CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF RIVIERA BEACH, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council, 1994 
____________ 
Adopted, November 2, 1994 
Effective, November 2, 1994 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
RIVIERA BEACH, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Clara K. Williams 
Mayor 
____________ 
Bertha Orange 
Chairperson 
____________ 
Margaret M. Confrey 
Bruce A. Guyton 
Marilyn Moffitt 
Barbara Rodriquez 
City Council 
____________ 
Gerald Adams 
Interim City Manager 
____________ 
Andrew DeGraffenreidt, III 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Gwendolyn E. Davis 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1957 Code, as supplemented through February 6, 1991, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1957 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Davender Kant, Planning and Zoning Director, Janice Jennings, former Assistant City Attorney, and the other members of the city staff, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 2642 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF RIVIERA BEACH, FLORIDA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF RIVIERA BEACH, PALM BEACH COUNTY, FLORIDA: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 31, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 16, 1994, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions and amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after March 16, 1994, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    PASSED AND APPROVED on first reading this 19th day of October, 1994. 
    PASSED AND ADOPTED on second and final reading this 2nd day of November, 1994. 
APPROVED: 
/s/  CLARA K. WILLIAMS       
CLARA K. WILLIAMS, MAYOR /s/  BERTHA ORANGE       
BERTHA ORANGE, CHAIRPERSON ATTEST: /s/  MARGE CONFREY       
MARGE CONFREY, CHAIR PRO TEM /s/  GWENDOLYN E. DAVIS       
GWENDOLYN E. DAVIS, CITY CLERK /s/  BRUCE A GUYTON       /s/  MARILYN S. MOFFITT       /s/  BARBARA RODRIGUEZ       
COUNCILMEMBERS FIRST READING: SECOND READING: MOTIONED BY: 
B. RODRIGUEZ       MOTIONED BY: 
B. RODRIGUEZ       SECONDED BY: 
B. GUYTON       SECONDED BY: 
M. MOFFITT       B. ORANGE 
AYE       B. ORANGE 
AYE       M. CONFREY 
AYE       M. CONFREY 
AYE       M. MOFFITT 
AYE       M. MOFFITT 
AYE       B. GUYTON 
AYE       B. GUYTON 
AYE       B. RODRIGUEZ 
AYE       B. RODRIGUEZ 
AYE        
Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida, held on the 2nd day of November, 1994. 
/s/ GWENDOLYN E. DAVIS 
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 3059  5- 6-09 Include 33 3083 10-20-10 Include 33 3084 10-20-10 Include 33 3085 11-17-10 Include 33 3086  2- 2-11 Include 34 3091  5-18-11 Include 34 3092  5-18-11 Include 34 3093  6- 2-11 Include 34 3094  6-15-11 Include 34 3095  6-15-11 Include 34 3097  7- 6-11 Include 34 4000  8- 3-11 Include 35 4001  9- 7-11 Include 35 4010  1-18-12 Include 35 4011  3- 7-12 Include 35 4013  5-16-12 Include 35 4014  6-20-12 Include 35 4015  8-15-12 Include 35 4016  8-15-12 Include 35 4017  9- 5-12 Include 35 4018  9- 5-12 Include 35 4009  1-18-12 Include 36 4022  1- 2-13 Omit 36 4023 Not adopted Omit 36 4024  7-17-13 Include 36 4025  8- 7-13 Include 36 4026  8- 7-13 Include 36 4027  8- 7-13 Include 36 4028  9- 4-13 Include 36 4029  9- 4-13 Omit 36 4030  9- 4-13 Include 36 4031  9- 4-13 Include 36 4032  9-18-13 Omit 36 4033  9-18-13 Omit 36 4034  9-18-13 Omit 36 152-13(Res.) 11-20-13 Include 36 4038 12-18-13 Include 37 3098  7-20-11 Include 38 4036 11-16-13 Include 38 4039  1-15-14 Include 38 4045  6-4-14 Include 38 4051 10-15-14 Include 39 4052 10-15-14 Include 39 4053 12- 3-14 Include 39 4054 12- 3-14 Include 39 4055 12-17-14 Include 39 4056 Not adopted Omit 39 4058  2- 4-15 Include 40 4059  2- 4-15 Include 40 4051 10-15-14 Include 41 4060  4-15-15 Include 41 4061  5-20-15 Include 41 4062  5- 6-15 Include 41 4063  6- 3-15 Include 41 4064  6-17-15 Include 41 4066  8-19-15 Include 42 4068  9- 3-15 Include 42 4072  9-16-15 Include 42 4073 12-16-15 Include 43 4078  2-17-16 Include 44 4082  7- 6-16 Include 44 4083  8- 3-16 Include 44 4087  9-27-16 Include 45 4088 12-21-16 Include 45 4092  1-18-17 Include 46 4095  5- 3-17 Include 46 4097 12- 6-17 Include 46 4099  9-20-17 Include 46 4103 10-18-17 Include 46 4109  5- 2-18 Include 47 4110  5- 2-18 Include 47 4112  6- 6-18 Include 48 4114  9- 5-18 Include 48 4119 12-19-18 Include 49 4120 12-19-18 Include 49 4125 12-19-18 Include 49 4126 12-19-18 Include 49  
PART I - CITY CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Council-Mayor-Manager Charter of Riviera Beach, initially adopted by referendum on April 17, 1973, as amended, and as subsequently revised by referendum of March 11, 2008 to create a new, revised City Charter which generally supersedes and replaces the earlier one. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the March 11, 2008, Charter. For stylistic purposes in the text of the Charter, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, citations to state statutes, capitalization and expression of numbers in text has been used. 

ARTICLE I. - CITY AND POWERS 

Section 1. - Municipality abolished and recreated. 
    That the municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of Riviera Beach, in Palm Beach County, Florida, be and the same is hereby abolished, and a new municipality to be known as the City of Riviera Beach, in Palm Beach County, Florida, is hereby created and established to succeed such former municipality. The City of Riviera Beach hereby created and established shall embrace and include all that territory in Palm Beach County, Florida, described as follows, to wit: 
Beginning at the Northwest corner of section 29, Township 42 South, Range 43 East, of the Tallahassee Meridian; thence East along the North lines of said Section 29, Section 28, and Section 27, of the said Township and Range to the centerline of the Intracoastal Waterway; thence Northerly along said centerline to a point of intersection with a line parallel to and 1,294 feet South of the North line of Section 22 and the centerline of the Intracoastal Waterway; thence Easterly along said line parallel to and 1,294 feet South of the North line of said Section 22 to a point in the Westerly boundary of the submerged land area conveyed by the Trustees of the Internal Improvement Fund of the State of Florida to the Lake Worth Realty Company, a Florida Corporation by Trustee's Deed No. 17145 recorded in Deed Book 205, page 82, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida; thence Northerly along said Westerly boundary to a point of intersection with a line parallel to and 8,000 feet Southerly from, measured at right angles to, the North line of section 10; thence Easterly along said line parallel to and 8,000 feet South of the North line of said section 10 to the water's edge of the Atlantic Ocean, thence Southerly along the water's edge of the Atlantic Ocean to the Point of intersection with the Southerly line of a tract of land in Palm Beach County known as Replat of Yacht Harbor, as the same is shown on plat recorded in Plat Book 23, page 57, of the Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida; thence continuing Southerly along the water's edge of the Atlantic Ocean to a point in a line 1,000 feet South of, measured at right angles to, the South line of said Replat of Yacht Harbor; thence on a true West line and parallel to the South line of said Replat of Yacht Harbor to a point in the Southerly extension of the centerline of that part of State Road No. 703 (formerly State road No. 140) which runs Northerly and Southerly through said Replat of Yacht Harbor; thence continuing on the same course West a distance of 1,539 feet; thence along a line with a with a bearing of North 83°03'30" West to its intersection with the centerline of the channel of the Intracoastal Waterway, as now established; thence Southwesterly and Southerly along said channel centerline to the South line of said Township 42 South, Range 43 East, thence Westerly along said township line to the Southwest corner of section 32 of said township and range, thence continue Westerly to the East right-of-way line of Military Trail, being State Road 809; thence Southerly along said East right-of-way line of Military Trail a distance of 700 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Up the Grove Lane, thence Easterly along said centerline of Up the Grove Lane a distance of 675 feet, more or less, to the westerly line extended of that property having a property control number of 58-42-43-01-00-000-1240; thence Southerly along said Westerly line, and its extension, a distance of 330 feet, more or less, to the Southerly line of said property; thence Westerly along said Southerly line, a distance of 675, more or less, to the East right-of-way line of Military Trail, being State Road 809; thence Southerly along said East right-of-way line, a distance of 330 feet, more or less, to the North right-of-way line of Lake Arjaro Drive extended to Military Trail; thence Westerly along said North right-of-way line, and its extension, a distance of 950 feet, more or less, to the Southeast boundary line of Gramercy Park, Unit 5, recorded in Plat Book 32, page 15, Palm Beach County Records; thence Northeasterly along said Southeast boundary line, a distance of 500 feet, more or less, to a point of intersection of said Southeast boundary line with the East boundary of said Gramercy Park; thence Northwesterly along said East boundary, a distance of 100 feet, more or less, to the Southeast and East right-of-way line of Cayman Circle East; thence Northeasterly, and Northerly, along said right-of-way line, a distance of 550 feet, more or less, to the Southeast corner of the portion of Cayman Circle East privately owned and having a property control number of 00-42-43-01-000-00-3022; thence Westerly, Northerly, Northwesterly, Northerly, and Easterly, totaling a distance of 200 feet, more or less, along the South, Southwest, West, and North sides of said privately owned portion of Cayman Circle East, to the Southeast corner of Lot 9, Block 18, of said Gramercy Park; thence Northerly, along the East line of said lot 9 and its Northerly extension, a distance of 200 feet, more or less, to the South line of Plat NO. 1 of Lone Pine Estates, recorded in Plat Book 33, page 33, Palm Beach County Records; thence Westerly, along said South line, a distance of 2,250 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Haverhill Road; thence Northerly, along said centerline of Haverhill Road, a distance of 4,650 feet, more or less, its intersection with Dyer Boulevard; thence continue Northerly and Northwesterly, along said centerline, straight and curved, of Haverhill Road, to a point opposite of and even with the Southern property corner of that property having a property control number of 00-42-42-22-600-00-1010; thence Easterly, to the East right-of-way line of Haverhill Road, and the Southerly corner of said property; thence Northerly, along the East line of said property, a distance of 250 feet, more or less, to the Northeast corner of said property; thence Westerly, along the North line of said property, a distance of 120 feet, more or less, to the centerline of said Haverhill Road; thence Northwesterly, along the centerline of said Haverhill Road, a distance of 270 feet, more or less, a point opposite to and even with the property having a property control number of 00-42-42-26-600-00-5040; thence Northeasterly, radial to Haverhill Road, to the Easterly right-of-way line of Haverhill Road and the Southerly corner of said property; thence Northerly, along the East line of said property, a distance of 350 feet, more or less, to the Northeast corner of said property; thence Westerly, along the North line of said property, a distance of 320 feet, more or less, to the centerline of said Haverhill Road; thence Northwesterly and Northerly, along the centerline of said Haverhill Road, a distance of 2,550 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the centerline of Haverhill Road with the centerline of Bee Line Highway; thence Southeasterly, along the centerline of Bee Line Highway, a distance of 1600 feet, more or less, to the West line of Woodbine Parcel E, recorded in Plat Book 78, page 113, Palm Beach County Records, and the Southerly extension of said line; thence Northerly, along said Westerly line and its extension, a distance of 3,450 feet to the Northwest corner of Woodbine Parcel C, recorded in Plat Book 73, page 106, Palm Beach County Records; thence Easterly, along the North line of said Woodbine Parcel C, and its Easterly extension, a distance of 5,500 feet, more or less, to the Easterly right-of-way line of Interstate 1-95; thence Northerly, along the East right-of-way line of Interstate 1-95, a distance of 1,350 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Park Avenue West; thence Easterly, along the centerline of Park Avenue West, a distance of 700 feet to a point opposite to and even with the Northwest corner of that property having a property control number of 00-43-42-19-100-00-0010; thence Southerly, along the West line of said property, a distance of 375 feet, more or less, to the Northwest corner of that property having a property control number of 00-43-42-19-100-00-0022; thence Easterly, along the North line of said property, a distance of 300 feet, more or less, to the Northeast corner of said property; thence Southerly, along the East line of said property, a distance of 175 feet, more or less, to the Southeast corner of said property; thence Westerly, along the South line of said property, a distance of 300 feet, more or less, to the Southwest corner of said property; thence Southerly, along the afore mentioned property line extended, a distance of 750 feet, more or less, to the North right-of-way line of the Northern P. B. County Water Control District Canal EPB 6; thence Westerly, along said North right-of-way line, a distance of 420 feet, more or less, to the Southwest corner of Lot 8, "Central Industrial Park North", recorded in Plat Book 51, page 123, Palm Beach County Records; thence Southerly, a distance of 650 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Central Industrial Drive North; thence Westerly, along said centerline, a distance of 275 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Byron Drive extended; thence Southerly, along said centerline, a distance of 1400 feet, more or less, to the Southwest corner of Parcel I of "Central Industrial Park" recorded in Plat Book 30, page 37, Palm Beach County Records; thence Easterly, along said South line, a distance of 600 feet, more or less, to the West right-of-way line of Enterprise Drive; thence Southerly, along said right-of-way line, a distance of 500 feet, more or less; thence Westerly a distance of 250 feet, more or less; thence Southerly a distance of 150 feet, more or less; thence Westerly a distance of 400 feet, more or less, to the East right-of-way line of Interstate 95; thence Southerly, along said East right-of-way line, a distance of 100 feet; thence Westerly, along the South right-of-way line of Woods Edge Circle, and its Easterly and Westerly extensions, a distance of 2,850 feet, more or less, to the East right-of-way line of Military Trail, being State Road 809;thence Southerly, along said East right-of-way line, a distance of 1100 feet, more or less; thence Easterly, a distance of 250 feet, more or less; thence Southerly, a distance of 250 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Blue Heron Boulevard; thence Easterly, along said centerline, a distance of 300 feet, more or less; thence Southerly, along the East line of the plat of 7200 Military Trail" recorded in Plat Book 48, page 185, Palm Beach County Records, a distance of 1600 feet, more or less; to the North right-of-way line of Bee Line Highway; thence Southeast, along said North right-of-way line, a distance of 2,600 feet, more or less; thence due North, a distance of 1,300 feet, more or less, to the West right-of-way line of Interstate 95; thence due East, a distance of 150 feet, to the centerline of Interstate 95; thence North-Northwest, along said centerline, a distance of 420 feet, more or less, to the Northwest corner of Section 31, Township 42 South, Range 43 East; thence Easterly, along the North line of said section 31, a distance of 200 feet, more or less; thence continue Easterly, along said North line, a distance of 2100 feet, more or less, to the West right-of-way line of Garden Road; thence Southerly along said West right-of-way line, a distance of 200 feet, more or less; thence Westerly a distance of 400 feet, more or less; thence Southerly a distance of 375 feet, more of less, to the centerline of Interstate Park Road North; thence Westerly along said centerline a distance of 50 feet, more or less; thence Southerly a distance of 500 feet to the centerline of Interstate Park Road South; thence Westerly a distance of 950 feet more or less to the centerline of Interstate Park Road West; thence Northwesterly a distance of 550 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Interstate Park Road North; thence Easterly along said centerline a distance of 800 feet, more or less; thence Northerly a distance of 500 feet, more or less; thence Westerly a distance of 1460 feet, more or less; thence Northwest a distance of 55 feet, more or less, to a point on the North line of said section 31, said point being 200 feet, more or less, East of the Northwest corner of said section; thence West, along said North line, a distance of 200 feet, more or less, to the Northwest corner of said section; thence Northerly a distance of 1000 feet, more or less; thence Easterly a distance of 1100 feet; thence Northerly a distance of 300 feet to the centerline of Blue Heron Boulevard; thence Westerly along said centerline a distance of 200 feet; thence Northerly a distance of 700 feet; thence Easterly a distance of 1000 to the West right-of-way line of Interstate 95; thence Northerly along said right-of-way line, a distance of 50 feet, more or less; thence Easterly a distance of 500 feet to the East right-of-way line of Interstate 95; thence Northerly, along said East right-of-way line, a distance of 300 feet, more or less to the South right-of-way line of Byron Drive; thence Easterly, along said right-of-way line, a distance of 575 feet, more or less; thence Southerly a distance of 250 feet; thence Easterly a distance of 400 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Central Industrial Drive; thence Southerly, along said centerline, a distance of 150 feet, more or less; thence Easterly a distance of 400 feet, more or less; thence Southerly a distance of 600 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Blue Heron Boulevard; thence Easterly, along said centerline, a distance of 800 feet, more or less, to the West right-of-way line of Garden Road; thence Northerly, along said West right-of-way line, a distance of 1200 feet, more or less; thence Westerly a distance of 550 feet; thence Southerly a distance of 150 feet, more or less; thence Westerly a distance of 350 feet, more or less; thence Southerly a distance of 200 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Industrial Way; thence Westerly, along said centerline, a distance of 400 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Central Industrial Drive; thence Northerly, along said centerline, a distance of 1000 feet, more or less; thence Easterly a distance of 1500 feet, to the West line of the plat of "Thousand Oaks" recorded in Plat Book 100, page 135, Palm Beach County Records; thence Northerly, along said West line, a distance of 2100 feet, more or less, to the Westerly extension of the Southerly right-of-way line of Silver Beach Road; thence Easterly, along said right-of-way line and its extension, a distance of 1700 feet, more or less, to the Point of Beginning. 
    The latest legal description of the city which is set forth above shall be revised, from time to time, as provided by ordinance, so as to conform with annexations to the territory of the city, as authorized by F.S. § 166.031(3). The latest legal description of the city shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk, accompanied by a map to be used for convenience of reference. The city council may, by ordinance, authorize the legal description and map to be editorially provided as an appendix to this Charter. 
Section 2. - Short title. 
    This Charter, adopted by the City Council of the City of Riviera Beach, shall be known and may be cited as the "Council-Mayor-Manager Charter of Riviera Beach." 
Section 3. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "council-mayor-manager form of government." All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be described by ordinance, or as provided by the general laws of the State of Florida. 
Section 4. - Seal. 
    The city shall have the right to adopt, use, and change a corporate seal. Such seal shall be the official seal of said city and shall be used only for said purpose and for such other purposes as the city council may authorize by ordinance. 
Section 5. - Powers of the city; non-interference with administration. 
(a)  Powers. To the fullest extent authorized by Article VIII, Section (2)(b) of the Florida Constitution and laws implementing the municipal home rule powers, the City of Riviera Beach shall have all governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers possible for a city to have under the constitution and laws of this state in order to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions, and render municipal services, and shall possess all other home rule powers. These powers shall be available as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter, unless prohibited by the provisions of this Charter. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter and ordinances adopted by the city council pursuant to authority provided herein or by applicable law, all powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the city council. 
(b)  Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations made in good faith, the mayor, council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the mayor, city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. This provision shall not prohibit advising appropriate city personnel of the need for assistance with city assigned computers or equipment. It is the express intent of this Charter provision that recommendations or suggestions for improvement in city government operations by individual council members or the mayor be made solely to and through the city manager. The mayor and council members may discuss with the city manager any matter of city business and may notify the city manager of problems; however, no individual council member or the mayor shall give orders to the city manager. Any such action taken in contravention of this restriction shall be malfeasance within the meaning of Section 112.51, Florida Statutes. However, a malfeasance shall not be found to exist under this Charter provision unless due process, including notice and an opportunity to be heard, is first provided to the alleged violator in accordance with procedures established by city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4119, § 2, 12-19-18, adopted by voters on 3-12-19) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4119, § 2, adopted on Dec. 19, 2018, and adopted by voters on March 12, 2019, amended the title of Art. I, § 5 to read as herein set out. The former Art. I, § 5 title pertained to powers of the city. 
Section 6. - Effect of this Charter on existing law. 
(a)  All laws and parts of laws relating to or affecting the City of Riviera Beach in force when this Charter shall take effect are hereby repealed and superseded to the extent that the same are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter. 
(b)  All registration rolls of voters, of qualified electors, freeholder or otherwise, prior to the taking effect of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect, notwithstanding the fact that the former City of Riviera Beach was abolished, and such lists, rolls, records and/or books that existed prior to the taking effect of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect and shall be considered to be the registration rolls of the city created under this Charter. 
(c)  Insofar as the provisions of this Charter are the same terms or in substance and effect as provisions of law in force when this Charter shall take effect, relating to or affecting the City of Riviera Beach, the provisions of this Charter are intended to be not a new enactment but a continuation of such provisions of law, and this Charter shall be so construed and applied. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed to impair the authority of the city's community redevelopment agency or the city's utility district. 
(e)  All powers previously conferred upon the city by special act are hereby preserved. 
Section 7. - Adoption by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
    That all powers conferred upon the city by this article shall be exercised by ordinance adopted by the city council except as otherwise required or permitted by this Charter, or by adopted resolution or motion, when appropriate. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT 

Section 1. - City council-mayor-qualifications. 
(a)  That, except as otherwise provided, all powers of the city conferred and provided in this Charter shall be vested in, and exercised by, a mayor and a city council consisting of five residents all of whom shall be qualified electors residing in the city, and who shall be elected from the city at large. Any person of the council or the mayor ceasing to possess any of the qualifications herein specified, or who should be convicted of a felony while in office, shall immediately forfeit his/her office. The term "convicted" shall embrace pleas of "guilty" or "nolo contendere," or forfeiture of bonds. The city council may by ordinance implement this provision and provide for the automatic forfeiture of such office upon conviction of a felony and may provide for other appropriate penalties for conviction of lesser crimes as determined by the city council at a hearing. 
(b)  Only electors of the city who have resided continuously in the city for one year preceding the date of filing for office shall be eligible to hold the office of mayor or councilperson, except that the candidates for districts 1, 2, 3, and 4 must reside within the respective district for the required one-year period. 
(c)  Term limits (elected officials): Beginning with the terms served commencing in 2019, no individual shall be elected to the office of city council member for more than three consecutive terms, irrespective of the district for which the individual is elected to serve. Beginning with the terms served commencing in 2019, no individual shall be elected to serve as mayor for more than three consecutive terms. 
(Ord. No. 4120, § 2, 12-19-18, adopted by voters on 3-12-19) 
Section 2. - Filing and qualification by districts and groups. 
    Elections as hereinafter provided for two councilpersons from the city at large shall be held on the first Tuesday in April, 1974, and biennially thereafter and on the second Tuesday in March, 1994, and biennially thereafter. The aforesaid candidates for the two offices of councilperson to be elected, shall each file and qualify by selecting the group in which he/she wishes to qualify and the two said groups shall be known and designated as group 2 and group 4 respectively. Elections as hereinafter provided for three councilpersons from the city at large and the mayor shall be held on the first Tuesday in April, 1975 and biennially thereafter and on the second Tuesday in March, 1993, and biennially thereafter. The aforesaid candidates for the three offices of councilperson, to be elected, shall each file and qualify by selecting the group in which he/she wishes to qualify and the three said groups shall be known and designated as group 1, group 3, and group 5, respectively. Once a candidate has selected the group in which he/she wishes to qualify, he/she shall not switch to another group. 
    The City of Riviera Beach shall be divided into four voting districts, however, the election shall be city-wide. The mayor and the candidates in group 5 shall be elected at large and without regard to districts. 
    The city council shall by ordinance set the boundaries of districts 1, 2, 3, and 4 by January 1, 1975 and either confirm, modify or change the district by January 1, 1985 and every ten years thereafter. Each district shall be as nearly as practicable equal in population and the districts must not vary more than eight percent in population at the time of creating said districts or the adjustment thereof every ten years. Appropriate city staff, as designated by the city manager, shall review the district boundaries and recommend any necessary revisions to the city council. 
    Elections shall be held in districts 2 and 4 on the first Tuesday in April, 1976, and biennially thereafter and on the second Tuesday in March, 1994, and biennially thereafter. The candidates for the two offices of council to be elected shall file and qualify by selecting the district in which he/she resides. 
    Elections shall be held for districts 1 and 3 and group 5 and the mayor on the first Tuesday in April, 1977 and biennially thereafter and on the second Tuesday in March, 1993, and biennially thereafter. The candidates for districts 1 and 3 shall file and qualify by selecting the district in which he/she resides. The mayor and the candidates in group 5 shall file and qualify without regard to district. 
    Commencing with the March 2012 general election and continuing thereafter, elections shall be held for group 2 and group 4 every three years, and the councilpersons in group 2 and group 4 shall serve a term of three years. Commencing with the March 2013 general election, and continuing thereafter, elections shall be held for the mayor and councilpersons in group 1, group 3 and group 5 every three years, and the mayor and councilpersons in group 1, group 3 and group 5 shall serve a term of three years. 
(Ord. No. 4009, § 1, 1-18-12) 
Editor's note- Although certain portions of this section 2 are obsolete by virtue of having been superseded by later provisions of this section or as a result of having already been accomplished, they have been retained herein for the purposes of tracing the evolution of this section and of assuring the consistent application of the provisions of this section to the electoral process, and in light of the circumstance that further review and study of the electoral system by the charter review board has been noted by the city as an intended future undertaking. 
Section 3. - Notice of candidacy-Filing fee. 
    In order for any person to qualify as a candidate for any elective offices, he/she shall file a notice with the city clerk that he/she will be a candidate for an office to be voted upon in the ensuing municipal general election in accordance with section 5-2 (a) of City's Code of Ordinances. The notice shall be accompanied by a filing fee of five percent of the annual salary of the office sought. Other fees shall be applicable as provided by Florida Statutes. The qualifying period may be revised by ordinance which is adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4063, § 2, 6-3-15) 
Section 4. - Date of election-Run-off elections. 
    The names of the persons so qualifying shall appear as candidates on the ballot for an election to be held on the second Tuesday in March of each election year. In case any one candidate for any office shall receive a majority of the votes of the registered and qualified electors of the city actually voting at such election, such person shall be deemed elected to such office. In case, as to any office, no candidate receives such a majority, then the two who receives the highest vote shall continue to be voted upon at an election to be held on the fourth Tuesday of March, and the one who then obtains a majority shall be deemed elected to such office. Election dates affected by any countywide or statewide election held in March will coincide with the date for the countywide or statewide election. If the initial election is held less than two weeks prior to the fourth Tuesday in March, then a run-off election, when necessary, shall be held the fifth Tuesday in March or the first Tuesday in April whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 4063, § 4, 6-3-15) 
Section 5. - Run-off in case of tie. 
    In the event of a tie vote at a run-off election, the candidates, all of whom shall be qualified electors residing in the city, receiving the tie votes in each group shall continue to be voted on at a special run-off election to be held in the same manner and by the same officers holding the previous election. 
    In the event of a tie vote at the first election between the persons receiving the second highest number of votes cast, the names of those persons receiving such tie votes shall be placed on the ballot, with the person receiving the highest number of votes, so that at the run-off election a candidate can be elected to such office. 
Section 6. - Elections nonpartisan. 
    All of the elections hereinabove provided for shall be nonpartisan and no ballots at any such elections shall contain any party designation. 
Section 7. - Continuance of present officials. 
    The terms of the present elected city officials shall continue until successors thereto have been elected and qualified at the regular and runoff election hereinabove provided, and all shall take office at the next regular city council meeting after general election. At such time shall commence with selection of chair and chair pro-tem. 
Section 8. - Official oath. 
    That the mayor, members of the city council, the city clerk, chief of police, any other police officer of the city, and any other persons required to take an oath, shall before entering upon the duties as such, and before being qualified to perform the duties of such official, make an oath of office in substantially the following form: 
State of Florida, County of Palm Beach, City of Riviera Beach, I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the State of Florida and conform to the statutes and general laws of the State of Florida, and do all in my power to uphold, support and enforce the Charter and ordinances of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida, and perform the duties of the office upon which I am about to enter, to the best of my ability, so help me God. 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this _____ day of ________, A.D. 
Notary Public, State of Florida at Large My Commission Expires:  
    Such oath of office may be administered by the city clerk or the mayor of the city or by any person authorized to administer oaths in the state. 
Editor's note- This section is not necessary, but supplements the oath required F.S. § 876.05. 
Section 9. - Meetings of city council. 
    That at least one regular meeting of the city council shall be held in each calendar month at such time as may be fixed by resolution or ordinance, and special meetings shall be called by the city clerk upon written request of the mayor or two persons of the city council. All meetings of the city council shall be open to the public and the citizens or taxpayers of the city shall have an opportunity to be heard at meetings in regard to any subject pertaining to the city. This provision shall not be construed in any manner which impairs or interferes with the city's ability to provide for orderly meetings and to use the open meetings exemptions or exceptions which are provided by applicable law. Accordingly, such exemptions and exceptions shall be applicable to this section. 
Section 10. - Salaries of elected officials. 
    The [annual] salaries of the elected officials of the city shall be $19,000.00 for a councilperson of the city council and $20,200.00 for the mayor. The city councilperson serving as chairperson shall be entitled to an annual stipend of $1,200.00 in addition to the above stated salary. 
Editor's note- At the March 11, 2008 Charter amendment election, the electors rejected an amendment of this section which was submitted pursuant to ballot item (9). Accordingly, this section was not affected by the results of the Charter amendment election, and continues to be subject to the provisions of the state law reference which is noted above. 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule powers act, repeal of certain limitations, F.S. Sec. 166.021. 
Section 11. - Chairperson. 
    The city council shall elect from its members a chairperson who shall act as mayor during the absence or other disability of the mayor and during such time shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of the mayor and shall be entitled to vote on all questions. The chairperson shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The council shall provide for a chairperson pro-tem to serve in the absence of the chairperson. The council may, by ordinance, restrict or limit the authority of the chairperson to exercise the veto authority of the mayor. 
Section 12. - Rules of the city council. 
    The city council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and in such cases shall have power to subpoena witnesses and compel the production of all pertinent books, records and papers. The city council shall conduct its meetings in accordance with parliamentary proceedings as laid down in Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, and shall keep a journal of its proceedings. It shall have power to compel the attendance of absent members and may punish its members for disorderly behavior. 
Section 13. - Quorum. 
    A majority of persons of the city council shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a less number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance. The affirmative vote of a majority of the members present at any meeting shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance, resolution, order or vote. 
    Each councilperson shall vote on matters unless otherwise required or authorized by the provisions of applicable law, including, but not limited to the Code of Ethics for Public Officers and Employees as set forth in F.S. Ch. 112, Pt. III, or F.S. § 286.012, or ordinance of the city council which provides additional ethics requirements. 
Section 14. - Final adoption of ordinances. 
    That upon final passage and approval of an ordinance, it shall be signed by the councilpersons voting, and be signed by the mayor, or chairperson, in the absence or inability of the mayor, and the city clerk, and it shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose. The mayor and city clerk shall sign all ordinances and resolutions even though he/she be not present at the meeting at which they were adopted; unless the mayor intends to veto an ordinance which he/she shall have the right to do, which veto must be entered into the record within five days of the passage of the ordinance, otherwise the ordinance shall stand adopted; provided, however, that the council may override the veto of the mayor by four affirmative votes. 
Section 15. - Mayor. 
    A mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city in the same manner as provided hereinabove for councilpersons. The mayor shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process and by the governor of the state for military purposes. In time of public danger or emergency, he/she may, with the consent of the city council, take command of the police and maintain order and enforce the laws. 
    During his/her absence or disability his/her duties shall be performed by the chairperson of the city council. The mayor shall report to the city manager violation or neglect of duty on the part of employees of the city that may come to his /her knowledge. He/she may examine into the condition of the books, records and papers of any department, and the manner of conducting official business. He/she shall report to the city council all violations and neglect of duty of any official that may come to his/her knowledge; he/she may make such recommendations about the business and the general welfare of the city to the council as he/she deems advisable; he/she may communicate from time to time to the council such information and make recommendations of the measures touching the public service as he/she may deem proper. He/she shall have a voice at the council meetings but he/she shall vote only in the matter of the appointment of a councilperson in case of a tie vote of the city council when a vacancy exists. 
    The mayor shall have power to suspend any officer or employee of the city, except members of the council, for misconduct in office or neglect of duty, but shall report his/ her action in writing to the council with the reasons thereof at the next regular meeting of the council for its approval or disapproval, and the said officer or employee shall stand and remain suspended only upon the approval thereof by a majority vote of the council, and upon disapproval thereby, shall receive his/ her compensation for the time during which he/ she was suspended. 
Section 16. - City attorney. 
    The city council shall appoint an attorney and/or may employ a professional law firm which specializes in municipal government for the city at such compensation and with such duties consistent with the office as may be determined by the council. In the event that the city council enters into a contract for the provision of legal services with the city attorney or the law firm, the contract shall provide for an annual performance evaluation of the city attorney or the law firm by the city council. It is the responsibility of the city attorney or the law firm to notify the city council of any contract expiration three months in advance or city attorney or law firm may forfeit such contract. 
Section 17. - Vacancies. 
    Whenever a vacancy shall occur in any elective office then such vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the city council and the mayor in case of a tie vote. The term of such appointment shall be only until the next general election, at which election the unexpired term, if any, shall be filled by the electors at a special election, from among candidates who qualify as hereinbefore provided. 
Section 18. - Removal of officers and employees. 
(a)  Any officer or employee appointed by the city manager or head of any department may be removed by the city manager or head of that department at any time, with the approval of the city manager; subject to the provisions of article III of this Charter. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the power to appoint and remove any city officer or head of a department, except for the city attorney. However, the city manager shall have the power to remove any such city officer or head of a department only for justifiable cause. The city council may, by ordinance, define the term "justifiable cause" as used herein. 
Section 19. - City council-Appointments. 
    The city council shall appoint the city manager and the city attorney (as provided by section 16 above) and shall set the salaries of the city manager and the city attorney. The city manager and the city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. In the event that the city council enters into an employment contract with the city manager, the contract shall provide for an annual performance evaluation of the city manager by the city council. The city council may, subject to annual budget procedures, appoint and set the salaries for its legislative staff, who shall serve at the pleasure of the council and whose responsibilities may be provided by ordinance. The legislative staff shall not, in any manner, interfere with the city manager. 
Section 20. - City manager appointment. 
    The city council shall appoint an officer of the city who shall have the title of city manager and shall have the powers and perform the duties in this Charter provided. No city councilperson shall receive such appointment during the term for which he/she shall have been elected. The council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term and may remove him/her by a majority vote of its members. If a contract is required the city council may execute same and shall therein provide for an annual performance evaluation of the city manager as referenced in section 19, above. 
    In the event of a vacancy of the city manager's position, a temporary appointment shall be made not to exceed 120 days, after which time a city manager shall be appointed. 
Section 21. - Qualifications of city manager. 
    The city manager shall be chosen by the city council on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his/her actual experience in, or his/her knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his/her office as hereinafter set forth. The city manager must present a resume of his/her credentials and shall become a bona fide resident of the city within 120 days of his/her appointment. 
Section 22. - City manager-Duties-Powers. 
    The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer and the head of the administrative branch of the city government. He/she shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city and to that end, subject to the personnel provisions of this Charter, shall have power and shall be required to: 
1.  Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the city, remove all officers and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, and except as he/she may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint and remove subordinates in such department or office; 
2.  Prepare the budget annually and timely submit it to the city council and be responsible for its administration after adoption; 
3.  Prepare and submit to the city council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year; 
4.  Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem to him/her desirable; 
5.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him/her by the city council, not inconsistent with this Charter. 
    The city manager shall attend all meetings of the city council, but shall have no vote therein. The city manager may take part in discussion of all matters coming before the city council. At the city manager's or council's request, the department directors and other officers may take part in discussions of the city council relating to their respective offices, departments or agencies. 
Section 23. - Competitive bidding. 
    The city council may by ordinance provide requirements for soliciting competitive bids or proposals for the city's purchase of supplies, materials, equipment, services or improvements. 
Section 24. - Appropriations for major disasters and catastrophes. 
    In accordance with the formula set forth hereinafter, the city council shall, pursuant to this section, each budget year make an appropriation to cover the potential cost to the city resulting from a major disaster and/or catastrophe. Subject to the annual budget public hearing and adoption process, each budget year the council shall appropriate 11/2 per centum of its total estimated annual ad valorem tax revenue, which shall be set aside in a separate fund known as the "major disaster fund." The balance in this fund shall be carried forward in the budget from year to year. Expenditures from this fund shall be made by resolution of the city council, approved by at least three members. 
Section 25. - Restriction on former elected city officials. 
    No former elected city official shall hold any compensated appointive city office or employment, whether as a city employee or as a city consultant, independent contractor or as the holder of a proprietary interest in a business serving the city government, until one year after the expiration of his/her term of office. However, simply owning stock in a corporation which is listed on a national or regional stock exchange shall not constitute a proprietary interest under this section. 
(Ord. No. 4125, § 2, 12-19-18, adopted by voters on 3-12-19) 
ARTICLE III. - CIVIL SERVICE 

Section 1. - Civil service for employees of the city. 
    The City of Riviera Beach shall have a civil service system for the employees of the city. 
    The civil service system for the employees shall be managed and controlled by two civil service boards one for the police and fire departments and the other for the general employees of the city. Each board shall be composed of at least five members but not to exceed seven members. 
    The fire department, the police department and the general employees of the city shall have the right to elect from their respective departments at least two of their fellow employees who shall serve on the board on all matters pertaining to their respective department. The city council shall appoint the remaining members to the police and fire department board and the general employees board. 
ARTICLE IV. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM 

Section 1. - General authority. 
(a)  Initiative. The qualified voters of the city shall have power to propose ordinances or initiative amendments to the city council and, if the council fails to adopt an ordinance or initiative amendment so proposed, the qualified voters of the city shall have a right to adopt or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of city officers or employees. 
(b)  Referendum. The qualified voters of the city shall have power to require reconsideration by the council of any adopted ordinance and, if the council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, the qualified voters of the city shall have a right to approve or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program except on capital projects financed by tax revenue certificates for water and sewer systems, and shall not apply to any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes. 
Section 2. - Commencement of proceedings; petitioner's committee; affidavit. 
    A minimum of five qualified voters of the city may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the city clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it with the city clerk in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and outlining in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance or proposed amendment sought to be reconsidered or considered. Although the members of the petitioners' committee shall be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, the petitioners' committee may authorize other persons to circulate the petition and act as circulators. 
    Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed the city clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee, to comply with the equal 15 percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular election. 
Section 3. - Petitions. 
(a)  Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to 15 percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular election. 
(b)  Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for circulating and filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing, and precinct number or other identifying information. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the proposed ordinance or proposed amendment sought to be reconsidered or considered. 
(c)  Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed for verification an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he/she personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his/her presence, that he/she believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the proposed ordinance or amendment sought to be reconsidered or considered. 
(d)  Time for filing referendum and initiative petitions. Referendum petitions must be filed within 30 days after adoption by the council of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Initiative petitions must be filed within 30 days after refusal or rejection of the council to pass a proposed ordinance or proposed amendment. 
Section 4. - Procedure after filing. 
(a)  Certificate of city clerk; amendment. Within 20 days after the petition has been verified for signatures and is filed the city clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying if it is sufficient or if insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the city clerk within two days after receiving the copy of the certificate. A supplementary petition may be filed within ten days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of section 3, and within five days after it is filed the city clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request council review under subsection (b) of this section within the time required, the city clerk shall promptly present his/her certificate to the city council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(b)  Council review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the city council. The city council shall review the certificate at its next regular meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the city council's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(c)  Court review; new petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
Section 5. - Referendum petitions; suspension of effect of ordinance. 
    When a referendum petition is filed with the city clerk, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
(1)  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition; or 
(2)  The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition; or 
(3)  The council repeals the ordinance; or 
(4)  Thirty days have elapsed after a vote of the city council on the ordinance unless a petition is in process. 
Section 6. - Action on petitions. 
(a)  Action by city council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the city council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance or initiative amendment in the manner provided therein or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the city council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance or fails to consider the proposed amendment without any change in substance within 60 days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within 30 days; or consider the proposed amendment after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance or proposed amendment to the voters of the city. 
(b)  Submission to voters. The vote of the city on a proposed or referred ordinance or amendment shall be held not less than 30 days and not later than one year from the date of the final council vote thereon. If no regular city election is to be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the city council shall provide for a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election, except that the city council may in its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance or amendment shall be made available at the polls. 
(c)  Withdrawal of petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the 15th day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the city by filing with the city clerk a request for withdrawal signed by at least four members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
Section 7. - Results of election. 
(a)  Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance or proposed amendment vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results by the city clerk and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the city council; or in the case an amendment to the Charter or Code of Ordinances. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance or amendment vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results by the city clerk. 
ARTICLE V. - SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT 

Section 1. - Riviera Beach a municipality. 
    That the said City of Riviera Beach, Palm Beach County, Florida, shall be and constitute a body politic and corporate and as such shall have perpetual existence and may sue, be sued, defend, plead, and be impleaded in all courts and places and shall exercise all the powers, privileges, and functions of municipalities prescribed, authorized and provided in the constitution and general laws of the State of Florida fully and completely, unless prohibited by the provisions of this Charter. 
Section 2. - Present ordinances and resolutions not repealed. 
    That all ordinances and resolutions of the City of Riviera Beach, Palm Beach County, Florida, which have not been repealed or rescinded by the city council of the said city be, and the same are hereby validated, ratified and confirmed. Except if an ordinance has been challenged in court as of the date of the final approval hereof, such ordinance so challenged shall stand ratified or invalidated as the court or courts may order. 
Section 3. - Rights of officers and employees reserved. 
    Nothing in this Charter contained, except as specifically provided, shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of officers or employees of the city or of any office, department or agency existing at the time when this Charter shall take effect, or any provision of law in force at the time when this Charter shall take effect and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, in relation to the personnel, appointment, ranks, grades, tenure of office, promotion, removal, pension and retirement rights, civil rights or any other rights or privileges of officers or employees of the city or any office, department or agency thereof. 
Section 4. - Continuance of present officers. 
    All persons holding administrative office at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties until provision shall have been made in accordance therewith for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of such office. The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office or department of the city by the laws of the state shall, if such office or department be abolished by this Charter, or under its authority, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office or department designated by the city council unless otherwise provided herein. 
Section 5. - Continuity of offices or departments. 
    Any office or department provided for in this Charter with a name or with powers and duties the same or substantially the same as those of an office or department heretofore existing shall be deemed to be continuation of such office or department and shall exercise its powers and duties in continuation of their exercise by the office or department by which the same were heretofore exercised and shall have power to continue any business, proceeding or other matter within the scope of its regular powers and duties commenced by an office or department by which such powers and duties were heretofore exercised. Any provision in any law, rule, regulation, contract, grant or other document relating to such a formerly existing office or department, shall, so far as not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, apply to such office or department provided for by this Charter. 
Section 6. - Transfer of records and property. 
    All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any office or department or part thereof, all the powers and duties of which are assigned to any other office or department by this Charter, shall be transferred and delivered to the office or department to which such powers and duties are so assigned. If part of the powers and duties of any office or department thereof are by this Charter assigned to another office or department, all records, property and equipment relating exclusively thereto shall be transferred and delivered to the office or department to which such powers and duties are so assigned. 
Section 7. - Present taxes-Levies-Assessments validated. 
    That all tax rolls, tax assessments, tax levies and tax sales made by the said city or its officials, and all tax sale certificates and tax deeds issued by the said city or its officials, and all liens fixed and levied by the said city or its officials for street and sidewalk improvements, and all foreclosures instituted and consummated by the said city or its officials for the sale of lands for taxes and special assessments, and all decrees rendered and deeds issued pursuant to any foreclosure proceedings, be, and the same are hereby validated, ratified, and confirmed. 
Section 8. - Bonds ratified. 
    That all refunding bonds issued by the said City of Riviera Beach and its officials, and all other bonds issued by the city to date of the final passage hereof, be, and the same are hereby validated, ratified, and confirmed. 
Section 9. - Continuance of contracts and public improvements. 
    All contracts entered into by the city, or for its benefit, prior to the taking effect of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws or Charter provisions existing at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to completion as nearly as practicable in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws and Charter provisions. 
Section 10. - Pending actions and proceedings. 
    No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time when this Charter shall take effect, brought by or against the city or any office or department or officer thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything therein contained; but all such actions or proceedings may be continued notwithstanding that functions, powers and duties of any office or department or officer party thereto may by or under this Charter be assigned or transferred to another office or department or officer, but in that event the same may be prosecuted or defended by the head of the office or department to which such functions, powers and duties have been assigned or transferred by or under this Charter. 
ARTICLE VI. - LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 1. - Adoption of state law. 
    The council shall make all local improvements in accordance with F.S. ch. 170 and the amendments thereto, provided however that 50 percent of the cost of all street and secondary drainage improvements shall be paid by the benefited property owner, provided further that council may determine the assessments for curbs, gutters, valley gutters, and sidewalks. 
Editor's note- At the Charter amendment election of March 11, 2008 the electors rejected an amendment of this section 1 which was presented by Charter amendment ballot item (5). Accordingly, this section 1 was not affected by the results of the Charter amendment election, and continues to be subject to the state law reference which is noted above. 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule powers act, repeal of certain limitations, F.S. § 166.021. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1. - Beach property not for sale. 
    The City of Riviera Beach, Palm Beach County, Florida, shall not have power to sell, and is hereby prohibited from selling any part of the municipal beach property owned by the City of Riviera Beach, Palm Beach County, Florida, on Singer Island in Township 42 South, Range 43 East, Palm Beach County, Florida, more fully described as: 
Commencing at the northeast corner of section 27, township 42 south, range 43 east, Palm Beach County, Florida as shown on the plat of Palm Beach Shores recorded in Plat Book 23, page 30, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida; thence run westerly along the north line of said section 27, a distance of 224.9 feet to a point in the centerline of the right-of-way of State Road No. 703 (formerly State Road No. 140) as same is now laid out and in use; thence south 2° 36' 30" west (on an assumed bearing) along said centerline, and its southerly projection making an angle of 90° 42' 00" with the north line of said section 27, measured from east to south, a distance of 2,686.31 feet to a point in the easterly projection of the north line of said Palm Beach Shores, as shown on sheet 2; thence continue southerly along the same course 1,000 feet to a point in the north line of lot 348 of said Palm Beach Shores, thence east along the north line of said lot 384 and lot 383 a distance of 50.05 feet to the point of beginning and the southwest corner of the parcel of land herein described; thence continue east along the north line of lots 383, 382, 381, 380 and 379 to the westerly right-of-way line of Ocean Avenue according to the plat of said Palm Beach Shores, thence continue east across said Ocean Avenue to the northwest corner of lot 631 and the easterly right-of-way line of said Ocean Avenue; thence continue east along the north line of said lot 631 to the waters of the Atlantic Ocean; thence meandering the waters of the Atlantic Ocean in a northerly direction to a point of intersection with the easterly extension of the north line of said Palm Beach Shores; thence west along the easterly extension of the north line of said Palm Beach Shores to a point in the easterly right-of-way line of said State Road No. 703; the said easterly right-of-way line being parallel to and 50 feet easterly (when measured at right angles) to the said centerline of State Road No. 703; thence southerly along said easterly right-of-way line a distance of 1,000 feet to the point of beginning. 
    The bearings used in this description are assumed. 
Section 2. - Municipal beach area. 
    That portion of the property known as the "Sand Beach and Swimming Area" and more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the point of intersection of the north line of lot 384 and the southerly projection of the centerline of State Road No. 703, according to the plat of Palm Beach Shores, recorded in Plat Book 23, page 30, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida; thence east along the north line of lots 383, 382, 381, 380 and 379, a distance of 458.27 feet to the point of beginning and the southwest corner of the herein described parcel of land; thence north 0° 47' 40" east along a line a distance of 999.05 feet, to a point of intersection with the north line of Palm Beach Shores extended easterly; thence east along said north line of Palm Beach Shores extended easterly to the waters of the Atlantic Ocean; thence southerly, meandering the waters of the Atlantic Ocean, to a point of intersection with the north line of lot 631, Palm Beach Shores; thence west along the north line of said lot 631 and its westerly extension to the point of beginning. 
    The bearings used in this description are assumed. 
    They shall be reserved for and perpetually used as a municipal beach and shall not be sold, leased or rented. 
Section 3. - Rental of beach property. 
    The City of Riviera Beach may from time to time enter into such rental agreements of portions of the municipal beach property owned by the City of Riviera Beach upon such terms and conditions as the city council may deem to be in the best interest of the city; however, no rental agreement, including options, shall exceed a period of 50 years. The land shall not be used for purposes other than those beneficial to tourism and recreation. The maximum height for any buildings or other structures on the municipal beach property shall be five stories. The municipal beach property is located in the City of Riviera Beach, Palm Beach County, Florida, on Singer Island in Township 42 South, Range 43 East, Palm Beach County, Florida, more fully described as: 
Commencing at the northeast corner of section 27, township 42 south, range 43 east, Palm Beach County, Florida as shown on the plat of Palm Beach Shores recorded in Plat Book 23, page 30, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida; thence run westerly along the north line of said section 27, a distance of 224.9 feet to a point in the centerline of the right-of-way of State Road No. 703 (formerly State Road No. 140) as same is now laid out and in use; thence south 2° 36' 30" west (on an assumed bearing) along said centerline, and its southerly projection making an angle of 90° 42' 00" with the north line of said section 27, measured from east to south, a distance of 2,686.31 feet to a point in the easterly projection of the north line of said Palm Beach Shores, as shown on sheet 2; thence continue southerly along the same course 1,000 feet to a point in the north line of lot 348 of said Palm Beach Shores, thence east along the north line of said lot 384 and lot 383 a distance of 50.05 feet to the point of beginning and the southwest corner of the parcel of land herein described; thence continue east along the north line of lots 383,382,381, 380 and 379 to the westerly right-of-way line of Ocean Avenue according to the plat of said Palm Beach Shores, thence continue east across said Ocean Avenue to the northwest corner of lot 631 and the easterly right-of-way line of said Ocean Avenue; thence continue east along the north line of said lot 631 to the waters of the Atlantic Ocean; thence meandering the waters of the Atlantic Ocean in a northerly direction to a point of intersection with the easterly extension of the north line of said Palm Beach Shores; thence west along the easterly extension of the north line of said Palm Beach Shores to a point in the easterly right-of-way line of said State Road No. 703; the said easterly right-of-way line being parallel to and 50 feet easterly (when measured at right angles) to the said centerline of State Road No. 703; thence southerly along said easterly right-of-way line a distance of 1,000 feet to the point of beginning. 
Editor's note- Section 3, in the form and substance which is set forth above, was adopted by referendum election of March 13, 2007, and was not altered at the March 11, 2008, Charter amendment election. 
Section 3.5. - City marina property. 
    The city's municipal marina shall not be sold. However, the city council may enter into management, license or lease agreements with marina users and/or outside operators for a term of not more than 50 years in order to facilitate marina activities, use or operations. This provision may be implemented by ordinance adopted by the city council. 
(Res. No. 152-13, § 1, 11-20-13; Ord. No. 4039, § 1, 1-15-14) 
Section 4. - Separability clause. 
    If any section or part of section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
Section 5. - Adoption by reference. 
    The City of Riviera Beach shall have authority to incorporate into its laws or codes any law of the State of Florida, which may be applicable to a municipality, by the adoption of an ordinance referring to and describing such law, and such law, when so adopted by reference, shall be in full force and effect and as enforceable as any other law of the City of Riviera Beach, and the city shall have authority to adopt such other laws and ordinances as may be provided by the general laws of the State of Florida. 
Section 6. - Repeal of conflicting laws. 
    That all laws or parts of laws in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Section 7. - Effective date. 
    This act shall take effect immediately upon its becoming a law. Upon approval by the majority of electors voting, the Charter amendments provided for herein [by Ordinance No. 3037] shall be effective as provided by the ordinance [Ordinance No. 3037] which submitted the amendments to the electors for approval. 
Section 8. - Conflicts of interest; ethical standards. 
    The mayor and council members, and all officers and employees of the city shall be subject to the standards of conduct for public officers and employees set by federal, state, county or other applicable law. The city council may adopt additional standards of conduct and code of ethics requirements that are not inconsistent with federal, state, county or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 4126, § 2, 12-19-18, adopted by voters on 3-12-19) 
Editor's note- The above document completes the revised City Charter which resulted from the Charter Amendment Election of March 12, 2019, at which 4 of 4 Charter Amendments presented were approved by the electors. 
Mayor Thomas A. Masters Council Tonya Davis Johnson, Chair Lynne L. Hubbard, Chair Pro Tem KaShamba Miller-Anderson Dr. Julia Botel Terence Davis City Manager Karen Hoskins City Clerk Claudene Anthony-Robinson City Attorney Andrew Degraffenreidt Charter Review Advisory Board Members Javarious Jackson, Chairman Edwin Ferguson, Vice Chairman Guy DiSpigno Ph.D., Secretary Evelyn Clark Marie Davis Keith Golden Anita Hester Shirley Lanier Rodney Roberts Special Legal Counsel to Charter 

Review Advisory Board David M. Wolphin, Esq.  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance/ 
Res. Number Adoption 
 Date Referendum 
  Date Section  Section 
this Charter  4-17-73 Arts. I-XIII Arts. I-XIII 2200  7- 6-83 1 Art. II, § 12 2293 11-20-85 1 Art. II, § 20 Art. II, § 25 183-92 11- 4-92 11- 3-92 1 Art. II, §§ 2,4 2596  9-20-93 1 Art. II, § 12 203-94 12- 7-94 11- 8-94 1 Art. II, §§ 20, 25 2920  7-17-02 1 Art. II, § 27 3014  9-20-06 1 Art. II, § 12 3037>  3-11-08 I-VII I-VII 4009  1-18-12  3-13-12 1 Art. II, § 2 152-13(Res.) 11-20-13 11- 2-10 1 Art. VII, § 3.5 4039  1-15-14  3-11-14 1 Art. VII, § 3.5 4063  6- 3-15 2, 3 Art. II, §§ 3, 4 4119 12-19-18  3-12-19 2 Art. I, § 5 4120 12-19-18  3-12-19 2       Added Art. II, § 1(c) 4125 12-19-18  3-12-19 2       Added Art. II, § 25 4126 12-19-18  3-12-19 2       Added Art. VII, § 8  
Subpart A - GENERAL CODE 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Riviera Beach, Florida" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1957, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Charter. The word Charter shall mean the Charter for the City of Riviera Beach, adopted on April 17, 1973, and printed in Part I of this volume. 
    City. The word city shall be construed as if the words "of Riviera Beach" followed. The word city shall also be construed to mean and include the various offices and employees of the City of Riviera Beach charged with the duty of enforcing the laws and regulations of the City of Riviera Beach, whether or not in this Code the officers and employees are referred to by position. Whenever the word city is used herein it shall refer to the City of Riviera Beach. 
Charter reference- City created, boundaries, art. I, § 1. 
    City attorney. The words city attorney, when used in this Code, shall refer to the city attorney of the City of Riviera Beach. 
    City council. Whenever the words city council are used in this Code, they shall be construed as if followed by the words of the City of Riviera Beach, and shall mean and include the city council designated as the official legislative body of the municipality. Likewise, when the appropriate terms such as city council are used they shall refer to the legislative body of this city. 
    City manager. The words city manager, when used in this Code, shall refer to the city manager of the City of Riviera Beach. 
    Code. The word Code shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida, and all references to sections in this Code shall be to this Code of Ordinances unless otherwise provided. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, F.S. § 1.090(d). 
    County. The word county shall mean Palm Beach County, Florida. 
State Law reference- Boundary of Palm Beach County, F.S. § 7.50. 
    F.S. The abbreviation F.S. shall mean the latest edition or supplement of the Florida Statutes. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The words keeper and proprietor shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent or employee. 
    Mayor. The word mayor shall refer to the mayor of Riviera Beach. 
    Month. The word month shall mean a calendar month. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The word oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed. 
    Or, and. Or may be read and, and, and may be read or if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word owner, applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word person shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term personal property includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
    Preceding, following. The words preceding and following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word property shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term public place shall mean any land, buildings, waterways or adjacent area in which the municipality has a proprietary interest therein. 
    Real property. The term real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Residence. The term residence shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
    Sidewalk. The word sidewalk shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. The word signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The word state shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
    Street. The word street shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
    Tenant. The words tenant or occupant, applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or part of such buildings or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. The word week shall be construed to mean seven days. 
    Written or in writing. The word written or in writing shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word year shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1957, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(Code 1957, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - References and editor's notes. 
    The references and editor's notes appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code. 
Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city or creating interest and sinking funds; 
(2)  Any right or franchise, permit, or other right granted by any ordinance; 
(3)  Any personnel regulations; any ordinance establishing salaries of city officers and employees or civil service rules; 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, alley or other public way in the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades in the city; 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(7)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(8)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance establishing the official plat of the city; 
(10)  Any zoning map amendment or land use or rezoning or zoning ordinance; 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory from the city; 
(12)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(13)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking regulations for specific streets and locations; 
(14)  Any subdivision ordinance; 
(15)  Any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes therefor; 
(16)  Any ordinance prescribing the districts, election, number, classification or compensation of any city officer; 
(17)  Any administrative ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1957, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city commission. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Riviera Beach, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows: ___________." The provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Riviera Beach, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows: ___________." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words this ordinance or words of the same meaning to this chapter, this article, this division, etc., as the case may be, or to sections _____ to _____ (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgement or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1957, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00; probation; conditions of probation, including but not limited to community service, drug screening and recommended treatment, medical examination, counseling, restitution; and/or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required for failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful in addition to the specific penalty provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code shall be punished by probation; conditions of probation, including but not limited to community service, drug screening and evaluation, medical examination, home confinement, counseling, restitution, or a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by all of the above penalties. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(d)  When there exists no such provision by ordinance, the court shall proceed to punish such offense by probation, conditions of probation which promote rehabilitation and deterrence, seek retribution, obtain restitution and result in forfeiture of illegal items or contraband. 
(Code 1957, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Penalty for violations of ordinances, F.S. § 165.19; general power of city to abate nuisances, F.S. § 167.05. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; animals, ch. 4; elections, ch. 5; health and sanitation, ch. 8; human relations, ch. 9; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; nuisances, ch. 11; disturbing city meetings and workshops, § 12-23; pensions and retirement programs, ch. 14; personnel, ch. 15; solid waste management, ch. 17.5; taxation, ch. 18; utilities, ch. 20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Applications for permits, deposit of cost of notice. 
    Whenever any application is made to the city for the granting of a permit of any kind, whereby it is necessary to publish newspaper notice or to notify property owners or others by mail, the person making application shall pay to the city the estimated cost and expense of giving such notice, and the amount estimated shall be deposited in the city treasury. 
(Code 1957, § 1-9) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; coastal construction, ch. 23; planning, ch. 27; zoning, ch. 31. 
Sec. 2-2. - City contracts. 
(a)  No contract shall be submitted to the city council for its approval unless it is completely executed by the submitting party. If the city council approves the contract, then it may authorize the mayor and city clerk to sign it in the name of and on behalf of the city. 
(b)  The mayor and city clerk shall not sign any contract in the name of or on behalf of the city unless it is fully executed and authorized by the city council pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. Any contract signed in violation of this section shall be null and void and shall not bind the city. 
(c)  If the contracting party is another governmental body which requires that the contract be first executed by the city, then the mayor and city clerk may be authorized by the city council to sign it and subsection (a) of this section shall not apply. 
(Code 1957, §§ 1-11, 1-12) 
Sec. 2-3. - Assessment charge for liens imposed by city. 
    In addition to any other expenses incurred in the imposition of any lien assessed by any resolution, ordinance or provision contained in the Code, there shall be added thereto an assessment charge of $15.00 whenever any such lien is recorded with the clerk of the circuit court. 
(Code 1957, § 1-13) 
Cross reference- Litter, § 8-16 et seq.; nuisances, ch. 11; utilities, ch. 20. 
Sec. 2-4. - Charge for unpaid bank checks and drafts given in payment of obligations due city. 
    Whenever any person shall give or cause to be given to the city, or any department or agency thereof, a check or draft drawn on a bank in purported payment of any obligation due the city, which check or draft is dishonored or unpaid by reason of the drawer having no account or having insufficient funds therein, or having stopped payment on the check or draft, there shall be added to the obligation due the city the sum of $20.00 or five percent of the face amount of the instrument to cover the additional cost to the city thereby entailed. Such sum shall be collected in the same manner as any other indebtedness due the city and any receipt theretofore given in reliance upon such check or draft shall be null and void and no other receipt shall be given for the payment of the original indebtedness until such charge has also been paid. 
(Code 1957, § 1-14) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; taxation, ch. 18; utilities, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Fee for dishonored checks, F.S. § 166.251. 
Sec. 2-5. - Powers and duties of officers prescribed not exhaustive. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as setting out all the powers and duties of the officers of the city, but such officers shall have such other powers and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by law or ordinance and are necessary or proper for the efficient administration of their respective offices. 
(Code 1957, § 2-1) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-161 et seq. 
Sec. 2-6. - Bond of officials and employees. 
    All persons holding office whether elected or appointed shall furnish bond and certain other city employees may be required furnished bond in the sum of $10,000.00 with a surety company authorized to do business in the state. Such bond shall be approved by the city attorney as to sufficiency of legal requirements and shall be approved by the city council as to sufficiency of the surety. When approved, the board shall be filed in the records of the city and kept in the city hall. 
(Code 1957, § 2-8) 
Cross reference- Mayor and city council, § 2-26 et seq.; boards, committees and commissions, § 2-41 et seq.; officers and employees, § 2-161 et seq. 
Sec. 2-7. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-8. - Residency requirement for executive staff members. 
    After December 12, 1997, each person who is appointed as a department head, assistant to the city manager or deputy city manager shall establish a residence within the corporate limits of the city within 12 months of such appointment and shall maintain the principal residence (domicile) therein during the entire term of such appointment. Upon the recommendation of the city manager, this requirement may be waived on an individual case-by-case basis by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2-9; Ord. No. 2768, § 1, 12-12-97) 
Sec. 2-9. - Contracts with department head. 
    Within 60 days before any city council primary, city council runoff or city council general election, no contract, written or oral, expressed or implied, shall be entered into by and between the city and any department head or other employee then employed by the city to grant to any department head any benefit that has a monetary impact to the city such as, but not limited to, awards of severance pay, extensions or increases in severance pay, increase in salary except regular salary increases or anniversary merit increases, vacation time, any leave with pay, any extension to the term of any employment contract, any renewal of an employment contract, any entering into a new employment contract or any other thing of monetary value. 
(Code 1957, § 1-10) 
Secs. 2-10-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3083, § 2, adopted Oct. 20, 2010, amended Art. II, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. II, pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference- City council and mayor, qualifications, etc., art. II. 
Cross reference- Bond required of certain officials and employees, § 2-6; elections, ch. 5; filing procedures and qualification of candidates, § 5-2; pensions and retirement programs, ch. 14; personnel, ch. 15. 

Sec. 2-26. - Mayor; council chairperson; powers and duties. 
(a)  The mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city in the same manner as provided for city council. The mayor shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process and by the governor of the state for military purposes. In time of public danger or emergency, he/she may, with the consent of the city council, take command of the police and maintain order and enforce the laws. During the absence or disability of the mayor, his/her duties shall be performed by the council chairperson of the city. 
(b)  The mayor shall report to the city manager violations or neglect of duty on the part of employees of the city that may come to his/her knowledge. He/She may examine the condition of the books, records and papers of any department and the manner of conducting official business. He/She shall report to the city council all violations and neglect of duty of any official that may come to his/her knowledge. He/She may make recommendations about the business and the general welfare of the city to the council as he/she deems advisable. He/She may communicate from time to time to the council such information and make recommendations of the measures regarding the public service as he/she may deem proper. He/She shall have a voice at the city council meetings, but he/she shall vote only in the matter of the appointment of a councilperson in case of a tie vote of the city council when a vacancy exists. 
(c)  The mayor shall have the power to suspend any officer or employee of the city except members of the city council for misconduct in office or neglect of duty, but shall report his/her action in writing to the city council with the reasons at the next regular meeting of the city council for its approval or disapproval. The officer or employee shall remain suspended only upon the approval by a majority vote of the city council. If the suspension is disapproved, he/she shall receive his/her compensation for the time during which he/she was suspended. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 2, 10-20-10 
Sec. 2-27. - Council persons and mayor; qualifications; attendance at council meetings; removal from office; punishment. 
(a)  Each candidate for the office of city council and mayor shall have continuously resided in the city for one year prior the date of filing to qualify for such office. Each candidate for the office of city council within districts 1, 2, 3 and 4 shall have been a resident of the respective district for one year immediately prior to qualifying for such office. If a person is elected in any such district and shall move out of the respective district but remain a resident of the city, such person shall be allowed to fulfill the remainder of the then-current term in office. If a city council person or mayor should move out of the city limits during a term in office, such move shall automatically forfeit the office. 
(b)  No member of the council shall be absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the council without excusable cause and without first notifying the council chairperson and city clerk. 
(c)  Any member of the city council who is absent from four consecutive meetings shall automatically forfeit his/her office. 
(d)  Any member of the city council who is absent from six or more regular meetings within a one-year period shall forfeit his/her office. 
(e)  If a council person is absent because he/she is away on official city business or attending a convention involving municipalities, the council person shall not be considered an absentee within the meaning of this section. 
    Pursuant to article II, government, section 1(a) of the City Charter, any councilperson or mayor who is convicted of a felony while in office, shall immediately forfeit his or her office. A councilperson or mayor who is convicted of lesser crimes while in office shall be subject to appropriate penalties as determined by the city council at a hearing following the provision of notice and an opportunity to be heard. The penalties imposed by the city council may include reprimand, censure or temporary suspension from office. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 2, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 2-28. - Regular meetings; and calling special meetings. 
    Regular and special meetings of the council shall be held as provided by article II, section 9 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 2, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 2-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2913, § 1, adopted Feb. 20, 2002, repealed § 2-29, which pertained to rules of procedure and derived from Code 1957, § 2-7. 
Sec. 2-30. - Vacancy in elective office. 
    Caused by death, resignation, or removal from office. 
(1)  Whenever a vacancy shall occur in any elective office of the city (whether a mayoral or council office) then such vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the city council. The mayor shall vote on the matter only in case of a tie vote. The appointment shall be made within 30 business days of the occurrence of the vacancy. The vacancy shall be filled by appointing a resident who possesses the qualifications of being a bona fide resident of Riviera Beach who has continuously resided in the vacant district for one year immediately prior to the appointment. If such vacancy occurs in the mayoral seat or city council district 5 seats, the appointment shall be done in the same manner, except the person shall be appointed without regard to district residency. The procedure to fill a vacancy shall be substantially as follows: 
a.  Within seven business days following the occurrence of a vacancy in an office of the mayor or councilperson, the city clerk shall publish an announcement advising of the vacancy and stating that persons meeting the residency and registered elector qualifications for the particular council or mayoral office are invited to submit an application (the "application") in the form of a resume and statement of interest, outlining their qualifications to serve on the council or as mayor. 
b.  The announcement shall invite applications to be submitted on or before a date which is not less than five days and not more than 15 days after the date of publication of the announcement. 
c.  Copies of all applications timely received shall be provided by the city clerk to the mayor and councilpersons within two business days after the application closing date. 
d.  Within ten business days after the application closing date, the council shall make an appointment in writing of the applicant whom the council deems to be the most qualified. The council may first interview individual applicants, if desired. In the event that the council is not satisfied that any applicant is qualified, the council shall advise the city clerk to repeat the application solicitation process. 
The city council may, by resolution, provide for additional procedures for the filling of council and mayoral vacancies. 
(2)  The term of such appointment shall be only until the next scheduled general municipal election, at which election the unexpired term, if any, shall be filled by the electors from among candidates who qualify as provided by law. The item shall appear on the ballot as a special election to complete the unexpired portion of the term of office. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 2, 10-20-10) 
Charter reference- Vacancies in city offices, art. II, § 23. 
Secs. 2-31-2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Bond required of certain officials and employees, § 2-6; city personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7; code enforcement board, § 2-331 et seq.; canvassing board, § 5-13; board of trustees of the municipal firefighters' pension trust fund, § 14-47; board of trustees of the municipal police officers' retirement trust fund, § 14-75; utilities advisory board, § 20-16 et seq.; community redevelopment agency, § 24-21 et seq.; planning board, § 27-31 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 31-36 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-41. - Dismissal of members of boards for lack of attendance at meetings. 
(a)  Any appointive member to any of the various boards other than those boards created by general law, special act or Charter who are suspended or removed pursuant to F.S. § 112.501 who misses, without an acceptable excuse, two meetings consecutively shall be subject to dismissal and his position declared vacant, and the city council shall appoint another person to fill the unexpired term of the position declared vacant. 
(b)  Before such person shall be dismissed for such reason, he shall be notified in writing by the secretary of the board that he has missed two consecutive meetings and that he is subject to dismissal from the board. He shall be notified that he has ten days within which to file with the secretary a written excuse setting forth the reasons why he has missed two meetings. The secretary shall within ten days thereafter notify the chairman of such board that such excuse has been received and the chairman shall within five days thereafter call a meeting of the board to consider such excuse. If after such consideration the board by a majority vote decides the excuse is not acceptable, the secretary shall send a letter to the delinquent member that his excuse is not acceptable and that his resignation is in order. If the resignation is not received within five days, then the secretary shall notify the city council that such delinquent member has not complied with the terms of this section and that he should be dismissed and his position declared vacant. Upon the receipt of such notice, the city clerk shall notify the city council of such action of the board, thereafter and within a reasonable time, the city council shall meet and declare the position vacant and notice of such action of the city council shall be sent to the delinquent member. 
(c)  The board shall have the power to request such delinquent member to appear before it to give testimony, if the board is of the opinion that verbal testimony is necessary to fairly decide the case. If the member fails to appear at the time appointed, then the board may proceed with the hearing without such testimony and make its decision accordingly. 
(d)  After the city council has declared such position vacant, it shall appoint another person to such position to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term of the person dismissed. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.2) 
Sec. 2-42. - One-year terms for all board members. 
    All board members and alternative board members shall be appointed for a period of one year commencing May 1982, except members of the police and fire civil service board. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.2.1) 
Sec. 2-43. - Quasi-judicial proceedings; intent. 
    It is the intent of the city to provide an equitable and efficient manner for the city to hear quasi-judicial matters and to set forth the city's quasi-judicial procedures. These procedures shall be utilized by the city council and all city boards and commissions when rendering a final decision on a quasi-judicial land use matter. 
(Ord. No. 2687, § 1, 10-4-95; Ord. No. 2967, § 1, 6-2-04) 
Sec. 2-44. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the terms listed below shall be defined as follows: 
    Affected person means a person (or persons), natural or corporate, who is the owner of the subject property or who owns property within 300 feet of the subject property as listed in the records of the county property appraiser, or who resides in or operates a business within 300 feet of the subject property. 
    Party or parties means the petitioner and members of city staff. 
    Party intervenor means an affected person who has filed a notice of intent to participate in the proceedings with the director of community development at least seven days prior to the quasi-judicial hearing. All party intervenors may present evidence, may cross-examine witnesses, and shall be subject to cross-examination. 
(Ord. No. 2687, § 1, 10-4-95; Ord. No. 2756, § 1, 9-17-97; Ord. No. 2967, § 2 6-2-04) 
Sec. 2-45. - Swearing of witnesses. 
(a)  In quasi-judicial proceedings on land use matters, a party or party intervenor, upon request by another party or party intervenor, shall be sworn as a witness, shall be subject to cross-examination by other parties or party intervenors, and shall be required to be qualified as an expert witness, as appropriate. 
(b)  A person who appears before the decision-making body who is not a party or party intervenor shall be allowed to testify before the decision-making body, subject to control by the decision-making body, and may be requested to respond to questions from the decision-making body; however, such person need not be sworn as a witness, is not required to be subject to cross-examination, and is not required to be qualified as an expert witness. The decision-making body shall assign weight and credibility to such testimony as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2967, § 3, 6-2-04) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2967, § 3, adopted June 2, 2004, repealed the former § 2-45, and enacted a new § 2-45 as set out herein. The former § 2-45 pertained to quasi-judicial matters and derived from Ord. No. 2687, § 1, adopted Oct. 4, 1995. 
Sec. 2-46. - Ex parte communications. 
(a)  A person may not be precluded from communicating directly with a member of the decision-making body by application of ex parte communication prohibitions. Disclosure of such communications is not required, and such nondisclosure shall not be presumed prejudicial to the decision of the decision-making body. 
(b)  All decisions of the decision-making body in a quasi-judicial proceeding on land use matters must be supported by substantial, competent evidence in the record pertinent to the proceeding, irrespective of such communications. 
(Ord. No. 2967, § 4, 6-2-04) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2967, § 4, adopted June 2, 2004, repealed the former § 2-46, and enacted a new § 2-46 as set out herein. The former § 2-46 pertained to procedures for quasi-judicial proceedings and derived from Ord. No. 2687, § 1, adopted Oct. 4, 1995; and Ord. No. 2756, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 1997. 
Sec. 2-47. - Procedure. 
(a)  City staff shall make the initial presentation. The petitioner shall then make a presentation, followed by a presentation from any party-intervenor. During such presentations, only the members of the decision-making body shall be permitted to ask questions. 
(b)  After all parties and party-intervenors have made their presentations, they will be permitted to cross-examine all parties and party-intervenors, including city staff and the petitioner, in order of their appearance at the hearing. 
(c)  After cross-examination has been concluded, all members of the public who wish to offer public comment and who have filled out a comment card, will be permitted to do so. Members of the public shall be subject to the time limits generally applicable to such comment. 
(d)  After public comment, all parties and party-intervenors shall be provided with an opportunity for brief rebuttal and summary. 
(e)  The decision-making body will then make a motion and proceed to discuss the matter and vote on the motion. 
(Ord. No. 2967, § 5, 6-2-04) 
Sec. 2-48. - Final order; appeal. 
(a)  If an ordinance or resolution is prepared upon approval of an action by the decision-making body, with or without conditions, requirements, or limitations, a final order will not be prepared unless the petition or application is denied. All necessary final orders will be prepared by the city attorney's office and shall include, at a minimum, findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
(b)  The final determination of the decision-making body is subject to judicial review by a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2967, § 5, 6-2-04) 
Secs. 2-49-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADVERTISING AND INDUSTRIAL PROMOTIONS COMMITTEE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- City personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10. 

Sec. 2-61. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a committee to be known as the City of Riviera Beach Advertising and Industrial Promotion Committee. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.1.2(a)) 
Sec. 2-62. - Membership, appointment, rules and regulations. 
(a)  The committee shall consist of five members and two alternate members appointed by the city council for a term of one year commencing on May 1. Individual members of the committee shall serve until their successors have been selected, and have accepted the appointment. 
(b)  Members shall hold office at the will of the city council and are removable by the appointing authority upon written notice. Members shall serve without compensation. The members shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of their affairs. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.1.2(b)) 
Sec. 2-63. - Compensation; expenses. 
    There shall be no compensation paid to the members of the advertising and industrial promotions committee. Any expenses necessarily incurred by the committee shall first be approved by the city council at any official meeting. The funds shall be provided by the city from its budgeted account under the community promotion, brochures and promotional fund. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.1.2(c)) 
Sec. 2-64. - Powers and duties. 
    The advertising and industrial promotions committee shall act only in an advisory capacity to the city council. It may create a program of development and prepare contracts for advertising which shall be presented to the city council for its action thereon. It shall investigate methods of advertising the city and make suggestions as to the various media of advertising available to the city. The results of the committee's investigations and recommendations shall be transmitted to the city council in writing. In addition to the written reports, the city council may request discussions with a member of the committee, or any and all of the committee, at the convenience of the city council to clarify any questions regarding the advertising investigations and recommendations. The committee may investigate all matters affecting the present and future industrial growth and development of the city. The results of the committee's investigations and recommendations shall be transmitted to the city council. The city council may request discussions with a member of the committee or all of the committee at the convenience of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.1.2(d)) 
Secs. 2-65-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LIBRARY BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- City personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7. 

Sec. 2-76. - Appointment; terms of members. 
    There is a library board for the city which consists of five members. The members are selected by the city council. Each member shall serve for a period of one year, commencing May 1. Individual members of the board shall serve until their successors have been selected and qualified. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.3(a)) 
Sec. 2-77. - Alternate members. 
    The city council may also appoint two alternate members to the board, whose tenure shall be for one year. Such alternates shall act at any meeting in the absence, disability or disqualification of members being absent, disabled or disqualified. If a full board is present at any meeting, either or both alternates shall have the right to attend such meeting so as to be advised of all matters being presented and may participate in the meeting but shall have no vote in deciding any issue presented. The alternate members shall have power to vote only when a full board is not present at an official meeting and the alternate shall be sitting in the place of and acting for a member who is absent, disabled or disqualified. The alternate first appointed shall have seniority and shall have first preference in the event of one regular absentee member and both alternates shall have authority in case of more than one regular absentee member. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.3(b)) 
Secs. 2-78-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RECREATION BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- City personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7; parks and recreation, ch. 13. 

Sec. 2-91. - Created; membership. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board to be known as the City of Riviera Beach Recreation Board. 
(b)  The board shall consist of seven members, appointed by the city council for a term of one year commencing in May of each year. Members shall continue to serve on the board until their successors have been appointed and have accepted the appointment. 
(c)  Members shall hold office at the will of the city council and are removable by the city council upon written notice. The members shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of their affairs. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.4(a), (b)) 
Sec. 2-92. - Compensation; expenses. 
    There shall be no compensation paid to the members of the recreation board. Any expense necessarily incurred by the board shall first be approved by the city council at any official meeting, and the funds shall be provided by the city from its budgeted account under recreation. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.4(c)) 
Sec. 2-93. - Powers and duties. 
    The recreation board shall act only in an advisory capacity to the city council. It may create a program of development and entertainment which shall be presented to the city council for its action. The city council may request discussions with a member of the board or all of the board, at the convenience of the city council regarding its investigations and recommendations. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.4(d)) 
Secs. 2-94-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WATERFRONT ADVISORY BOARD[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- City personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7; parks and recreation, ch. 13; water sports, § 13-26 et seq.; boats, § 13-51 et seq.; marina operations, § 13-76 et seq. 

Sec. 2-101. - Created. 
    There is hereby created and established an advisory board to be known as the Riviera Beach Waterfront Advisory Board. 
(Code 1957, § 2-141) 
Sec. 2-102. - Composition; appointment; qualifications; term and oath of office of members; filling vacancies. 
(a)  The waterfront advisory board shall consist of seven members. Members shall possess reputations for civic pride, responsibility, integrity and business or professional ability. Members shall be selected with special reference to their knowledge of and interest in waterfront resources and development of the city. 
(b)  Each city council member shall nominate and appoint a board member for a period of one year, commencing May 1 of each year, and the city council shall appoint two board members for a period of one year. Vacancies occurring shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city councilmember or successor to that elective office whose initial nominee and appointee resulted in such vacancy. If the appointee was appointed by the city council, the city council shall fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. Members may be appointed to successive terms. 
(c)  Before entering his duties, each member shall execute an acceptance of appointment and oath and file same with the city clerk. Any member serving on this board will not be precluded from serving at the same time on any other board or agency of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2-142) 
Sec. 2-103. - Members' attendance and participation at meetings; neglect of duty. 
(a)  Members shall be required to attend all regular and special meetings of the waterfront advisory board. The city council shall be notified of any member who neglects the duties of this office as determined by the board, and such members may be removed by two-thirds vote of the city council. 
(b)  Any member who neglects the duties of his office as determined by the board may be recommended for removal by two-thirds vote of the board. Any member of the board who fails to attend two out of three successive regular meetings without approval of the chairperson or in the chairperson's absence, the acting chairperson, shall automatically forfeit his appointment to serve on the board. Such vacancy shall promptly be filled as provided for in section 2-102. Each member of the board shall vote on every motion; however, in the event of a conflict of interest as defined in F.S. § 112.311 et seq., such member shall not vote or participate in the discussion of the matter and thereafter within 15 days after the vote occurs file disclosure of voting conflict, form 4, with the clerk of the board, which disclosure is to be incorporated into the minutes. 
(c)  Members shall file with the city clerk a financial disclosure statement in prescribed form to satisfy the requirements of F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 
(Code 1957, § 2-143) 
Cross reference- Dismissal of board members for failure to attend meetings, § 2-41. 
Sec. 2-104. - Organization; meetings; annual report; quorum. 
(a)  As soon after appointment of the members of the waterfront advisory board as may conveniently be done, the board shall call the first meeting for the purpose of its organization. The board shall select from its membership a chairperson and vice-chairperson, and the board may in its discretion select a secretary and such other officers as it may deem desirable. In the absence, sickness or inability of the chairperson of the board to act, the duties of the chairperson shall be performed by the vice-chairperson. 
(b)  Subject to approval of the city council as to content and policy, the board shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its actions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. All meetings of the board shall be public. The board shall file with the city clerk an annual report setting forth its activities during the preceding year and making recommendations to the city council. 
(c)  Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum necessary to hold a meeting and take any action. A majority vote of a quorum of the membership of the board shall be necessary to accomplish any actions, transactions, findings or determinations. 
(d)  The chairperson shall be authorized to call meetings of the board, and meetings may be called by written notice signed by any four members of the board. The board at any regular or special meeting may fix and call a meeting for a future day. 
(Code 1957, § 2-144) 
Sec. 2-105. - Compensation of members. 
    Members of the waterfront advisory board shall receive no compensation for their services, but the city council may provide in the annual city budget sufficient funds for payment of the actual and necessary expenses incurred by the board in the performance of its official duties prescribed in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 2-145) 
Sec. 2-106. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The general purpose of the waterfront advisory board shall be to advise the city council on matters related to the development, maintenance, operation, financial management and related issues pertaining to the city-owned waterfront facilities in accordance with present and future needs, demands and requirements of the prosperity, convenience and general welfare of the residents of this city. In addition, the board shall advise to the extent so authorized by the city council on any other matter related to waterfront properties, public or private, and the impact of any development, or lack of development, that may influence or affect the resources of the city. For the accomplishment of such purposes, the board shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Establish and maintain effective liaison, cooperation and communications among persons or entities interested in the development of the city's waterfront, the city council and the various agencies, departments and officials of the city relating to and affecting waterfront development within the city. 
(2)  Hear complaints by persons or entities related to waterfront development or operations where governmental regulations, restrictions, harassment, inspections, lack of cooperation, discourtesy or general annoyances are brought before the board, and conduct any investigations as may be necessary to prepare a report to the city council outlining the complaint and articulating the board's recommendations for council action. 
(3)  Review federal, state and local legislation, codes, ordinances, regulations and directives having an effect on the city's waterfront property, and monitor city ordinances and state statutes affecting waterfront development and policy and administration actions of the city affecting such waterfront development for the purpose of making recommendations to the city council in respect to local actions that may be appropriate to protect, maintain, promote or develop the waterfront of the city. 
(4)  Advise and inform the city council concerning recreational, social, economic, political and other factors affecting or influencing the cost and desirability of operating, maintaining or locating waterfront enterprises in the city and to make recommendations concerning methods by which waterfront development may make a greater contribution to the prosperity and welfare of the city. 
(5)  Advise and inform the city council through periodic and continuing reports of appropriate action designed to improve or expand the waterfront developments of the city, and to make such area more attractive for existing and prospective development and to inform the public and other interested parties of the waterfront facilities and opportunities that exist in the city. 
(6)  In regard to the city's waterfront complex, and the operation of the marina and in-out dry-boat storage facility, prepare a recommended program for city council action that would encompass, but not necessarily be limited to: 
a.  Establishing a management structure; 
b.  Preparation of operating rules and regulations for the marina and dry-boat storage operations; 
c.  Establishing initial rental rates and periodic review of the rental structure in terms of cost/revenue; 
d.  Confirming the extent of services offered and review changes to these services; 
e.  Establishing a policy on advance deposits for slip space during the construction period and beyond; 
f.  Advise on maintenance, repair and/or facility expansion considerations; 
g.  Determining forms and reporting systems to be used by the marina operation; 
h.  Review of operating procedures; and 
i.  Advise on advertising and other public relations programs that serve the interest of the city in regard to the waterfront complex. 
(b)  The board shall perform such other duties as may be authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2-146) 
Sec. 2-107. - Limitations on authority. 
    The waterfront advisory board shall have no power or authority to commit the city council to any policies or to incur any financial obligation or to create any liability on the part of the city. No actions or recommendations of the board shall be binding upon the city until approved or adopted by the city council. This board shall not infringe upon any of the powers expressly granted by ordinance to any other duly constituted agency, department or board of the city government. 
(Code 1957, § 2-147) 
Secs. 2-108-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - COMMUNITY SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-116. - Created; members; appointments; vacancies. 
    The city council hereby creates a community services advisory board. The board shall consist of no more than five members with terms of one year commencing in May of each year. A member may be reappointed for successive terms. An appointment to fill any vacancy on the community services advisory board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. If any member fails to attend three successive meetings without prior notice to the chairperson, the community services advisory board shall declare the member's office vacant and the city council shall properly fill such vacancy. The members shall serve at the will of the city council and are removable by the appointing authority upon written notice. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.8.1(a)) 
Sec. 2-117. - Chairperson; quorum; member compensation. 
    The city council shall designate the chairperson of the community services advisory board. The presence of three or more members shall constitute a quorum of the community services advisory board. Members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for such travel, mileage and per diem expenses as may be authorized by the city council in the city's budget. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.8.1(b)) 
Sec. 2-118. - Powers and duties. 
    The board shall act only in an advisory capacity to the city council. It may develop and recommend a program of community service enhancements and initiatives which shall be presented to the city council for its action thereon. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.8.1(c)) 
Secs. 2-119-2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CIVIL SERVICE BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2660, § 1, adopted March 15, 1995, purported to amend §§ 2-76-2-90 of the 1957 Code; however, to maintain consistency in the new Code, provisions of Ord. No. 2660 have been included herein as ch. 2, article III, division 7, §§ 2-126-2-141 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-126. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Board shall mean the civil service board herein provided for general and police and fire employees. 
    City shall mean the City of Riviera Beach. 
    Council shall mean the city council of the City of Riviera Beach. 
    Department heads shall mean the director, chief, or head of the departments created by this chapter or from time to time by the city council under this division. 
    Hearing officer shall mean the person who adjucates employee hearings. 
    Members of the civil service shall mean the persons employed by the city on a regular, full-time basis as a firefighter and police officer who shall be responsible to the police and fire civil service board and all other employees shall be considered under the general civil service board and who are subject to the civil service provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 2-127. - Civil board created; composition; qualifications and removal of members; quorum; meetings. 
(a)  Creation; selection; term. There shall be two civil service boards for the city. One board for general employees and one board for sworn police officers and uniform fire employees. Each board shall consist of seven members. Five of the members shall be selected by the city council and shall be composed of persons who are sympathetic to the principles of personnel administration. The remaining members shall be elected as directed by the city charter which says in part: 
The fire department, police department and the general employees of the city shall have the right to elect from its department at least two of their fellow employees who shall serve on the board on all matters pertaining to their respective departments. 
Each member shall serve for a period of two years. In addition, two alternates shall be selected for each board, one alternate to be selected by the city council and one alternate to be elected by the general, uniform fire and sworn police employees, respectively. Alternate members shall be selected and elected for a term of one year to serve in the absence of any of the regular members of the civil service boards. Individual members of the board shall serve until their successors have been selected and qualified. 
Terms of appointed members of the board shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the date of the second regular city council meeting in April. The term of office of elected members of the board shall end April 30th. 
All members of each board shall serve without recompense unless provided by the legislative body. 
(b)  Qualifications. All members of the board, except employee members, shall be registered voters of the city; however, that no person who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude shall be eligible to hold such office. 
(c)  Removal. Members of the board may be removed by the city council for incompetency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. In the event of resignation or death of a board member or his removal from office, the council shall within 30 days, appoint a person to fill the unexpired term of office. 
(d)  Quorum. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum necessary for the conduct of the business of the board. 
(e)  Meetings. The board shall hold not less than one regular meeting each month and may hold other meetings at the call of the chairman as may be required for the transaction of the business of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 2-128. - Same-Function and duties. 
    It shall be the function of the civil service boards to encourage and promote a proper personnel system for the city, to inspire public confidence in the city service, to assist, through a proper personnel system, administrative officials in the efficient performance of their tasks, and to provide employees in the classified service, an opportunity for honorable and useful employment. The civil service boards shall have specific functions to be outlined in the following provisions and shall also have a general responsibility for creating standards of conduct and service which will be of mutual advantage to the city and its employees. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 2-129. - Same-Reports. 
    The board shall make periodic reports, at least once a year, of the activities of the board and of the needs of the city relating to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 2-130. - Same-Authority to adopt rules and regulations. 
    The board shall adopt, and amend as necessary, a code of regulations which pertain to their own operating procedure. The board shall adopt rules and regulations regarding the hearing and adjudication of grievances relating to demotion, suspension and dismissal upon appeal from a decision of the city manager. The rules and regulations are subject to approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 2-131. - Classified and unclassified service. 
(a)  Division of employment; jurisdiction of boards. All employment within the city service shall be divided into the classified or the unclassified service. The authority of the civil service boards shall extend only to those positions within the classified service. 
(b)  Unclassified service. The unclassified service shall extend to persons elected by public vote, and appointments made by the city manager, and city council such as, but not limited to, the city manager, the city attorney, and assistant city attorney, members of boards or commissions or committees appointed by the city council, intermittent employees, persons employed under limited term contractual service to perform specialized technical and professional services for the city, and such other additional positions as the city council may include because of the specialized or confidential nature of the position. 
(c)  Classified service. All other employment in the city shall be deemed to be within the classified service and shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the civil service boards. 
(d)  Transfer between services. Any employee in the classified service holding regular or probationary status who accepts a temporary position in the unclassified service shall have the right to return to the position held in the classified service or a comparable position upon completion of his service in an unclassified position. Credit for pension benefits or time in service shall not be adversely affected by service in an unclassified position. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 2-132. - Title and compensation of employees. 
    No employee in the classified service shall be employed under a position title nor paid a salary not in accordance with the provisions of a schedule set by the city council establishing a list of approved class titles and compensation rates for such titles. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 2-133. - Examinations. 
    The department of human resources shall, by rule, provide for the conduct of examinations in a manner which will fairly test the ability and capacity of individuals admitted to the examination. The department of human resources may establish reasonable standards for admission to examinations. Examinations may consist of any one, all or a combination of the following: 
Written test, oral test, performance test, evaluation of training and experience, seniority, efficiency rating, physical and medical examination, or any other type or combination of examination which may reasonably establish the merit and fitness of applicants for the position. 
Any civil service employee who is dismissed for misconduct or delinquency or who resigns while charges are pending shall not be eligible for future employment by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 2-134. - Establishment of eligible registers. 
    The civil service board chairperson and director of department of human resources shall provide for the establishment of eligible registers. A register may consist of one or more of the following: Reemployment list, promotional list, and open list. The reemployment list shall contain the names of employees who have been separated from a position in the classified service, and who left against their own will and in good standing, after completion of the probationary period. The promotional list shall consist of the names of individuals who are in the civil service and qualified through open competitive examination for a position on the list. The open list shall contain the names of persons who have qualified by examination but are not at present members of the civil service of the city. The promotional and open list shall remain in effect for one year from date of qualification. Provision may be made for examination and combination of the eligible lists resulting therefrom, either in the order of respective final grades in the examinations or in the order of the dates of examinations. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 2-135. - Appointments. 
(a)  No person shall be appointed or promoted to any position in the classified civil service except upon requisition by the department head and upon certification by the board chairperson and director of department of human resources from an eligible list prepared in accordance with sections 2-133 and 2-134 of this division. To fill existing positions in the city service, the department head shall determine the duties and responsibilities of the position or promotion to be filled. The department head, after certification of names of persons on the eligible list have been made, shall make requisitions from the certified eligible list for employment; the position, if filled, must be filled by the appointment and employment of one of the persons certified. Management shall first consider those individuals on the reemployment list; second those individuals on the promotional list; and third those persons whose names are on the open list. When a person on the reemployment or promotional list is not chosen, the reason, in writing, for such action shall be filed with the department of human resources. The department head may, in the event there are five or more names on the list, choose one of the top five and not necessarily in order of standing. If there are less than five names on the list, he may choose one or reject all. If there is one name on the list, he may choose to accept or reject the individual. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the filling of the position by reinstatement, transfer or demotion of an employee. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95; Ord. No. 2810, § 1, 4-7-99) 
Sec. 2-136. - Employment. 
(a)  Regular, temporary and part-time employment. Employment in the city service shall be divided into categories of regular employment or temporary employment. Regular employment shall be defined as employment in the positions which have an expected duration of more than six months and after the satisfactory completion of the probationary period following probationary appointment or promotion. Temporary employment shall be defined as employment in a position which has a duration of not more than one year or less. No extension of the duration of employment of temporary employment shall be allowed by the department head and/or city manager. Part-time employment shall be defined as employment which requires a weekly work schedule of less than 40 hours. Part-time and temporary employees do not receive benefits assigned to those of regular employment. 
(b)  Emergency appointments. The city manager may, in time of emergency or to prevent the stoppage of public business, make emergency appointments not to exceed 30 days of any person to any position without regard to civil service procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95; Ord. No. 2785, § 1, 9-16-98; Ord. No. 2810, § 2, 4-7-99) 
Sec. 2-137. - Probationary period. 
    Individuals appointed from a certified list to regular employment shall serve a probationary period of a minimum of six months, but which shall not extend for more than 12 months. Sworn police officers and uniform fire personnel shall serve a minimum of 12 months probation but which shall not extend for more than 18 months. An employee appointed to a temporary position does not serve a probationary period and such service shall not count in completing a probationary period. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95; Ord. No. 2810, § 3, 4-7-99) 
Sec. 2-138. - Procedure for discharge, suspension and demotion of employees. 
(a)  Probationary period. During the probationary period, the city manager may, at his discretion, discharge, suspend or demote an employee. 
Notice of discharge, suspension and demotion shall be given the employee or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
No probationary employee has the right to appeal any disciplinary action or dismissal by the city manager for any cause whatsoever to the civil service board or hearing officer. The civil service board has no jurisdiction over probationary employees. 
(b)  Probationary period completed. The city manager may discharge an employee who has completed the probationary period from the employee's position at any time, by outlining in writing, the specific reason(s) for discharge. The written charge(s) must be given personally to the employee or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the employee and discharge cannot be made effective until this notice has been given to or sent to the last known address of the employee. The employee may, within ten calendar days after receipt of this notice, file a request for a hearing with the civil service board to determine whether there is competent, substantial evidence to support the discharge. The hearing officer shall begin such hearing within 30 calendar days following the board's granting of the request for hearing. 
In a hearing, the hearing officer shall not be bound by rules of technical evidence but shall use reasonable grounds and discretion to secure a fair and complete hearing of the facts in the case. The employee, the department head or the city manager, may be represented by counsel if desired. Written notice shall be given to the person so dismissed with a copy to the city manager, director of human resources and department head, of the time and place of the hearing. The hearings shall always be open to the public. 
Upon completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall present the finding of facts and recommendation within 15 calendar days to the civil service board. The board must file its final order within 30 days after rendering its decision. The decision of the civil service board shall be final and binding on the employee, the city manager, and the legislative body unless an appeal is taken to civil court. The civil service board may overturn the action of the city manager upon a finding that the city manager's action is not supported by competent substantial evidence. 
(c)  Suspension without pay. The city manager may suspend, without pay, an employee for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days in any one calendar year, for purposes of discipline. Such suspension by the city manager shall be subject to notice to the employee, and to appeal by the employee through the proper grievance procedure. If the grievance is not resolved, then the employee may file a request for a hearing in the same manner previously provided for discharge of an employee. 
(d)  Demotion. The city manager may demote an employee for purposes of discipline. Such demotion by the city manager shall be subject to notice to the employee, and to appeal by the employee, through the proper grievance procedure. If the grievance is not resolved, then the employee may file a request for a hearing in the same manner previously provided for discharge and suspension of an employee. 
(e)  Refusal to obey subpoena. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to respond to any subpoena duly issued by the hearing officer without a legitimate excuse therefore and such failure or refusal to respond may be declared a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as now provided for by section 1-11 of this Code. 
(f)  Witnesses before hearing officer. All city witnesses demanding witness fees for attendance shall be entitled to the per diem of $5.00 to be paid by the city but no employee of the city summoned before the hearing officer to testify shall be entitled to any compensation nor suffer any loss of pay for such attendance. The aggrieved employee shall be responsible for all witness fees summoned by him. 
(g)  Pre-determination conference/disciplinary review hearing. Nothing in this division shall prevent the city from making any necessary investigation, prior to or subsequent to the filing of charges, in an attempt to mediate the matter. Regular general employees shall be entitled to a pre-determination hearing prior to disciplinary action to refute the charges. Sworn police and uniform fire personnel shall be entitled to a departmental disciplinary review hearing prior to any disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95; Ord. No. 2786, § 1, 9-16-98; Ord. No. 2798, § 1, 12-16-98; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 4-7-99) 
Sec. 2-139. - Demotion, suspension, dismissal of employees-Causes generally. 
    Any member of the civil service under this division who shall be guilty of incompetence, malfeasance, nonfeasance, misfeasance, misconduct, neglect of his duty, insubordination, immorality, drunkenness, or violation of any law or rules of the department or city shall be subject to demotion, suspension or dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 2-140. - Hearing officer. 
    Services of a hearing officer may be secured by contract, which may be on a case-by-case basis or an annual basis for all hearings under civil service. Contract for hearing officer shall be made only with members of the Florida Bar in good standing, and who have the requisite overall qualification, as demonstrated by past experience. 
    City staff attorneys shall not serve as a hearing officer for civil service. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 2-141. - Appropriation for administration of division. 
    A sufficient sum of money shall be appropriated each year by the city council to carry out the provisions of the division. The amount of such appropriation shall be at the discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Secs. 2-142-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - DRUG COALITION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-151. - Created. 
    The city council of the City of Riviera Beach hereby creates the City of Riviera Beach Drug Coalition Advisory Board. 
(Ord. No. 2697, § 1, 12-6-95) 
Sec. 2-152. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent of this division to establish the drug coalition advisory board in order to promote and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2697, § 1, 12-6-95) 
Sec. 2-153. - Organizational structure. 
(a)  A seven-member advisory board shall be appointed to provide direct oversight and to manage the overall mission, goals, and objectives of the coalition. 
(b)  The chairperson of the advisory board shall report recommendations and suggestions to the city council. 
(c)  A subcommittee task force shall be appointed from the following identified priority categories: 
(1)  Human services; 
(2)  Youth and activities; 
(3)  Law enforcement; 
(4)  Health/substance abuse; 
(5)  Resident/community; 
(6)  Grant and AID/economic development; and 
(7)  Education/employment. 
(d)  The chairperson of each task force shall report all findings and recommendations to the advisory board. 
(e)  The purpose of each task force shall be to develop strategic plans to improve for economic/educational/employment, development and for community improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2697, § 1, 12-6-95) 
Sec. 2-154. - Definitions. 
    Board shall mean the Riviera Beach Drug Coalition Advisory Board. 
    Council shall mean the Riviera Beach City Council. 
    Manager shall mean the City of Riviera Beach city manager. 
    Secretary shall mean the person appointed to perform the clerical and administrative duties and such duties as provided herein necessary to carry out the activities of the drug coalition advisory board. 
    Staff shall mean the staff of the Riviera Beach Civil Drug Court or any employee designated by the city manager. 
    Subcommittee shall mean that body of individuals assigned specialty tasks by the advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 2697, § 1, 12-6-95) 
Sec. 2-155. - Jurisdiction. 
    The drug coalition advisory board shall have jurisdiction throughout the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2697, § 1, 12-6-95) 
Sec. 2-156. - Organization function. 
(a)  The council shall sit as the drug coalition governing board. The advisory board shall make recommendations to the city manager who shall provide these recommendations to the city council. 
(b)  The council or city manager will assign administrative assistance as may be reasonably required by the board for proper performance of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 2697, § 1, 12-6-95) 
Sec. 2-157. - Procedures for membership. 
(a)  Drug coalition advisory board membership shall be by appointment from the city council. 
(b)  Nominations shall be submitted in writing with name, address and qualifications of nominee to board chairperson for review and recommendation to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2697, § 1, 12-6-95) 
Sec. 2-158. - Conduct of meetings. 
(a)  A regular meeting of the coalition shall be held bi-monthly unless modified by vote of the members of the advisory board. 
(b)  A special meeting of the coalition may be held when called by the chair of the advisory board or the subcommittee. 
(c)  The place of regular meetings shall be in the municipality of Riviera Beach. A written or telephone notice stating the time, place and day shall be proper notice. 
(d)  The chair of each committee shall be a member of the bylaws committee. 
(Ord. No. 2697, § 1, 12-6-95) 
Secs. 2-159, 2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Powers and duties of officers, § 2-5; bond of officials and employees, § 2-6; city personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7; code enforcement officer, § 2-311; fire chief, § 6-3; general employees pension program, § 14-21 et seq.; social security, § 14-101 et seq.; personnel, ch. 15; police department, § 16-21 et seq.; reserve police force, § 16-61 et seq.; director of planning, § 27-51 et seq. 
State Law reference- Code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; suspension or removal of board members, F.S. § 112.501; public records act, F.S. § 119.01 et seq.; public meetings law, F.S. § 286.01 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-161. - Disclosure procedures related to ex-parte communication with public officials. 
    Access permitted. Any person not otherwise prohibited by statute, charter provision or ordinance may communicate in person or by writing to any local public official (elected and/or appointed) regarding the merits or lack thereof of any matter on which quasi-judicial action may be taken by any board, council or commission on which the local public official is a member, so long as the following process is observed: 
(1)  The substance of any ex-parte communication with a local public official (appointed and/or elected) which relates to any quasi-judicial action pending before the official shall not be presumed to have been prejudicial to the action if the subject of the communication and the identity of the person, group or entity with whom the communication took place is disclosed and made a part of the record of the quasi-judicial board, commission or council before final action on the matter. 
(2)  A local public official may read a written communication from any person regarding a matter or issue which is pending before the public official sitting in his/her quasi-judicial capacity. However, a written communication that relates to quasi-judicial action pending before a local public official shall not be presumed prejudicial to the action provided; however, that such written communication shall be made a part of the record before final action on the matter. 
(3)  Local public officials may conduct investigations and site visits and may receive expert opinions regarding quasi-judicial action pending before them. Such activities shall not be presumed prejudicial to the action if the existence of the investigation, site visit or expert opinion is made a part of the record before final action on the matter. 
(4)  Disclosure made pursuant to paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) must be made before or during the public meeting at which a vote is taken on such matters, so that persons who have opinions contrary to those expressed in the ex-parte communication are given a reasonable opportunity to refute or respond to the communication. This section does not subject local public officials to F.S. ch. 112, Part III for not complying with this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2688, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2688, adopted Oct. 4, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1 as § 2-161 was at the discretion of the editor. 
DIVISION 1.5. - LOBBYIST REGISTRATION 

Sec. 2-162. - Title and purpose. 
(a)  This division shall be cited as the "City of Riviera Beach Lobbyist Registration Ordinance." 
(b)  The city council hereby determines that the operation of responsible government requires that the fullest opportunity be afforded to the people to petition their city government for the redress of grievances and to express freely to the elected officials their opinions on legislation and other actions and issues; to preserve and maintain the integrity of the governmental decision-making process, it is necessary that the identity and activities of certain persons who engage in efforts to influence city council, advisory board members, and employees on matters within their official duties, be publicly and regularly disclosed. 
(Ord. No. 4001, § 1, 9-7-11) 
Sec. 2-163. - Definitions. 
    Unless expressly provided herein to the contrary, for purposes of this division, the following definitions will apply: 
    Advisory board means any advisory or quasi-judicial board created by the city council. 
    City Council or council means the mayor or any member of the City of Riviera Beach City Council. 
    Employee means all personnel employed by the City of Riviera Beach. 
    Lobbying means seeking to influence the decision of the mayor or any city council person, any advisory board member, or any employee with respect to the passage, defeat or modification of any item anticipated to be presented for consideration to the city council or the city's advisory boards as applicable. 
    Lobbyist means any person who is employed and receives payment, or who contracts for economic consideration, for the purpose of lobbying on behalf of a principal, and shall include an employee whose principal or most significant responsibilities to the employer is overseeing the employer's various relationships with government or representing the employer in its contacts with government. "Lobbyist" shall not include any employee as defined by this division when acting in the course of his or her employment, any elected official when the official is lobbying on behalf of the governmental agency which the official serves, or any member of the official's staff when such staff member is lobbying on an occasional basis on behalf of the governmental agency by which the staff member is employed. 
    Person means individuals, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations (profit or not-for-profit), professional corporations, or associations, and all other groups or combinations however constituted. 
    Principal means the person or entity a lobbyist represents for the purpose of lobbying. 
(Ord. No. 4001, § 1, 9-7-11) 
Sec. 2-164. - Registration and expenditures. 
(a)  Registration required. Prior to lobbying, all lobbyists shall submit an original, fully executed registration form to the city clerk. A separate registration is required for each principal represented. A registration fee of $25.00 must be included with each registration form submitted. A registrant shall promptly send a written statement canceling the registration for a principal upon termination of the lobbyist's representation of that principal. This statement shall be signed by the lobbyist. Lobbying prior to registration is prohibited. 
(b)  Registration form. The registration form shall require the following information: 1) the name and address of the lobbyist; 2) the name and address of the principal represented; 3) the date the lobbyist was initially retained by the principal; 4) the nature and extent of any direct business association or partnership the lobbyist and principal might have with any current city councilperson, advisory board member, or employee; 5) the area of legislative interest; and 6) a statement confirming that the registrant is authorized to represent the principal. The form shall be signed by the registrant and the principal. 
(c)  Registration exceptions. Registration shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  City council members, advisory board members or employees discussing matters relevant to their official duties; 
(2)  Persons under contract with the city who communicate with city council persons, advisory board members or employees regarding issues related only to the performance of their services under their contract; 
(3)  Any person who lobbies only in his or her individual capacity for the purpose of self-representation; 
(4)  Any person who appears before the city council or advisory board in a quasi-judicial proceeding; or 
(5)  A representative of a labor union or an employee of the city who is a member of a labor union which has a collective bargaining agreement with the city. 
(d)  Reporting of expenditures. Commencing October 1, 2011, and on October 1 of each year thereafter, the lobbyist shall submit to the city clerk a signed statement under oath listing all expenditures made by the lobbyist in lobbying city officials and employees in excess of $25.00 for the preceding year. A statement shall be filed even if there have been no expenditures during the reporting period. The statement shall list in detail each expenditure category, including food and beverage, entertainment, research, communications, media advertising, publications, travel, lodging and special events. 
(1)  The administration shall provide notice of violation to any lobbyist who fails to timely file an expenditure report and shall also notify the Palm Beach County Commission on Ethics of this failure. In addition to any other penalties which may be imposed under this division, any lobbyist who fails to file the required expenditure report within 30 days of the date of notice of violation shall be suspended from lobbying unless the notice of violation has been appealed to the commission on ethics. 
(e)  False statements . A lobbyist shall not knowingly make, or cause to be made, a false statement or misrepresentation in maintaining registration or when lobbying city councilpersons, advisory board members, or employees. 
(Ord. No. 4001, § 1, 9-7-11) 
Sec. 2-165. - Record of lobbying contacts. 
(a)  Contact log. Except when appearing before the city council or any advisory board, all persons shall sign, for each instance of lobbying, contact logs maintained and available in the office of each department of city government. The person shall provide his or her name, whether or not the person is a lobbyist as defined in this division, the name of each principal, if any, represented in the course of the particular contact, and the subject matter of the lobbying contact. All contact logs shall be transmitted to the city manager at the end of each calendar quarter. 
(b)  Lobbying outside of city offices. In the event that a lobbyist engages in lobbying which is outside of city offices, and which is a scheduled appointment initiated by any person for the purpose of lobbying, the lobbyist shall advise the city manager's office, legislative office, or the employee's department as appropriate of the calendar scheduling of an appointment and the subject matter of the lobbying contact. 
(Ord. No. 4001, § 1, 9-7-11) 
Sec. 2-166. - Cone of silence. 
(a)  Cone of silence means a prohibition on any communication, except for written correspondence, regarding a particular request for proposal, request for qualification, bid, or any other competitive solicitation between: 
(1)  Any person or person's representative seeking an award from such competitive solicitation; and 
(2)  Any city councilperson or legislative staff, or any employee authorized to act on behalf of the council to award a particular contract. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a person's representative shall include, but not be limited to, the person's employee, partner, officer, director, consultant, lobbyist, or any actual or potential subcontractor or consultant of the person. 
(c)  The cone of silence shall be in effect as of the deadline to submit the proposal, bid, or other response to a competitive solicitation. The cone of silence shall remain in effect and subject to the terms of this section for any person or person's representative who responds to a particular request for proposal, request for qualification, bid, or any other competitive solicitation, and such response is either rejected by the city or withdrawn by the person or person's representative. Each request for proposal, request for qualification, bid or any other competitive solicitation shall provide notice of cone of silence requirements and refer to this division. 
(d)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to oral communications at any public proceeding, including pre-bid conferences, oral presentations before selection committees, contract negotiations during any public meeting, presentations made to the council, and protest hearings. Further, the cone of silence shall not apply to contract negotiations between any employee and the intended awardees, any dispute resolution process following the filing of a protest between the person filing the protest and any employee, or any written correspondence at any time with any employee, city council member, or advisory board member or selection committee member, unless specifically prohibited by the applicable competitive solicitation process. 
(e)  The cone of silence shall not apply to any purchases made in an amount less than the competitive bid threshold set forth in the city procurement ordinance. 
(f)  The cone of silence shall terminate at the time the city council or the city manager, acts on behalf of the city, awards or approves a contract, rejects all bids or responses, or otherwise takes action which ends the solicitation process. 
(g)  Any contract entered into in violation of the cone of silence provisions in this section shall render the transaction voidable. 
(Ord. No. 4001, § 1, 9-7-11) 
Sec. 2-167. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If the administration is informed of any person who has failed to comply with the requirements of this division, the administrator shall conduct a preliminary investigation as deemed necessary under the circumstances. In the event it is determined that a violation may have occurred based on the results of the investigation, the city manager shall forward the matter to the Palm Beach County Commission on Ethics for further investigation and enforcement proceeding as set forth by the code of ethics procedures. A complaint submitted under this subsection by the city manager or designee shall be deemed legally sufficient evidence of such violation to transfer the matter to the Palm Beach County Commission on Ethics for further investigation and enforcement proceedings. 
(b)  The commission on ethics may process any other legally sufficient complaints of violations under this division pursuant to the procedures established. 
(Ord. No. 4001, § 1, 9-7-11) 
Sec. 2-168. - Penalities. 
    Violations of this division shall be punishable as follows: 
(a)  Failure to properly register as required by section 2-164 of this division shall be deemed a single violation, punishable by a fine of $250.00 per day for each day an unregistered lobbyist engages in lobbying activity, in an amount not to exceed a total of $2,500.00. 
(b)  Failure to properly provide lobbying contact information as required by section 2-165 of this division shall be punishable by a fine of $250.00 for each violation. 
(c)  Violations of the cone of silence set forth in section 2-166 of this division shall be punishable by a fine of $250.00 for each violation. 
(d)  Any person who knowingly makes or causes to be made a false statement or misrepresentation in maintaining a lobbyist registration shall be subject to a fine of $250.00 for each violation. 
(e)  Any person who violates the provisions of this division more than once during a twelve-month period shall be prohibited from lobbying as follows: A second violation shall resultin a prohibition of one year; a third violation shall result in a prohibition of 2 years. 
(f)  The penalties provided in this section shall be exclusive penalties imposed for any violation of the registration, contact log, and cone of silence requirements of this division. Willful violations of this division may be referred by the commission on ethics to the state attorney for prosecution. Failure or refusal of any lobbyist to comply with any order of the commission on ethics shall be punishable as provided by law, and shall otherwise be subject to such civil remedies as the city may pursue, including injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 4001, § 1, 9-7-11) 
Secs. 2-169-2-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment, qualifications, powers, duties, etc., of city manager, art. II, §§ 27-29. 
Cross reference- City personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7. 

Sec. 2-176. - Powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The city manager may head one or more departments and shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. The city manager shall have power and shall be required to do the following: 
(1)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or remove all officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided for by the Charter or laws and except as he or she may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in such department or office. 
(2)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the legislative body together with a message describing the important features and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the city council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(4)  Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as he or she may deem advisable. 
(5)  Recommend to the city council a standard schedule of pay for each appointive office and position in the city's service including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates. 
(6)  Recommend to the city council adoption of such measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services. 
(7)  Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his or her jurisdiction with the approval of the city council. 
(8)  Attend all meetings of the city council unless excused and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the city. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the city council. 
(9)  Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget and unless otherwise authorized by city council after the effective date of this section, the city manager's spending authority for contracts, agreements, or other types of expenditures, shall be the same as the amount authorized in the city's procurement code or procurement policies irrespective of whether the expenditure falls under the procurement code or procurement policies. The city manager may issue such rules governing purchasing procedures within the administrative organization as the city council shall approve. 
(10)  See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced. 
(11)  Investigate the affairs of the city or any department or division. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities of the city and see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. 
(12)  Devote his or her entire time to the discharge of his or her official duties. 
(13)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the city council not inconsistent with the Charter, laws or ordinances. 
(Code 1957, § 2-20; Ord. No. 4068, § 1, 9-3-15) 
Charter reference- Powers and duties of the city manager, art. II, § 29. 
Sec. 2-177. - Emergency powers. 
    In case of accident, disaster or other circumstances creating a public emergency, the city manager may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting the emergency in any amount not to exceed $7,500.00. He shall file promptly with the city council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(Code 1957, § 2-22) 
Sec. 2-178. - Bond. 
    The city manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the city council. Such bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2-23) 
Sec. 2-179. - Compensation. 
    The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall fix by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1957, § 2-24) 
Secs. 2-180-2-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- City personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7. 

Sec. 2-196. - Petitions, claims, communications, receipt, issuance of. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to receive all petitions, claims or other communications directed to the city or to the city council and to bring them before the city council at its next regular meeting. The city clerk shall issue and send out all communications ordered by the city council unless otherwise expressly ordered. 
(Code 1957, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-197. - Custodian of records, books, papers. 
    The city clerk shall be the custodian of all records, books and papers of the city except as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1957, § 2-29) 
Sec. 2-198. - Duties of city clerk. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk to collect all assessments due the city of every kind and nature. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to perform all the duties required by law or by ordinance in the collection of special assessments and liens due the city and file such liens in the office of the clerk of the circuit court. 
(b)  The city clerk shall supervise the clerical staff assigned to his office in maintaining official municipal records. His duties shall include the receipt of funds of the general fund and the receipt thereof. He shall attend every meeting of the city council, keep the minutes and records of all proceedings and be responsible for the accuracy and completeness of such official city records. Such records shall be preserved in bound volumes together with all books, papers and records committed to his care during his tenure of office and be charged with the responsibility in the orderly transfer of such books and records to his successor. The city clerk shall be the keeper of the corporate seal of the city and be responsible for the efficient operation and keeping of the minutes of all city boards and supervise the efficient operation of the microfilm records. His duties shall also require him to be available to the public during city hours. At city council meetings he shall record all motions, votes and direct actions of the city council. He shall review completed minutes of each meeting for errors and confirmation of city council actions prior to submission for approval by the city council. He shall supervise the recording of all ordinances, resolutions, administer oaths, take affidavits, issue subpoenas, maintain municipal deeds, leases, agreements and other records as required and advertise and post public notices as required by law or the city council. He shall supervise all municipal elections and coordinate the official results of such elections. 
(c)  The city clerk shall maintain records and the collection of all special assessments of various improvement phases within the city; and provide for the recording of unpaid assessments at the county courthouse. The city clerk shall issue satisfactions of liens and shall be knowledgeable of city codes and inform and instruct the public of city services upon request. 
(Code 1957, § 2-32.1) 
Secs. 2-199-2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference- Department of finance, art. II, § 30. 
Cross reference- City personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7; taxation, ch. 18. 

Sec. 2-211. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The director of finance shall be responsible for administrative work in the supervision and maintenance of the accounting system for all funds of the city. The director of finance shall: 
(1)  Supervise collection of all revenues. 
(2)  Issue and cosign all checks and drafts of the city with the mayor as the other cosigner. Facsimile signatures shall be valid for all purposes as if a manual signature. 
(3)  Pre-audit all claims against the city. 
(4)  Make periodic reports of all his activities to the city council. 
(5)  Direct and coordinate the financial activities of the city. 
(6)  Be responsible for directing and coordinating activities carried on in the areas of accounting, budgeting, debt administration and purchasing. 
(b)  His duties shall include the design, installation and supervision of financial and accounting procedures for all municipal departments. 
(c)  His office shall have a high degree of independence pertaining to fiscal matters of the city to policy directives and other general policies and rules of the city manager. 
(Code 1957, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-212. - Semiannual financial report. 
    It shall be the duty of the director of finance as treasurer at the first meeting of the city council in November and May each year to report to the city council the amount of funds collected by the city during the preceding six months, the source from which collected, the total disbursements of the city during the period and the general objects or purposes for which they were made. 
(Code 1957, § 2-34.1) 
Sec. 2-213. - Collection, expenditures, deposit of funds; monthly reports; financial records to be kept. 
    It shall be the duty of the director of finance as treasurer to receive all moneys of the city from the city clerk or any person owing the city to make monthly reports of all disbursements showing the items in detail. It shall be the duty of the city council to require absolute settlement with the monthly reports. All disbursements of the city shall be authorized by the city council and shall be made by check, signed by the director of finance or city treasurer and mayor. In the absence of the mayor, the chairman of the city council shall sign such checks. It shall be the duty of the director of finance to deposit all funds belonging to the city in the bank or trust company designated by the city council, and to require security for such deposits as required by law. It shall be the duty of the director of finance as city treasurer to keep such records, books, and accounts as may be necessary or proper to show the amount received and expended by the city and all funds, securities, real estate and other property belonging to the city and all indebtedness of the city and all evidence of the city's indebtedness outstanding. The director of finance as city treasurer shall require and keep on file receipts or vouchers for all disbursements. 
(Code 1957, § 2-34.2) 
Sec. 2-214. - Duties as city treasurer. 
(a)  The director of finance is hereby invested with the duties of city treasurer. 
(b)  The powers and duties of the director of finance as city treasurer shall be to: 
(1)  Deposit all monies received by the city in the account of the city in such depositories as are qualified by the state for the deposit of public funds and it shall be his responsibility to secure from such depository security for all funds on deposit. 
(2)  Sign all checks along with the mayor in payment of the debts of the city as are approved by the city council. 
(3)  Be responsible for the arranging of both short-term and long-term financing as approved by the city council and city manager. 
(4)  At all times keep unused funds of the city invested in interest-bearing accounts in such securities as are authorized by the state. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as are assigned by the city council or city manager. 
(6)  Give bond, the premium on which shall be paid by the city in such an amount as required by the city council and with a surety doing business in the state and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of office indemnifying the city for any loss due to any neglect of duty or wrongful act on his part. 
(Code 1957, § 2-34.4) 
Secs. 2-215-2-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4036, § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 2013, repealed former Art. V, §§ 2-231-2-240, in its entirety which pertained to per diem travel and expenses and derived from the Code of 1957, §§ 2-124-2-130, 2-132; Ord. No. 2604, §§ 1-10, 11-17-93; Ord. No. 2843, § 1, 12-15-99. 

Secs. 2-231-2-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE ENFORCEMENT[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 4; health and sanitation, ch. 8; litter, § 8-16 et seq.; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; nuisances, ch. 11; solid waste management, ch. 17.5; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; flood prevention and protection, ch. 25; planning, ch. 27; signs, ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; subdivisions, ch. 30; zoning, ch. 31. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-311. - Code enforcement officer; definition; authority. 
(a)  As used hereunder, "code enforcement officer" means any designated city employee or agent whose duty is to enforce codes and ordinances enacted by the city. Employees or agents who may be designated as code enforcement officers may include, but are not limited to, code inspectors, law enforcement officers, animal control officers or fire safety inspectors, which includes the fire marshal. With the exception of the law enforcement officers, the code enforcement officer shall not have the power to arrest or be subject to the provisions of F.S. §§ 943.085-943.255. 
(b)  A code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation to any person who, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted code or ordinance. 
(c)  Prior to issuing a citation, a code enforcement officer shall provide notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of a code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than 30 days. If, upon personal investigation, a code enforcement officer finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the specified time period, a citation may be issued to the person who has committed the violation. However, a reasonable time period to correct a violation prior to issuing a citation is not required if the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(Code 1957, § 2-35) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-161 et seq. 
Sec. 2-312. - Citations. 
    Pursuant to F.S. § 162.21(c), a citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall contain: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
(4)  The facts constituting reasonable cause. 
(5)  The number or section of the code or ordinance violated. 
(6)  The name and authority of the code enforcement officer. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(Code 1957, § 2-35.1) 
Sec. 2-313. - Violations. 
(a)  The violation of a code or an ordinance is a civil infraction with a maximum civil penalty not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  A civil penalty of less than the maximum civil penalty may be assessed if the person who has committed the civil infraction does not contest the citation. 
(c)  The citation shall be contested in county court. 
(d)  Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the enforcement pursuant to F.S. §§ 553.79 and 553.80 and building codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73 as they apply to construction, provided that a building permit is either not required or has been issued by the city. For the purposes of this subsection, "building codes" means only those codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73. 
(f)  The provisions of this section are an additional and supplemental means of enforcing the city's Code of Ordinances and may be used for the enforcement of any code or ordinance, or for the enforcement of all codes and ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other means. 
(Code 1957, § 2-36) 
Secs. 2-314-2-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD AND SPECIAL MASTER[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-41 et seq.; pretaking hearing before code enforcement board prior to disposition of abandoned property, § 11-98. 

Sec. 2-331. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attorney means the city attorney for the city or the city attorney's designee. The attorney shall be the legal counsel for the code enforcement board. 
    City prosecutor means the prosecuting attorney before the board or special master. 
    Code enforcement board means the board organized in accordance with F.S. ch. 162. 
    Code enforcement officer means an employee of the city whose duty it is to assure code compliance. 
    Special master means the person appointed by the city council pursuant to F.S. § 162.03(2). 
(Code 1957, § 2-36.1; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 3-1-00) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-332. - Creation; applicability; jurisdiction. 
    Pursuant to F.S. § 162.03, the city council hereby creates the code enforcement board and designates a special master for the city. The board or the special master shall have authority to hold hearings and assess fines against violators of the city's Code of Ordinances in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth herein and under F.S. ch. 162. The jurisdiction of the code enforcement board or the special master shall not be exclusive. Any alleged violation of this Code may be pursued by appropriate remedy in court at the option of the city manager. 
(Code 1957, § 2-36.2; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 3-1-00) 
Sec. 2-333. - Organization; qualifications of members; terms of office; officers. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint a seven-member code enforcement board and two alternate members to serve on the board in the absence of board members. The members shall have the following qualifications and terms of office: 
(1)  Members of the enforcement board shall be residents of the city. Appointments shall be made in accordance with applicable law and ordinances on the basis of experience and interest in the subject matter jurisdiction of the code enforcement board. 
(2)  The membership of the board shall, whenever possible, consist of: 
a.  An architect. 
b.  A businessman. 
c.  An engineer. 
d.  A general contractor. 
e.  A subcontractor. 
f.  A realtor or broker. 
(3)  No member of the enforcement board may be an employee of the city. 
(b)  In order that terms of office of all members will not expire at the same time, the initial appointments to the enforcement board shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two members shall be appointed for terms of one year. 
(2)  Three members shall be appointed for terms of two years. 
(3)  Two members shall be appointed for terms of three years. 
Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for terms of three years. Any member may be reappointed from term to term upon the approval of the city council. 
(c)  Appointments to fill any vacancy on the enforcement board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. Any member who fails to attend two out of three successive meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chairperson or the acting chairperson shall automatically forfeit his appointment and the city council shall promptly fill such vacancy. 
(d)  Each member of the board shall vote on every motion; however, in the event of a conflict of interest as defined in F.S. § 112-311 et seq., Code of Ethics for Public Officers and Employees, such member shall not vote or participate in the discussion of such matter and thereafter, within 15 days after the vote occurs, shall file a disclosure of voting conflict, form 4 with the city clerk, and such disclosure is to be incorporated into the minutes of that meeting. 
(e)  The members of the enforcement board shall elect a chairperson. The presence of four or more members shall constitute a quorum of the enforcement board. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for such travel expenses, mileage expenses, and per diem expenses as may be authorized by the city council. 
(f)  The members shall serve in accordance with the Code of Ordinances and may be removed or suspended for cause as provided in such ordinance for the removal of members of the board. 
(Code 1957, § 2-36.3) 
Sec. 2-333.1. - Special master; appointment; term; qualifications. 
(a)  There is hereby established a special master who shall be designated by the City Council of the City of Riviera Beach. 
(b)  The special master may be appointed for a term not to exceed two years. 
(c)  The special master shall be an attorney and a member of the Florida Bar. 
(d)  The special master may be removed from office by the city council with 30 days written notice. 
(e)  The special master shall preside over code enforcement matters once a month, or more often if necessary. 
(f)  Minutes shall be maintained at all hearings presided over by the special master; all hearings shall be open to the public. The city shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be required by the special master for the proper performance of the special master's duties. 
(g)  The city prosecutor shall represent the city by presenting cases before the special master. 
(Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 3-1-00) 
Sec. 2-334. - Powers. 
    The enforcement board and the special master shall jointly have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings. 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may be served by the city's police department or by code enforcement. 
(3)  Subpoena evidence. 
(4)  Take testimony under oath. 
(5)  Admit material into evidence. 
(6)  Issue orders having the force of law commanding whatever steps are necessary to bring violation into compliance. 
(Code 1957, § 2-36.4; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 3-1-00) 
Sec. 2-334.1. - Assignment of cases. 
    Cases shall be assigned to the code enforcement board or to the special master by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 3-1-00) 
Sec. 2-335. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to initiate enforcement procedures of the various codes; however, no member of the board nor the special master shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) and (d) of this section, if a violation of the codes is found, the code enforcement officer shall notify the violator and give such violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction in the notice of violation, the code enforcement officer shall notify the enforcement board or special master and request a hearing. Written notice of hearing before the board or special master shall be hand delivered or mailed to such violator as provided herein. 
(c)  If the code enforcement officer has reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code enforcement officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator, and may immediately notify the enforcement board or special master and request a hearing. 
(d)  If a repeat violation is found, the code enforcement officer shall notify the violator, but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. The code enforcement officer, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, shall notify the enforcement board or special master and request a hearing. The code enforcement board or special master, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing and shall provide notice of such hearing as provided herein. The case may be presented to the enforcement board or special master even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and the notice shall so state. A repeat violation is defined as a violation of the provisions of the Code of Ordinances by a person who has been previously found to have violated the same provision within five years prior to this violation. 
(e)  If the owner of property which is subject to an enforcement proceeding before the enforcement board, special master, or court transfers ownership of such property between the time the initial pleading or notice of violation was served and the time of the hearing, such owner shall: 
(1)  Disclose, in writing, the existence and the nature of the proceeding to the prospective transferee. 
(2)  Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the pleadings, notices, and other materials relating to the code enforcement proceeding received by the transferor. 
(3)  Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee that the new owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and with orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding. 
(4)  File a notice with the court or with code enforcement of the transfer of the property, with the identity and address of the new owner and copies of the disclosures made to the new owner, within five days after the date of the transfer. 
(Code 1957, § 2-36.5; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 3-1-00) 
Sec. 2-336. - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)  The chairperson of the enforcement board may schedule hearings of the enforcement board, and hearings may also be scheduled by written notice signed by at least three members of the enforcement board. The special master, through clerical staff, shall schedule hearings as provided herein. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings, and all hearings shall be open to the public. 
(b)  The city manager shall designate a department to provide such clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by the enforcement board or special master for the proper performance of their duties, to keep all records of the board or special master, and to collect fines when assessed. 
(c)  Each case before the enforcement board or special master shall be presented by the city prosecutor or by a member of the administrative staff of the city. 
(d)  The enforcement board or special master shall proceed to hear the cases on the agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The enforcement board or special master shall take testimony from the code enforcement officer, the alleged violator and all other material witnesses. Physical evidence may be admitted into evidence by the board or special master. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply; however, fundamental due process shall be observed and govern such proceedings. Enforcement board members or the special master may ask questions of any witness testifying at the hearing or call any witness deemed necessary to provide a full and fair hearing of the case. 
At the hearing the burden of proof shall be upon the city to show by competent, substantial evidence that a violation did occur, or does exist, or has been repeated. If proper notice of hearing has been given to the violator, either as actual notice or as provided herein, a hearing may proceed in the absence of the violator. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearings, the enforcement board or special master shall issue findings of fact based on evidence of record and conclusions of law, and shall issue a written order affording the relief consistent with powers granted herein. In the case of the enforcement board, the findings and conclusions shall be by motion approved by a majority of those present and voting, except that at least four members of the enforcement board must vote for the action to be official. The order issued by the enforcement board or by the special master shall be stated orally at the hearing, and shall be reduced to writing and sent by certified mail to the violator within ten working days after the hearing. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed if the order is not complied with by such date. 
(f)  A certified copy of such order may be recorded in the public records of the county and shall constitute notice to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest or assigns if the violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding upon the violator and, if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent purchaser, successor in interest or assigns. If an order is recorded in the public records pursuant to this subsection and the order is complied with by the date specified in the order, the enforcement board or special master shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required to issue an order acknowledging compliance. 
(Code 1957, § 2-36.6; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 3-1-00) 
Sec. 2-337. - Appeal. 
    An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a ruling or written order of the enforcement board or special master by certiorari to the circuit court of the 15th Judicial Circuit in and for the county. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the written order to be appealed. 
(Code 1957, § 2-36.7; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 3-1-00) 
Sec. 2-338. - Administrative fines; liens. 
(a)  The code enforcement board or special master, upon notification by the code enforcement officer that an order of the enforcement board or special master has not been complied with by the set time or, upon finding that a repeat violation has been committed, may order the violator to pay a fine in an amount specified in this section for each day the violation continues past the date set by the enforcement board or special master for compliance or, in the case of a repeat violation, for each day the repeat violation continues past the date of notice of the violator of the repeat violation. If a finding of a violation or a repeat violation has been made as provided herein, a hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order imposing the fine. 
(b)  A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $250.00 per day for a first violation and shall not exceed $500.00 per day for a repeat violation. In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the enforcement board or special master shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation; 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
(3)  Any previous violation committed by the violator. 
(c)  The enforcement board or special master may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this section. 
(d)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order shall be enforceable in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including execution and levy against the personal property of the violator, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant to this part shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. A lien arising from a fine pursuant to this section runs in favor of the city and the city may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this section. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the enforcement board or special master may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this part may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under section 4, article X of the state constitution. 
(e)  No lien provided under the Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act shall continue for a period longer than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorneys' fee, that incurs in the foreclosure. The continuation of the lien affected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(Code 1957, § 2-36.8; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 3-1-00) 
Sec. 2-339. - Notices. 
(a)  All notices shall be provided to the alleged violator by: 
(1)  Certified mail, return receipt requested, provided if such notice is sent under this paragraph to the owner of the property in question at the address listed in the tax collector's office for tax notices, and at any other address provided to the city by such owner and is returned as unclaimed or refused, notice may be provided by posting as described below, and by first class mail directed to the addresses furnished to the city with a properly executed proof of mailing or affidavit confirming the first class mailing; 
(2)  Hand delivery by the code enforcement officer or police officer; 
(3)  Leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is over the age of 15 and informing such person of the contents of the notice; or 
(4)  In the case of commercial premises, leaving the notice with the manager or other person in charge. 
(b)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (a), at the option of code enforcement board or the special master, notice may also be served by posting as follows: 
(1)  Notice may be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing, or prior to the expiration of any deadline contained in the notice, in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other shall be at city hall. 
(2)  Notice by posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (a). 
(3)  Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail as provided in subsection (a), together with proof of posting as provided in this section, shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this part have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 3-1-00) 
Chapter 2.5 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2648, § 1, adopted December 21, 1994, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as ch. 2.5, §§ 2.5-1-2.5-13, 2.5-20-2.5-32, 2.5-40-2.5-44, and 2.5-50-2.5-63. 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 31. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2.5-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "adult entertainment code." 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-2. - Authority. 
    This chapter is enacted under the home rule power of the City of Riviera Beach, in the interest of the health, peace, safety, and general welfare of the people of the City of Riviera Beach and under the authority of City of Riviera Beach, hereafter, the "City," to regulate the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages under the Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-3. - Scope. 
    This adult entertainment code shall be effective throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-4. - Purpose. 
    The intent of the Riviera Beach City Council in adopting this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations for the adult entertainment industry that will protect the health, safety, property values, and general welfare of the people, businesses, and industries of the city. It is not the intent of the Riviera Beach City Council to legislate with respect to matters of obscenity. These matters are regulated by federal and state law, including F.S. ch. 847. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-5. - Findings of facts. 
    Based on evidence and testimony presented at one or more public hearings before the city council and on the findings incorporated in the United States Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986), Jacksonville Ordinance Code, Chapter 410, Ordinance 77-257-256, Section 1, the Los Angeles Municipal Code, Section 12.70, Ordinance 156509 (1982), the Detroit Zoning Ordinance, 66,0000, Ordinance 742-G, Section 1, 10-24-72, and "A Summary of a National Survey of Real Estate Appraisers Regarding the Effect of Adult Bookstores on Property Values," conducted by the Division of Planning, Department of Metropolitan Development, Indianapolis, January 1984, the city council hereby finds: 
(1)  Adult entertainment establishments exist or may exist within the city and other nearby cities or counties where books, magazines, periodicals or other printed material, or photographs, films, motion pictures, prints, videotapes, slides, or other visual representations or recordings, or recordings or other audio matter, or instruments, novelties devices, or paraphernalia which depict, illustrate, describe or relate to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are possessed, displayed, exhibited, distributed or sold. 
(2)  Adult entertainment establishments exist or may exist within the city and other nearby cities or counties where dancers, entertainers, performers, or other individuals, who, for commercial gain, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing specified anatomical area; or engage in straddle dancing or touching with customers. 
(3)  The activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur at adult entertainment establishments which operate for the purpose of making a profit and, as such, are subject to regulation by the city in the interest of the health, safety, economy, property values, and general welfare of the people, businesses, and industries of the city. A major industry which is important to the community's economic welfare is tourism by persons seeking to bring children to visit attractions who wish to stay in a community with a family atmosphere. 
(4)  When the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) are present in adult entertainment establishments, other activities which are illegal, unsafe, or unhealthful tend to accompany them, concentrate around them, and be aggravated by them. Such other activities include, but are not limited to, prostitution, pandering, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, exposing minors to harmful materials, possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and property. 
(5)  When the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) are competitively exploited in adult entertainment establishments, they tend to attract an undesirable number of transients, blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring businesses, lower real property values, promote the particular crimes described in subsection (4), and ultimately lead residents and businesses to move to other locations. 
(6)  The adult entertainment establishments in which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur often are constructed, in part or in whole of substandard materials, maintained in a manner reflecting disregard for the health and safety of the occupants, and have exterior signs or appearance that lower the surrounding property values and contribute to urban decline. 
(7)  The activities described in subsections (1) and (2) often occur in adult entertainment establishments concurrent with the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  The concurrence of the sale and of alcoholic beverages with the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) leads to a further increase in criminal activity, unsafe activity, and disturbances of the peace and order of the surrounding community. 
(9)  The concurrence of the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages with the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) creates additional hazards to the health and safety of persons in attendance and further depreciate the value of adjoining real property harming the economic welfare of the surrounding community and adversely affecting the quality of life, tone of commerce, and community environment. 
(10)  In order to preserve and safeguard the health, safety, property values, and general welfare of the people, businesses, and industries of the city, it is necessary and advisable for the city to regulate the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages at adult entertainment establishments where the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur. 
(11)  Employees of adult entertainment establishments at which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur engage in a higher incidence of certain types of unhealthy or criminal behavior than employees of other adult entertainment establishments. 
(12)  Physical contact or touching within adult entertainment establishments at which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur between employees exhibiting specified anatomical areas and customers poses a threat to the health of both and promotes the spread of communicable and social disease. 
(13)  In order to preserve and safeguard the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city it is necessary and advisable for the city to regulate the conduct of owners, managers, operator, agents, employees, entertainers, performers, customers at adult entertainment establishments where the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur. 
(14)  The potential dangers to the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city posed by permitting an adult entertainment establishment at which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur to operate without first meeting the requirements for obtaining a license under this chapter are so great as to require the licensure of such adult entertainment establishments prior to their being permitted to operate. 
(15)  Requiring operators of adult entertainment establishments at which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur to keep a list of information concerning current employees and certain recent past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects, and by preventing minors from working in such adult entertainment establishments. 
(16)  Prohibiting adult entertainment establishments at which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur from operating within set distances of educational institutions, religious institutions, residences, areas zoned or designated far residential use, and parks, at which minors are customarily found, will serve to protect minors from the adverse affects of the activities that accompany such adult entertainment establishments. 
(17)  Straddle dancing, unregulated private performances, and enclosed adult booths in adult entertainment establishments at which the activities described in subsection (1) and (2) occur have resulted in indiscriminate commercial sex between strangers and poses a threat to the health of the participants and promotes the spread of communicable sexually transmitted diseases. Straddle dancing is primarily conduct rather than communication or expression. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-6. - Definitions. 
    The following word, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Adult bookstore shall mean: 
(1)  An adult entertainment establishment which advertises, sells or rents, or offers for sale or rent adult material. 
(2)  The provisions of subsection (1) are not intended to apply and it is an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this chapter regarding operating an adult bookstore without an adult entertainment license if the alleged violator shows that at the adult entertainment establishment: 
a.  Admission is not restricted to adults only, and 
b.  All adult material is accessible only by employees, and 
c.  The gross income from the sale or rental of adult material comprises less than ten percent of the gross income from the sale and rental of the goods or services at the adult entertainment establishment, and 
d.  The individual items of adult material offered for sale or rental comprise less than 25 percent of the total individual new items publicly displayed as stock in trade in any of the following categories: books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videotapes, slides, or other visual representations, or recordings, or other audio matter or less than 25 percent of the individual used items publicly displayed at the adult entertainment establishment as stock in trade in the same categories set out above. 
    Adult booth shall mean a small enclosure inside an adult entertainment establishment accessible to any person, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access. The term "adult booth"' includes, but is not limited to, a "peep show" booth, or other booth used to view "adult material" but does not include a restroom or a foyer through which the public enters or exits the adult entertainment establishment. 
    Adult entertainment establishment shall mean an adult theater, an adult bookstore, or an adult performance establishment operated for commercial or pecuniary gain, regardless of whether such adult entertainment establishment is licensed under this chapter. "Operated for commercial or pecuniary gain" shall not depend upon actual profit or loss. An adult entertainment establishment which has an occupational license shall be presumed to be "operated for commercial or pecuniary gain." An adult entertainment establishment with an adult entertainment license shall be presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. 
    Adult material shall mean any one or more of the following regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videotapes, slides, or other visual representations, or recordings, or other audio matter, which have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    Adult performance establishment shall mean: 
(1)  An adult entertainment establishment where any employee: 
a.  Displays or exposes any specified anatomical areas to a person other than another employee, regardless of whether the employee actually engages in dancing; 
b.  Wears any covering, tape, pastie, or other device which simulates or otherwise gives the appearance of the display or exposure of any specified anatomical areas, regardless of whether the employee actually engages in dancing; 
c.  Offers, solicits, or contracts to dance or perform with a person other than another employee in consideration for any tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that person; or 
d.  Dances or performs with or within three feet of a person other than another employee and accepts any consideration, tip, remuneration, or compensation from or on behalf of that person. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense that an adult entertainment establishment does not exist if the predominant business or attraction offered to customers is not a product, service, or entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and, the adult entertainment establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on or the advertising or promotion of materials relating to or employees depicting, describing, displaying, exposing, or simulating specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  An adult performance establishment shall not be deemed a place provided or set apart for the purpose of exposing or exhibiting a person's sexual organs in a manner contrary to the first sentence of F.S. § 800.03, the state's indecent exposure statute as set forth in the decision of the Supreme Court of Florida in the case of Hoffman v. Carson, 250 So.2d 891, 893 (Fla. 1971), appeal dismissed 404 U.S. 981 (1971). 
    Adult theater shall mean any adult entertainment establishment which has adult booths where adult material may be viewed or any adult entertainment establishment which has an auditorium, rooms, or an open air area where persons may view films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult booth or peep show arcades are considered to be adult theaters. 
    Alcoholic beverage shall mean a beverage containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight. It shall be prima facie evidence that a beverage is an alcoholic beverage if there is proof that the beverage in question was or is known as beer, wine, whiskey, moonshine whiskey, moonshine, shine, rum, gin, tequila, bourbon, vodka, scotch, scotch whiskey, brandy, malt liquor, or by any other similar name or names, or was contained in a bottle or can labeled as any of the above names, or a name similar thereto, and the bottle or can bears the manufacturers insignia, name, or trademark. Any person who, by experience in the handling of alcoholic beverages, or who by taste, smell, or drinking of such alcoholic beverages has knowledge of the alcoholic nature thereof, may testify as to his opinion about whether such beverage is an alcoholic beverage. 
    Conviction shall mean a determination of guilt resulting from a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether imposition of sentence was suspended. 
    Department shall mean the fire department, police department, planning and zoning division, or code enforcement and licensing division, including the respective director, employees, officers and agents thereof. 
    Educational institution shall mean a premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes or courses of study required for eligibility to certification by, accreditation to, or membership in the State Department of Education of Florida, Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. The term "educational institution" includes a premises or site upon which there is a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of learning. However, the term "educational institution" does not include a premises or site upon which there is a vocational institution, professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community college, junior college, four-year college or university. 
    Employee shall mean a person who works, performs, or provides services at an adult entertainment establishment, irrespective of whether said person is paid a salary or wage and shall include, but is not limited to, independent contractors, subcontractors, lessees, or sublessees who work or perform at an adult entertainment establishment. 
    Law enforcement officer shall mean an officer who is on official duty for a law enforcement agency. 
    Licensee shall mean any person whose application for an adult entertainment establishment has been granted and who owns, operates or controls the adult entertainment establishment. 
    Operator shall mean any person who engages in or performs any activity necessary to, or which facilitates, the operation of an adult entertainment establishment, including but not limited to, the licensee manager, owner, doorman, bouncer, bartender, disc jockey, sales clerk, ticket taker, or movie projectionist. 
    Park shall mean a tract of land within a city or unincorporated area of a county which is kept for ornament or recreation and which is maintained as public property. 
    Preexisting shall mean as follows: 
(1)  When used together with the term "adult entertainment establishment," "religious institution," "educational institution," "commercial adult entertainment establishment that in any manner sells or dispenses alcohol for on-premises consumption," or "residence" the word "preexisting" shall mean: 
a.  The adult entertainment establishment, institution, or residence is already being lawfully used or lawfully occupied; or 
b.  A building permit for the adult entertainment establishment, institution, or residence has been lawfully issued, all fees associated with the permit have been paid, and the permit has not expired; or 
c.  An application or plan to allow the adult entertainment establishment, institution, or residence to be constructed, used, or occupied has been filed and is undergoing review or is approved, with or without conditions. 
(2)  When used together with the term "park," the word "preexisting" shall mean: 
a.  The park is already being used; or 
b.  The park site has been approved or otherwise designated by the appropriate governing body. 
    Private performance shall mean modeling, posing, or the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by an employee of an adult entertainment establishment to a person, other than another employee, while the person is in an area not accessible during such display to all other persons in the adult entertainment establishment or, while the person is in an area in which the person is totally or partially screened or partitioned during such display from the view of all persons outside the area. 
    Public nudity shall mean to display or expose at an adult entertainment establishment less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(1)  Human genitals or pubic region; 
(2)  The cleavage of the human buttocks; 
(3)  The areola or nipple of the human female breast. 
    Religious institution shall mean a premises or site which is used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious activities. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals or pubic region; or 
b.  Any part of the human buttocks; or 
c.  That portion of the human female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of the areola (the colored ring around the nipple). This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect or turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified criminal act shall mean: 
(1)  A violation of article V of this adult entertainment code; or 
(2)  Any offense under the following: 
a.  F.S. ch. 794 regarding sexual battery; 
b.  F.S. ch. 796 regarding prostitution; 
c.  F.S. ch. 800 regarding lewdness and indecent exposure; and 
d.  F.S. ch. 847 regarding obscene literature; or 
(3)  An offense under an analogous statute of a state other than Florida, or an analogous ordinance of another city or county. 
    Specified sexual activity shall mean: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, erection or tumescence; or 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast; or 
(3)  Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sapphism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or urolagnia; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1), (2), or (3). 
    Straddle dance, also known as a lap dance or face dance, shall mean either of the following acts: 
(1)  The use by an employee of any part of his or her body to touch the genital or pubic area of a person while at the adult entertainment establishment, or the touching of the genital or pubic area of any employee with a person while at the adult entertainment establishment. It shall be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" occurs while the employee is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area. It shall also be a straddle dance regardless of whether the touch or touching is direct or through a medium. 
(2)  The straddling of the legs of an employee over any part of the body of a person other than another employee at the adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether there is a touch or touching. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-7. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by: 
(1)  A suit brought by the city in the circuit court to restrain, enjoin, or prevent a violation of this chapter; or 
(2)  Enforcement proceedings by the city code enforcement board; or 
(3)  Criminal prosecution as provided in section 2.5-50. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-8. - Responsibilities of departments. 
    Ultimate responsibility for the administration of this chapter is vested in the Riviera Beach City Council. The other departments are responsible for the following: 
(1)  The code enforcement and licensing division is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling adult entertainment licenses for proposed and existing adult entertainment establishments as set out in article II. 
(2)  The code enforcement and licensing division is responsible for inspecting any proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment in order to ascertain compliance with article IV of this chapter and all applicable statutes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(3)  The police department is responsible for verifying information contained on an application made pursuant to section 2.5-21, for inspecting proposed, or existing adult entertainment establishments in order to ascertain compliance with applicable criminal statutes and ordinances, including those set forth in article V, for determining whether adult entertainment license applicants have been convicted of a felony or a specified criminal act within the previous five years, and for enforcing applicable criminal statutes and ordinances, including those set forth in article V. 
(4)  The fire department is responsible for inspecting any proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment in order to ascertain compliance with article IV of this chapter and all applicable fire codes, statutes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(5)  The planning and zoning division is responsible for ascertaining whether the location of proposed adult entertainment establishments complies with all distance, zoning, and location requirements of article III, applicable portions of article IV, and all applicable zoning regulations in the city and whether existing adult entertainment establishments are in compliance with article III and article IV and all applicable zoning regulations and land use laws. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-9. - Appeals. 
    Any decision of the code enforcement and licensing division made pursuant to article II ("Licensing") may be appealed to the code enforcement board. An appeal must be submitted in writing to the code enforcement and licensing division within ten days of the administrative decision being appealed. Such appeal shall be scheduled for the next regular meeting of the code enforcement board. Any determination of the code enforcement board may be appealed to circuit court, upon the filing of an appropriate pleading by an aggrieved party. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-10. - Notice. 
    Any notice required under this chapter shall be accomplished by sending a written notification by certified mail to the mailing address set forth on the application for the license. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-11. - Immunity from prosecution. 
    The city or any of its departments or agents or any law enforcement officer shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon an adult entertainment establishment while acting within the scope of the authority under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-12. - Construction. 
    This chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of licensing, regulating and dispersing adult entertainment and related activities. Unless otherwise indicated, all provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to all persons, regardless of sex. Masculine pronouns, such as "he," "his," and "him," as employed in this chapter, shall also be construed to apply to feminine pronouns and neutral pronouns, unless the context suggests otherwise. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, unless the context suggests otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-13. - Severability. 
    If any portion of this chapter, or any application thereof is declared to be void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such portion or provision, or the application thereof, shall be severable from this chapter. The remaining portions and provisions of this chapter, and all applications thereof shall remain in full force and effect. No void, unconstitutional or invalid portion or proscribed provision, or application thereof, was an inducement to the enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Secs. 2.5-14-2.5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 2.5-20. - License required; classifications. 
(a)  Requirement. No adult entertainment establishment shall be permitted to operate without having been first granted an adult entertainment license by the code enforcement and licensing division under this chapter. 
(b)  Classifications. Adult entertainment establishment licenses referred to in this chapter shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore; 
(2)  Adult theater; or 
(3)  Adult performance establishment. 
(c)  Single classification of license. An adult entertainment license for a particular adult entertainment establishment shall be limited to one classification of license. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-21. - Application for license; application fee; consent by applicant. 
(a)  Required. Any person desiring to operate an adult entertainment establishment shall file with the code enforcement and licensing division a sworn license application on standard application forms supplied by the code enforcement and licensing division. 
(b)  Contents of application. The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he is 18 years of age or older; or 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, the names and mailing addresses of all partners whether general or limited, the residence address of at least one person authorized to accept service of process, and provide a copy of any existing partnership agreement; or 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, the name and address of the registered corporate agent for service of process, and provide a copy of its articles of incorporation and charter; 
(2)  If the applicant intends to conduct the adult entertainment establishment under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall provide evidence of the adult entertainment establishment's fictitious name registration under F.S. § 865.09; 
(3)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) has, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a felony of any state or of the United States or any specified criminal act and, if so, the specific crime involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction; 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) has had a previous license under this chapter suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult entertainment establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose license under this chapter has previously been suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult entertainment establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation; 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) holds any other licenses under this chapter and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed adult entertainment establishments; 
(6)  The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing; 
(7)  The location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment, including a legal description of the property site, and a legal street address; 
(8)  The applicant's mailing address, business addresses, residential address, and business and residential telephone numbers; and 
(9)  A site plan drawn to appropriate scale of the proposed adult entertainment establishment, including, but not limited to: 
a.  All property lines, rights-of-way, and the location of buildings, parking areas and spaces, curb cuts, and driveways; 
b.  All windows, doors, entrances and exits, fixed structural features, walls, stages, partitions, projection booths, admission booths, adult booths, concession booths, stands, counters and similar structures; 
c.  All proposed improvements or enlargements to be made, which shall be indicated and calculated in terms of percentage of increase in floor size; 
(10)  A recent photograph of the applicant; 
(11)  Fingerprints of the applicant; and 
(12)  The applicant's social security number or employer's tax identification number and either the applicant's driver's license number or the number of a state or federally issued identification card. 
(c)  Application fee. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable, administrative processing fee of $200.00. 
(d)  Incomplete application. In the event the code enforcement and licensing division determines or learns at any time that the applicant has not properly completed the application for a proposed adult entertainment establishment, that division shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and shall allow the applicant ten days to properly complete the application. (The time period for granting or denying a license under section 2.5-23 shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.) 
(e)  Consent. By applying for a license under this chapter, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise of their responsibilities under this chapter by the agents or departments of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-22. - Processing of application; investigation; findings. 
(a)  Processing. Upon receipt of a complete application properly filed with the code enforcement and licensing division and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the code enforcement and licensing division shall immediately stamp the application with the date it was received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application and all attachments to the police department, the building division, the fire department, and the planning and zoning division. 
(b)  Investigation. Each department shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application, and the proposed adult entertainment establishment in accordance with its responsibilities summarized in section 2.5-8 to determine whether false, incomplete, or incorrect information was given on the application or whether the proposed adult entertainment establishment will be in violation of any provision of article III or article IV of this chapter or of any building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance, regulation, lease, deed restriction, or court order. 
(c)  Findings. After investigation, each department report its findings in writing and shall forward its findings to the code enforcement and licensing division within 14 days and shall state whether the department finds that false, incomplete, or incorrect information was give on the application or whether the proposed adult entertainment establishment will be in violation of any provision of article III or article IV of this chapter or of any building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance, regulation, lease, deed restriction, or court order. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-23. - Grant; denial; rejection. 
(a)  Time period for granting or denying license. The code enforcement and licensing division shall grant or deny an application for a license under this article II within 30 days from the date of its proper filing. 
(b)  Granting of application for license. Upon the applicant meeting the requirements of this chapter, the code enforcement and licensing division shall grant the application, notify the applicant and issue the license to the applicant upon payment of the appropriate annual license fee required in section 2.5-24 and section 2.5-25. 
(c)  Denying of application for license. 
(1)  The code enforcement and licensing division shall review the findings reported by the departments or divisions, and shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
a.  The application contains material false information or is incomplete; 
b.  The granting of the application would violate a statute or ordinance, deed restriction, lease, or an order from a court of law which prohibits the applicant from obtaining an adult entertainment establishment license; 
c.  The applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to section 2.5-21(b)(1) has had a license under this chapter suspended or revoked by the code enforcement and licensing division or the State of Florida, or upon investigation has had an adult entertainment license revoked by any government subdivision of any city, county, state or federal government. 
d.  An adult entertainment license has not been obtained from Palm Beach County, or a copy of that license has not been provided with the application to the city. 
(2)  If the code enforcement and licensing division denies the application, that division shall notify the applicant of the denial, and state the reason(s) for the denial. 
(d)  Rejection of application. If a person applies for a license at a particular location within a period of nine months from the date of denial of a previous application for a license at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which would lead to a different decision regarding the former reason(s) for denial, the application shall be rejected. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-24. - Licenses; term; renewal; expiration; cancellation; reports; consent. 
(a)  Contents. An adult entertainment license shall state the name of the licensee, the name of the adult entertainment establishment, the street address of the adult entertainment establishment, the classification of the license, the date of issuance, and the date of expiration. 
(b)  Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be annual licenses which shall commence on October 1, if the renewal fee has been paid, and shall expire on September 30 of the following year. The required fee for a license shall not be prorated and shall be paid in full at the time of issuance. 
(c)  Renewals. Licenses shall be renewed annually. Subject to other provisions of this chapter, a licensee under this chapter shall be entitled to a renewal of his annual license from year to year, as a matter of course, by October 1 by presenting the license for the previous year and by paying the appropriate license fee. The licensee is responsible for renewal each year whether notice is received by licensee or not. 
(d)  Expiration. A license that is not renewed under this chapter by October 1 of each year shall expire. An expired license may be renewed by November 30 of the same year upon payment of the appropriate license fee, and upon payment of a penalty of ten percent of the appropriate license fee for the month of October, or fraction thereof, and an additional penalty of five percent of the appropriate license fee for the month of November, or fraction thereof. After November 30, a license shall be void if the renewal fee has not been paid, and a new application must be submitted to receive a new license. 
(e)  Cancellation. All expired licenses not renewed by November 30 shall be canceled summarily by the code enforcement and licensing division. 
(f)  Reports and records. Each licensee shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the code enforcement and licensing division and the departments to implement this chapter and to carry out its purpose. Whenever the information required by or provided under section 2.5-21(b) has changed, the licensee shall report any changed information to the code enforcement and licensing division within ten days of the change. 
(g)  Consent. By holding a license under this chapter, the licensee shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise by the code enforcement and licensing division and the departments of their responsibilities under this chapter. The licensed adult entertainment establishment shall be the subject to inspection by city, county state and federal officials at all times during normal business hours. Such inspections may include all licenses, premises, employees and accounting records. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-25. - Annual license fee. 
(a)  Levy. There are hereby levied the following annual license fees under this chapter for an adult entertainment establishment: 
(1)  An adult bookstore-$1,200.00. 
(2)  An adult theater, as follows: 
a.  Having only adult booths-$50.00 for each booth; 
b.  Having only a hall or auditorium-$5.00 for each seat; or 
c.  Having a combination of a., b. or c.-The cumulative license fee applicable to each under such subsections. 
(3)  An adult performance establishment-$1,800.00. 
(b)  Fees regulatory. The annual license fees collected under this chapter are declared to be regulatory fees which are collected for the purpose of examination and inspection of adult entertainment establishments under this chapter and the administration thereof. These regulatory fees are in addition to and not in lieu of the occupational license taxes imposed by other ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-26. - Transfer. 
(a)  Requirements. An adult entertainment licensee is not transferable to a another person by surrendering possession, control, or operation of the licensed adult entertainment establishment. An adult entertainment license may be transferred to another person only upon satisfaction o the following requirements: 
(1)  A license transfer is applied for to the code enforcement and licensing division by filing an application setting forth the information called for under section 2.5-21, and the application has been granted by the code enforcement and licensing division after investigation by the police department; and 
(2)  A sales contract is provided that shows ownership of the adult entertainment establishment has been or will be transferred through a bona fide sale to a new owner; and 
(3)  A transfer fee of ten percent of the annual license fee is paid. 
(b)  Effect of suspension or revocation procedures. No license may be transferred pursuant to subsection (a) when the code enforcement and licensing division has notified the licensee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the licensee. 
(c)  Location of license nontransferable. A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another location. Each location shall require a new and separate application that is in compliance with all requirements and procedures in this chapter. 
(d)  Attempted improper transfer void. Any attempted transfer of a license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-27. - Changing the name of an adult entertainment establishment. 
    No licensee may change the name of an adult entertainment establishment unless and until he or she satisfies each of the following requirements: 
(1)  Gives the code enforcement and licensing division 30 days notice in writing of the proposed name change; 
(2)  Pays the code enforcement and licensing division a $25.00 change-of-name fee; and 
(3)  Complies with F.S. § 865.09. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-28. - Suspension. 
(a)  Violation of building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance, or regulation. In the event a department learns or finds upon sufficient cause that a licensed adult entertainment establishment is operating in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state, or local, contrary to the respective general requirements of section 2.5-40(1), (2), (3) or (4), the department shall promptly notify the licensee of the violation and shall allow the licensee a seven-day period in which to correct the violation. If the licensee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven-day period, the department shall notify the code enforcement and licensing division, who shall forthwith suspend the license, and shall notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the department which reported the violation notifies the code enforcement and licensing division in writing that the violation of the provision in question has been corrected. 
(b)  Illegal transfer. In the event the code enforcement and licensing division learns or finds upon sufficient cause that licensee engaged in a license transfer contrary to section 2.5-26, that division shall forthwith suspend the license, and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the code enforcement and licensing division is satisfied that the requirements of section 2.5-26(a) have been met. 
(c)  Convictions for violations of this chapter. 
(1)  In the event three or more violations of any specified criminal act occur at an adult entertainment establishment within a two-year period, and convictions result from at least three of the violations, the code enforcement and licensing division shall, upon receiving evidence of the third conviction, suspend the license, and notify the the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of 30 days. 
(2)  In the event one or more violations of any specified criminal act occur at the same adult entertainment establishment within a period of two years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 30 days under subsection (c)(1), but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 30 days, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations, the code enforcement and licensing division shall, upon receiving evidence of the first conviction, suspend the license again, and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of 90 days. 
(3)  In the event one or more violations of any specified criminal act occur at the same adult entertainment establishment within a period of two years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 90 days under subsection (c)(2), but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 90 days, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations, the code enforcement and licensing division shall, upon receiving evidence of the first conviction, suspend the license again, and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of 180 days. 
(4)  The transfer or renewal of a license pursuant to this chapter shall not defeat the terms of subsections (c)(1) through (3). 
(d)  Effective date of suspension. All periods of suspension shall begin ten days after the date the code enforcement and licensing division mails the notice of suspension to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-29. - Revocation. 
(a)  False information. In the event the code enforcement and licensing division receives evidence that a license was granted based upon false information, misrepresentation of fact, or mistake of fact, the code enforcement and licensing division shall forthwith revoke the license, and notify the licensee of the revocation. 
(b)  Repeat convictions. 
(1)  In the event one or more violations of any specified criminal act occur at an adult entertainment establishment which has had a license suspended for a period of 180 days pursuant to section 2.5-28(c)(3), and the violation occurs within a period of two years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 180 days, but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 180 days, the code enforcement and licensing division shall, upon receiving evidence of a conviction for the subsequent violation, forthwith revoke the license, and notify the licensee of the revocation. 
(2)  The transfer or renewal of a license pursuant to this chapter shall not defeat the terms of subsection (b)(1). 
(c)  Effect of revocation. If a license is revoked, the licensee shall not be allowed to obtain another adult entertainment license for a period of two years, and no license shall be issued again to any other person for the location upon which the adult entertainment establishment was situated. 
(d)  Effective date of revocation. The revocation shall take effect ten days after the date the code enforcement and licensing division mails the notice of revocation of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
ARTICLE III. - DISTANCE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 2.5-30. - Prohibited locations. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or any provision of the Land Development Code, no person shall propose, cause or permit the operation of, or enlargement of, an adult entertainment establishment which, while in operation or after enlargement, would or will be located within 1,000 feet of a preexisting adult entertainment establishment, within 1,000 feet of a preexisting commercial adult entertainment establishment that in any manner sells or dispenses alcohol for on-premises consumption, within 1,000 feet of a preexisting religious institution, within 1,000 feet of a preexisting educational institution, within 1,000 feet of an area zoned within the city or unincorporated Palm Beach County for residential use, within 1,000 feet of an area designated as residential on the city's future land use map, within 1,000 feet of the property line of a preexisting residence, or within 1,000 feet of a preexisting park. In this subsection the term "enlargement" includes, but is not limited to, increasing the floor size of the adult entertainment establishment by more than ten percent. 
(b)  In addition to the distance requirements set forth in subsection (a), an adult entertainment establishment shall only be allowed in areas designated industrial on the city's future land use map. 
(c)  The distance requirements of subsection (a) are independent of and do not supersede the distance requirements for alcoholic beverage adult entertainment establishments which may be contained in other laws, rules, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-31. - Measurement of distance. 
    The distance from a proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment to a preexisting adult entertainment establishment, a preexisting religious institution, a preexisting educational institution, an area zoned for residential use, an area designated on the future land use map of the comprehensive plan as residential, a preexisting residence, a preexisting park, or a preexisting commercial adult entertainment establishment that sells or dispenses alcohol for on-premises consumption shall be measured along the route of ordinary pedestrian travel from the main public entrance of the proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment to the preexisting adult entertainment establishment, preexisting religious institution, preexisting educational institution, area zoned for residential use, area designated on the future land use map of the comprehensive plan as residential, preexisting residence, preexisting park, or preexisting commercial adult entertainment establishment that sells or dispenses alcohol for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-32. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  An adult entertainment establishment which, on the date the ordinance from which this chapter derives was adopted (December 21, 1994), was legally located on a site which is prohibited by section 2.5-30 of this chapter, shall cease operations by October 1, 1996. 
(b)  When a nonconforming use of an adult entertainment establishment has been discontinued for 90 consecutive days or more, the nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned and the future use of the premises or site shall revert to only those uses permitted on the site on which the adult entertainment establishment is located. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Secs. 2.5-33-2.5-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL OPERATIONAL RULES 

Sec. 2.5-40. - General requirements. 
    Each adult entertainment establishment is subject to all of the following general requirements and shall: 
(1)  Conform to all applicable building, fire, heath, zoning, and land use statutes, codes, ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, state or local. 
(2)  On the first Monday of each month, provide the police department with a report of all persons who [are] employees or who were employees at the adult entertainment establishment during the previous month, which report shall contain the name, date of birth, residential address, social security number, position, and stage name, if any, of such persons. 
(3)  Keep the adult entertainment license posted in a conspicuous place at the adult entertainment establishment available for inspection by the public at all times. 
(4)  Cover opaquely each window or other opening through which a person outside the adult entertainment establishment may otherwise see inside the adult entertainment establishment. 
(5)  Maintain all exterior walls and surfaces of the adult entertainment establishment, excluding signs, a single achromatic or light pastel color, and shall maintain all awnings, canopies, window shutters, window treatment, or other trim the same color or a single different shade of the same achromatic or light pastel color. The trim color shall not exceed 20 percent of the entire exterior surface of the building. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of an adult entertainment establishment such as brick or stone. 
(6)  Install, construct, keep, maintain, or allow only those signs at the adult entertainment establishment which comply with the city sign regulations and the provisions of this subsection. 
a.  No sign shall contain any flashing lights, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner (except for the logo of the adult entertainment establishment, provided the logo shall not contain any specified anatomical areas, or any male or female forms at or below the clavicle); 
b.  No sign shall contain in the name or logo of the adult entertainment establishment, or otherwise, the words "nude," "nudity," "naked," "topless," "go-go," or "dancer," or other words or material depicting or describing, specified anatomical areas or sexual activities. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-41. - Adult theaters. 
    In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in section 2.5-40, an adult theater shall comply with the following special requirements: 
(1)  If an adult theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall have: 
a.  Individual separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, to accommodate the number of persons allowed to occupy the area; 
b.  A continuous main aisle alongside of the seating areas in order that each person seated in the areas shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and 
c.  A sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area. 
d.  Sufficient illumination so that persons in all areas of the auditorium can be seen. 
(2)  If an adult theater contains adult booths, each adult booth shall have: 
a.  A sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance which states the maximum number of persons allowed to occupy the booth, which number shall correlate with the number of seats in the booth; 
b.  A permanently open entrance not less than 32 inches wide and not less than six feet high, which entrance shall not have any curtain rods, hinges, rails, or the like which would allow the entrance to be closed or partially closed by any curtain, door, or other partition. 
c.  Individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, which correlate with the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth; 
d.  A well-illuminated continuous main aisle alongside the booth in order that each person situated in the booth shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and 
e.  Except for the entrance, walls or partitions of solid construction without any holes or openings in such walls or partitions. 
f.  Illumination by a light bulb of no less than 25 watts. 
(3)  If an adult theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by persons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the adult entertainment establishment so fenced, that the material to be seen by those persons may not be seen from any public right-of-way, property zoned for residential use, religious institution, educational institution, or park. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-42. - Adult performance establishments. 
    In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in section 2.5-40, an adult performance establishment shall: 
(1)  Have a stage provided for the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by an employee to a person other than another employee consisting of a permanent platform (or other similar permanent structure) raised a minimum of 36 inches above the surrounding floor and encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet; and 
(2)  Have no areas in which private performances may occur. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-43. - Adult bookstores. 
    In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in section 2.5-40, an adult bookstore shall not display merchandise or adult material in a manner that allows such merchandise or adult material to be visible from outside of the structures at the adult entertainment establishment. Persons under the age of 18 years of age are not permitted in an adult bookstore. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-44. - Employee records. 
(a)  An adult entertainment establishment shall maintain a record of all employees who are currently employed by the adult entertainment establishment, and of all former employees who were employed by the adult entertainment establishment during the preceding one-year period. The record shall contain the current or former employee's full legal name, including any aliases, date of birth, residential address, residential telephone number (if any), social security number, driver's license number or state or federally issued identification card number, and a recent photograph of the employee. 
(b)  The original records required by subsection (a), or true and exact photocopies thereof, shall be kept at the adult entertainment establishment at all times. 
(c)  All operators of the adult entertainment establishment shall be responsible for knowing the location of the original records, or the true and exact photocopies thereof. 
(d)  An operator of the adult entertainment establishment shall, upon request by a code enforcement inspector or a law enforcement officer when the adult entertainment establishment is open for business, immediately make available for inspection the original records, or the true and exact photocopies thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Secs. 2.5-45-2.5-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CRIMINAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2.5-50. - Penalty. 
    Whoever violates any section of this article V ("Criminal Provisions") may be punished as provided in F.S. § 125.69. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-51. - Operation without valid adult entertainment license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment when: 
(1)  The adult entertainment establishment does not have a valid adult entertainment license for each applicable classification; 
(2)  The license of the adult entertainment establishment is under suspension; 
(3)  The license of the adult entertainment establishment has been revoked or canceled; or 
(4)  The adult entertainment establishment has a license which has expired. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-52. - Working at an unlicensed adult entertainment establishment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an employee of an adult entertainment establishment that he or she knows or should know does not have a valid license under this chapter, or which has a license which is under suspension, has been revoked or canceled, or has expired, or which does not have each applicable adult entertainment license conspicuously displayed. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-53. - Operation contrary to certain provisions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment: 
(1)  Which does not satisfy all of the general requirements of section 2.5-40(3), (4), (5), or (6); 
(2)  Which is an adult theater and does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 2.5-41; 
(3)  Which is an adult performance establishment and does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 2.5-42; 
(4)  While the entrance or exit of the adult entertainment establishment is locked when a person other than an employee is inside the adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-54. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for an employee of an adult entertainment establishment to commit any of the following acts or for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment to knowingly or with reason to know, permit, suffer, or allow any employee to commit any of the following acts: 
(1)  Engage in a straddle dance with a person at the adult entertainment establishment; 
(2)  Offer, contract or otherwise agree to engage in a straddle dance with a person at the adult entertainment establishment; 
(3)  Engage in any specified sexual activity at the adult entertainment establishment; 
(4)  Engage in public nudity as defined in section 2.5-6 of this chapter; 
(5)  Display or expose at the adult entertainment establishment specified anatomical areas while such employee is not continuously positioned at least three feet away from all other persons or while such employee is not in an area as described in section 2.5-42(1); 
(6)  Display or expose specified anatomical areas at an adult entertainment establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold, offered for sale or consumed; 
(7)  Display or expose any specified anatomical area while simulating any specified sexual activity with any other person at the adult entertainment establishment; 
(8)  Engage in a private performance; 
(9)  Intentionally touch any person at the adult entertainment establishment, while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area; 
(10)  Intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed body of any person at the adult entertainment establishment, at any point below the waist and above the knee of the person, or to intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any female person; or 
[Notwithstanding any provision indicating the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any employee of an adult entertainment establishment to] expose any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom, or bona fide use of a dressing room which is used and occupied only by other employees of the same sex. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-55. - Touching employees prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in an adult entertainment establishment to intentionally touch an employee who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area at the adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in an adult entertainment establishment to intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any employee, or to touch the clothed body of any employee at any point below the waist and above the knee of the employee. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-56. - Advertising prohibited activity. 
    It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment to advertise, encourage or promote any activity prohibited by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-57. - Minors prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for an operator or employee of an adult entertainment establishment to knowingly, or with reason to know, permit, suffer, or allow a person under 18 years of age to: 
(1)  Enter or remain in the adult entertainment establishment; 
(2)  Purchase goods or services at the adult entertainment establishment; or 
(3)  Work at the adult entertainment establishment as an employee. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-58. - Failure to maintain employee records. 
    It shall be unlawful to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment at which all records for employees required by section 2.5-44 have not been compiled, are not maintained, or are not made available for inspection by a law enforcement officer upon request when the adult entertainment establishment is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-59. - Exceeding occupancy limit of adult booth. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy an adult booth in which booth there are more people than that specified on the posted sign required by section 2.5-41. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-60. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day for: 
(1)  An operator of an adult entertainment establishment to allow such adult entertainment establishment to remain open for business, or to allow, suffer or permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale provide a service, or solicit a service. 
(2)  An employee of an adult entertainment establishment to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-61. - Alteration of license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or otherwise change the contents or appearance of an adult entertainment license without the written permission of the code enforcement and licensing division. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-62. - False statement in application for license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person applying for an adult entertainment license pursuant to article II to make a false statement or provide false information which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license on the application required by section 2.5-21, to provide false information in the reports required by section 2.5-40, or to falsify the records required by section 2.5-44. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 2.5-63. - Solicitation or personal advertising. 
    It shall be unlawful for any employee of an adult entertainment establishment while situated outside any structure on the site of the adult entertainment establishment, or while the employee is situated at a place at the adult entertainment establishment where the employee is visible from any public right-of-way or sidewalk to display or expose specified anatomical areas or engage in personal advertising, pandering, or solicitation, whether passive or otherwise, on behalf of the employee, any other employee, or the adult entertainment establishment. Personal advertising includes, but is not limited to, sitting or standing outside any structure on the site of the adult entertainment establishment, gesturing, waving, repeatedly speaking in a raised tone of voice or otherwise encouraging or enticing potential customers beyond the adult entertainment establishment to enter the adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; health and sanitation, ch. 8; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; police, ch. 16; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 19; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; signs, ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; zoning, ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverage law, F.S. ch. 561 et seq.; liquors and beverages generally, F.S. § 561.01 et seq.; municipality prohibited from imposing license tax on alcoholic beverages by way of license or excise or otherwise, F.S. § 561.342(3); authority to regulate location of business, hours of sale and sanitary conditions for state beverage law licensees, F.S. § 562.45; further authority to regulate hours of sale, F.S. § 562.14. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume. 
    Intoxicating beverages or intoxicating liquors includes only those alcoholic beverages containing more than 4.007 percent of alcohol by volume. 
    Liquor shall be taken to include the words "distilled spirits" and shall extend to and include all spirituous beverages created by distillation and by mixture of distilled beverages by what is commonly termed "blending." 
    Premises means any building from which alcoholic beverages are sold, including any lot, parcel or ground on which such building is located. 
    Wine means all beverages made from fresh fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added, in the manner required by the laws and regulations of the United States, and includes all sparkling wines, champagnes, combination of the aforesaid beverages, vermouths and like products. Sugar, flavors and coloring materials may be added to wine to make it conform to the consumer's taste, except that the ultimate flavor or the color of the product may not be altered to imitate a beverage other than wine or to change the character of the wine. 
    Other words or phrases shall be as defined in F.S. § 561.01 and F.S. chs. 561 through 565. 
(Code 1957, § 4-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-2. - Sale without state license prohibited. 
    No beverage containing alcohol of more than one-half of one percent by volume shall be sold within the city, except by persons holding licenses permitting such sales issued by the state. 
(Code 1957, § 4-2(a)) 
Sec. 3-3. - Compliance with state and federal manufacturing and licensing law. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture or to possess or to offer for sale or to sell intoxicating liquors, wines or other beverages within the city which have not been manufactured and licensed pursuant to the laws of the United States and of the state. 
(Code 1957, § 4-3) 
Sec. 3-4. - Compliance with use requirements of zoning ordinance required. 
    All retail establishments for the sale of alcoholic beverages to be consumed either on or off the premises shall comply with the use requirements as specified in the city zoning ordinance as applied to the zoning classification of the respective parcel of land. 
(Code 1957, § 4-2(b)) 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 31. 
Sec. 3-5. - Location restrictions for issuance of licenses. 
(a)  No license other than those in effect as of November 6, 1988, for the operation of a bar or package store, for consumption on or off the premises, for sale of intoxicating beverages shall be issued where the location of such proposed bar or package store is within 500 feet of another bar or package store, church or public, private or parochial school. The method of measurement shall be made or taken from the main front entrance of such church or school or place of business of such bar or package store to the main entrance of such applicant's place of business along the route of ordinary pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  If any bar or package store lawfully licensed on November 6, 1988, shall after such date cease operation, shall fail to renew its license or if its license is for any reason revoked, no new license shall thereafter issue to such place of business if it shall be located within 500 feet from any then-existing bar or package store, church or public, private or parochial school. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the place of business for the operation of any licensed bar or package store may be moved or transferred to another location within the city, provided either: 
(1)  The new location is within 500 feet of the former location and there are not a greater number of bar and package stores within 500 feet thereof than existed within 500 feet of the former location; or 
(2)  The new location is not within 500 feet of any bar or package store, church, or public, private or parochial school. The measurement shall be made by the city engineer as provided in subsection (a) of this section, and his determination shall be final and binding, on all parties. The bars and package stores licensed under subsection (e) of this section shall be excluded from any computations made hereunder. 
(d)  The licensee desiring to transfer a license from one location to another as permitted in subsection (c) of this section must file with the director of community development and environmental control a written application for such transfer, giving the exact location of the then-existing place of business and the exact location of the proposed new place of business. The transfer to the new location shall not be made until authorized by the director. 
(e)  The provisions of subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section shall not apply to hotels or motels of at least 100 rooms or to restaurants serving the general public having full course meals, accommodations for service of 150 or more patrons at tables, and occupying at least 2,500 square feet of space, being the type of license regulated by F.S. § 561.20, which license shall not hereafter be moved to a new location, such licenses being valid only on the premises of the hotel or restaurant constituting the basis for their original issuance; and provided further, where such license is issued to a hotel with at least 100 guest rooms. All entrances to such bar or package store shall be within such hotel and there shall be no display of goods visible from the street and no exterior advertising, and such bar or package store shall be operated wholly within the confines of such hotel and such display shall not be visible from any street or public thoroughfare. The provisions of subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section shall not apply to "club licenses" as defined in F.S. § 565.02(4) or to beer and wine licenses for consumption off the premises. The provisions of subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply to four COP licenses issued by the division of beverages of the department of business regulation. 
(Code 1957, § 4-4(a)-(e), (g), (h)) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; planning, ch. 27; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; zoning, ch. 31. 
Sec. 3-6. - Restricted hours; extended hours licenses. 
(a)  Restricted hours. Anything in the article to the contrary notwithstanding, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or consume, or to permit the sale, service or consumption of any intoxicating liquor or intoxicating beverage, beer, ale or wine in any place holding a license to sell same from the state or in any other public place within the city, and it shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, receive or consume any such liquor, beverage, beer, ale or wine from any such place between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and on Sunday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  Extended hours license. Any person, vendor or any place of business operating as a restaurant bar, hotel or motel bar, nightclub or show club in the city and duly and regularly licensed by the state to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages, wine or beer therein may apply for an extended hours license. The fee for the issuance of such license shall be $1,700.00. Such extended hours license permits and extends the hours in which such licensee may remain open until 5:00 a.m. on any day; however, all such extended hours licenses for restaurant bars, hotel or motel bars, nightclubs or show clubs are hereby declared to be and are regulatory in nature. Every such license shall expire on October 1 of each and every year. The city clerk shall place all initial applications for such licenses on the agenda for the first regular city council meeting to be held in August, or as soon thereafter as may be heard, and shall notify all qualified applicants of the date on which their applications will be heard. The city council may grant or deny such extended hours license. Any person, vendor or any place of business who wishes to make an initial application for an extended hours license shall pay a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $300.00 to defray costs for investigation of such applicant. Such fee shall be submitted with the application for such license, and no application shall be accepted by the city unless accompanied by such fee. 
(1)  The specific criteria for city council consideration in making the decision to grant or deny a license are as follows: 
a.  Off-street parking. The amount of off-street parking in relation to demands created by the extra hours of operation, especially with regard to the adverse impact on adjacent residential areas of any illegal or hazardous parking. 
b.  Law enforcement activities. The amount and degree of law enforcement activities generated by the operation of any bar, restaurant bar, hotel or motel bar, nightclub or show club, both outside and inside the particular location, with particular emphasis on the vandalism, noise, vehicular use by patrons and illegal activity of any kind by employees, patrons or others associated with the establishment. 
c.  Effect on neighboring properties. The adverse effects, if any, that the extended hours of operation will have on neighboring properties, especially with respect to the effects of noise, parking and glare from headlights or exterior lighting on nearby residential properties. 
d.  Noise. Such licenses shall only be granted to those establishments which are wholly enclosed, soundproofed and air conditioned, and any windows, doors or other opening kept closed, except for normal and emergency ingress and egress, in order that noise and music emanating therefrom will not disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood; provided, however, that the city council may, in its discretion, grant an extended hours license to an establishment that is not wholly enclosed, soundproofed and air-conditioned, upon a showing that such establishment does not disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(2)  The city council may require, as a condition of the privilege of extending hours of operation, compliance with any reasonable conditions deemed by the council to be necessary to mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects of such extended hours. These conditions may include, without being limited to, provision by the owner or operator of the premises to provide, at his expense, additional off-street parking, security personnel and screening and buffering from nearby properties. 
(3)  The granting of an extended hours license to a particular licensee has been and continues to be a privilege subject to modification or termination by the city council each year at renewal time, and no person may reasonably rely on a continuation of that privilege. The renewal of any extended hours license shall first be determined by the city manager. If, in his opinion based upon the criteria set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the license should be renewed, a new license shall be issued upon payment of the aforementioned fee. If, however, he determines that renewal should be denied, the licensee shall have 20 days from the date of the notice of denial to appeal his decision to the city council. The city council, in determining such appeal, shall use the criteria specified in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section. 
(4)  If, prior to renewal time, the city manager determines that any licensee has either violated a condition of renewal or is operating in a manner harmful to the public health, safety or welfare based upon the criteria specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section, he may place on the city council agenda the matter of revoking the extended hours license. Such agenda item shall be publicly advertised in a newspaper of local circulation and written notice of the charges against the licensee shall be sent to him at least 14 days in advance and shall also contain the date, time and place of such agenda item. After consideration of the matter and allowing the licensee to be heard, the city council may revoke, modify or condition the extended hours license. If the council determines that the actions of the licensee are of such a nature as to pose a serious harm to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, the council may also revoke the privilege of selling, delivering or permitting on any day of the week, including Sunday. The criteria to be used by the city manager and city council in such matters shall be the criteria specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section. Should the license or privilege be revoked, conditioned or modified, the licensee may seek review of such action before the city council after three months. The council may then modify or refuse to modify its action. Only one such review shall be given within a 12-month period. 
(5)  The costs incurred by the city in investigating any of the matters included within the criteria of subsection (b)(1) of this section in either a revocation or denial of renewal proceeding of an alcoholic beverage establishment's extended hours license shall be paid by the licensee to the city. These costs shall be in addition to the initial application fee and annual license fee required by this section and shall not exceed $5,000.00 for any one proceeding. 
(c)  Limited extended hours license. 
(1)  Any person, vendor or any place of business operating as a restaurant bar, hotel or motel bar, nightclub or show club in the city and duly and regularly licensed by the state to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages, wine or beer therein may apply for a limited extended hours license. Such license shall only be valid on Friday, Saturday and Sunday nights as well as the following specified holidays: New Year's Eve, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 3 and 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve and Christmas Day. 
(2)  The fee for the issuance of a limited extended hours license shall be $1,000.00 a year. Any person, vendor or place of business who wishes to make an initial application for a limited extended hours license shall pay a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $250.00 to defray the cost of investigation of the applicant. Such fee shall be submitted with the application for such license, and no application will be accepted by the city unless accompanied by such fee. 
(3)  All procedural requirements as well as the criteria to be considered by the city council in making a decision as to a general extended hours license shall equally apply to a limited extended hours license. Any person, vendor or place of business which receives a limited extended hours license shall abide by all the terms and conditions for the operation of the premises with an extended hours license every night for which the limited extended hours license is valid. Failure to so comply with this requirement may result in either the revocation or denial of renewal of the limited extended hours license. 
(d)  One-time extended hours license. 
(1)  Any person, vendor or any place of business operating as a restaurant bar, hotel or motel bar, nightclub or show club in the city and duly and regularly licensed by the state to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages, wine or beer therein may apply for a one-time extended hours license. Such license shall be in effect for a maximum of two consecutive nights. The fee for the issuance of a one-time extended hours license shall be $250.00. A person, vendor or place of business may only obtain one one-time extended hours license per year. 
(2)  All procedural requirements as well as the criteria to be considered by the city council in making a decision as to a general extended hours license shall equally apply to a one-time extended hours license. Any person, vendor or place of business which receives a one-time extended hours license shall abide by all the terms and conditions for the operation of the premises with an extended hours license every night for which the one-time license is valid. Failure to so comply with this requirement may result in the revocation of the one-time extended hours license. 
(e)  Violations, penalty. Any person who shall violate any term, condition or provision of this section, upon conviction of such violation before a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11. Each day of violation of any term, provision or condition of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Further, it shall be unlawful for any pub, lounge, bar and any food service establishment on the same building or on the same lot or parcel of land to be open to any members of the public during any such prohibited hours. It shall also be unlawful for any person to loiter or congregate on any part of the real property owned, leased or otherwise controlled outside of any such establishment at any time. 
(Code 1957, § 4-4(f); Ord. No. 2571, § 1, 11-18-92) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2733, adopted Mar. 5, 1997, imposed a moratorium upon the issuance of extended hours beverage licenses for the operation of alcoholic beverage establishments after 2:00 a.m. for a period of one year after the enactment of this Ord. No. 2733 for the purpose of studying the community conditions and impacts of the operation of alcoholic beverage establishments after 2:00 a.m., in order to determine the appropriateness of having alcoholic beverages sold within the city limits after 2:00 a.m. 
Sec. 3-7. - Soliciting alcoholic drinks by employees and others prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee, musician, dancer, singer or other entertainer of an establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to solicit alcoholic drinks from any patron of such establishment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator or manager of a place dispensing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to employ or permit to remain on the premises any person for the purpose of soliciting alcoholic drinks from any patron of such establishment. 
(Code 1957, § 4-5) 
Sec. 3-8. - Prohibiting persons frequenting or loitering in establishment for the purpose of soliciting drinks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, not an employee thereof, to frequent or loiter in any establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for the purpose of soliciting alcoholic drinks from any patron of such establishment. 
(Code 1957, § 4-6) 
Sec. 3-9. - Sale at gasoline filling station. 
    No liquor or intoxicating beverages of any kind or nature shall be sold at any gasoline filling station. This does not prohibit the sale of wine, beer or ale for consumption off of the premises. 
(Code 1957, § 4-7) 
Sec. 3-10. - Drinking intoxicating beverages on streets, public ways or places; open containers. 
(a)  No person shall drink any alcoholic or intoxicating beverages or liquors, beer, ale or wine in or upon any street, avenue, alley, park, bench, parking lot where same is sold, or other public way or public place in the city. The consumption or possession of alcoholic or intoxicating beverages or liquors, beer, ale, or wine in an unsealed container is also prohibited within 500 feet of a commercial establishment parking lot or in or upon a motor vehicle being operated on or parked on a public or semi-public area open for vehicular travel. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: 
    Commercial establishment parking lot. Any private or public area appurtenant to commercial establishments used by the public for parking for, and pedestrian access to, commercial establishments, including drives, parking areas, sidewalks and walkways appurtenant thereto. 
    Public or semi-public area open for vehicular travel. All public and private roads, streets, highways, lanes, alleys, parking lots and parking areas on which the public is expressly or implicitly invited to travel in or upon by motor vehicle or which is otherwise opened for vehicular travel. 
(c)  Specific acts prohibited. The following acts are prohibited: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in or within 500 feet of a commercial establishment parking lot, except in those areas in which such consumption is permitted by Florida Statute, the Florida Administrative Code or other parts of this Code. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any container of alcoholic beverage, except in an original container with the seal unbroken, or to consume any alcoholic beverage in or on a motor vehicle being operated on or parked on a public or semi-public area open for vehicular traffic. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage in or within 500 feet of a commercial establishment parking lot, except in those areas in which such consumption is permitted by Florida Statute, the Florida Administrative Code or other parts of this Code, unless such alcoholic beverage is in the original container with the seal unbroken. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager, or designee, may authorize the consumption of such alcoholic beverage in a public park or building, street, avenue, alley, parking lot, or other public way or public place in the city when used in conjunction with a picnic, social event or public gathering held by a family, group of persons or an organization. Such authorization shall be in writing and shall set forth the date, time and place during which such alcoholic beverages may be consumed. Further, any such authorization may include any other requirement the city manager may deem necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, including but not limited to, obtaining a special events permit. The city manager shall not grant such authorization if in his opinion, for stated reasons, the public safety or peace may become impaired. 
(Code 1957, § 4-8; Ord. No. 2933, § 1, 11-20-02) 
Cross reference- Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places unlawful, § 12-7; vehicles for hire, ch. 21; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; zoning, ch. 31. 
Sec. 3-11. - Penalties for violation of article. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 4-9) 
Sec. 3-12. - Violation of state law deemed violation of article. 
    Every violation of the laws of the state relating to the possessing, sale, gift, service or permitting the service of alcoholic beverages, now or hereafter enacted, is hereby made a violation of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 4-10) 
Secs. 3-13-3-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2648, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 1994, repealed former art. II of ch. 3, §§ 3-16-3-23, relative to adult entertainment at alcoholic beverage establishments, which derived from the Code of 1957, §§ 2B-1-2B-8. Similar provisions will now be found in ch. 2.5, adult entertainment code. 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; code enforcement, § 2-311 et seq.; garbage and refuse, ch. 7; health and sanitation, ch. 8; nuisances, ch. 11; parks and recreation, ch. 13; animals prohibited on beaches, § 13-3; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; zoning, ch. 31. 
State Law reference- State department of health and rehabilitative services authority to make rules on rabies, F.S. § 381.031(1)(g)1; livestock at large, F.S. § 588.12 et seq.; damage by dogs, F.S. ch. 767; cruelty to animals, F.S. ch. 828; animal fighting, F.S. § 828.122. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Running at large. 
(a)  "Allowed to run at large," as used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean the wilfully leaving of animals or fowl unconfined so that they may enter upon public streets or public grounds or upon private grounds of persons other than the owner or person having such animals or fowl in charge. 
(b)  No animal or fowl shall be allowed to run at large within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1957, §§ 5-1, 5-2) 
Sec. 4-2. - Riding, walking on streets, sidewalks and other public ways. 
    No person shall ride, walk or otherwise operate any horse, pony or mule upon any street, sidewalk or right-of-way within the city except by written permit of the chief of police on paths designated for the exclusive use of such animal. 
(Code 1957, § 5-3.2) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 29. 
Sec. 4-3. - Keeping birds, animals or reptiles prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to raise or keep birds, animals or reptiles within the city for any purpose other than household pets or in any number exceeding three pets of any one species. It shall be unlawful in any event to keep any number of animals when the keeping of such animal creates any noise, obnoxious odor, or any unsanitary conditions which may reasonably be considered a nuisance to adjoining or nearby residents. This section does not apply to animal hospitals. 
(Code 1957, § 5-4) 
Sec. 4-4. - Keeping of livestock and poultry prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to raise or keep any animal generally considered as livestock or poultry, including but not limited to chickens, horses, goats, sheep, pigs, cows or any other such animal or fowl generally kept or maintained on a farm within this city. 
(Code 1957, § 5-4.1) 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 31. 
Secs. 4-5-4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 4-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    At large means off the premises of the owner. 
    Dog means both male and female canines. 
    Owner means any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog. 
(Code 1957, § 5-9) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-22. - Running at large; conditions to being on public property. 
    No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit such dog to run at large. No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit the dog on any public street, parkways, walkways or any public park or parks unless the dog is properly licensed by the county with a tag and collar and accompanied by a person who has a leash on the dog. 
(Code 1957, § 5-12) 
Sec. 4-23. - Depositing offal or excreta off owner's premises; allowing, abetting prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any dog under his care, custody or control or subject to his command to deposit or place on any public or private premises, pavement or streets, parkways or walkways or any public park or parks or ways on the oceanfront devoted to the use of the public other than on premises owned by the owner of such dog, any offal or excreta of such dog. 
(Code 1957, § 5-13) 
Chapter 5 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; mayor and city council, § 2-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- State election law, F.S. ch. 97 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3083, § 3, adopted Oct. 20, 2010, amended Art. I, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. I, pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 5-1. - Designation of voting districts. 
(a)  The boundaries of voting districts numbers 1, 2, 3 and 4 are hereby redefined as follows: 
(1)  Voting District Number 1. Bordered on the west by the western corporate limits of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida; bordered on the north by the northern corporate limits of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida; bordered on the east by the east property line of Lot 1, Block 34, Plat No. 2, Park Manor as recorded in the Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida, in Plat Book 26, Pages 126 and 127 to the point of intersection with the south property line of said Lot 1, Block 34, Plat No. 2, Park Manor; thence westerly along said south property line to its point of intersection with the east property line of Lot 2, Block 34, Plat No. 2, Park Manor; thence southwesterly along the south property line of Lot 2, Block 34, Plat No. 2, Park Manor, to its point of intersection with the prolongation of the centerline of right-of-way of drainage canal RC-4; thence south along said centerline of drainage canal RC-4 to its point of intersection with the centerline of Blue Heron Boulevard as laid out and now in use; and bordered on the south by the centerline of Blue Heron Boulevard as laid out and now in use. 
(2)  Voting District Number 2. Bordered on the west by the east property line of Lot 1, Block 34, Plat No. 2, Park Manor as recorded in the Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida, in Plat Book 26, Pages 126 and 127, to the point of intersection with the south property line of said Lot 1, Block 34, Plat No. 2, Park Manor; thence westerly along said south property line to its point of intersection with the east property line of Lot 2, Block 34, Plat No. 2, Park Manor; thence southwesterly along the south property line of Lot 2, Block 34, Plat No. 2, Park Manor, to its point of intersection with the prolongation of the centerline of right-of-way of drainage canal RC-4; thence south along said centerline of drainage canal RC-4 to its point of intersection with the center line of Blue Heron Boulevard as laid out and now in use; thence westerly along said centerline of Blue Heron Boulevard to the point of intersection with the centerline of the Florida East Coast Railroad right-of-way as laid out and now in use; thence following said centerline of railroad right-of-way southerly to the south corporate limits of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida; bordered on the north by the northern corporate limits of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida, to the point of intersection with the western shoreline of Lake Worth; bordered on the east by the western shoreline of Lake Worth, and bordered on the south by the southern corporate limits of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida. 
(3)  Voting District Number 3. Bordered on the west by the westerly corporate limits of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida; bordered on the north by the centerline of Blue Heron Boulevard; bordered on the east by the centerline of the Florida East Coast Railroad right-of-way; and bordered on the south by the southern corporate limits of Riviera Beach, Florida. 
(4)  Voting District Number 4. Bordered on the west by the eastern shoreline of Lake Worth; bordered on the north by the northern corporate limits of Riviera Beach, Florida; bordered on the east by the western shoreline of the Atlantic Ocean; and bordered on the south by the southern corporate limits of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida. 
(5)  Council voting district 5. Consists of the entire city and comprises districts 1, 2, 3, and 4 taken together for purposes of indicating the permissible residency of the person elected to that office. 
(b)  Made a part of this section by reference is a voting district map as redefined by this section which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-2. - Filing and qualification of candidates for mayoral and council. 
(a)  Candidates for mayoral and city council shall file such papers and pay such fees as may be required by law, including the filing fee required by City Charter article II, section 3, during the qualifying period with the city clerk no earlier than noon on the fourth Tuesday in November and no later than noon on the second Tuesday in December of the calendar year prior to the year the mayoral or city council election is to be held. The names of all candidates and the offices for which they have filed shall be received by the Palm Beach County Supervisor of Elections from the city clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the first Friday after the close of the above described qualifying period. 
(b)  Qualification procedures. 
(1)  For elections, as provided by subsection (a) above, it shall be the duty of any person desiring to become a candidate for election to the office of mayor or councilperson to file a written notice of candidacy, in the form set forth in subsection (4) below, accompanied by the filing fee required by subsection (3)a. or b. below, the additional election assessment imposed by F.S. § 99.093(1), as described in subsection (3)c. below, and the statutory oath of candidate. Further, all candidates shall timely file all other qualification papers required by law. 
(2)  The place of qualification shall be at the office of the city clerk and the hours and dates of qualifying shall be the applicable time period set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  Filing fee. 
a.  Pursuant to City Charter section 3 of article II, the filing fee is five percent of the annual salary of the office sought. Accordingly, the filing fee for a mayoral candidate shall be five percent of the annual mayoral salary as computed by the city clerk; and 
b.  The filing fee for a councilperson candidate shall be five percent of the annual councilperson salary as computed by the city clerk. 
c.  The statutory election assessment under F.S. § 99.093(1), shall be computed as one percent of the annual mayoral or council salary, respectively, as said salary is specified in section 10 of article II of the City Charter. 
d.  Any person desiring to obtain an election packet for candidates, as prepared by the city clerk, shall pay a non-refundable fee to the city for the cost of preparation of such packet, in accordance with F.S. § 119.07. 
(4)  Notice of candidacy. The form of notice of candidacy shall be substantially as follows: 
"Notice of Candidacy" 
I, the undersigned, an elector of the City of Riviera Beach (the "City"), who resides and has resided continuously in: 
[ ] (check if applicable) - the specific District # _______ of the City from which I seek to be elected, 
[ ] (check if applicable) - within any district of the City as allowed for District # 5 office or for the mayoral office, 
for (1) year immediately preceding the date of filing of this Notice of Candidacy, whose residence is _______ in the City, hereby announce my candidacy for the office of: 
[ ] (check applicable) - Council District _______; 
[ ] (check applicable) - Mayor; 
to be voted for at the City election to be held on the ___ day of _______, _______, and I hereby agree to serve as ___________ if elected. (Indicate Mayor or Council District # ___, as applicable) 
/s/   
      Signature of Candidate   DATE AND HOUR OF FILING: 
___________ 
RECEIVED BY: 
/s/   
      CITY CLERK/ 
      ELECTION OFFICIAL   (c)  Elections for council districts 2 and 4 shall be held on the second Tuesday in March of each even numbered year: Elections for council districts 1, and 3 and 5 and the mayor shall be held on the second Tuesday in March of each odd numbered year. The regular term of office for the mayor and each councilperson is two years. 
(d)  Candidates for council districts 1, 2, 3 and 4 shall file and qualify by indicating the district in which such candidates continuously resided for one year prior the date of filing for office. Candidates for mayoral office and candidates for city council district 5 shall file and must have continuously resided within the city's municipal boundaries for one year prior the date of filing for office. Upon expiration of the qualifying period for the mayoral or city council position, a candidate shall not switch from one district to another district or from mayoral to a district or from district to mayoral. 
(e)  The mayor and each councilperson shall be elected by vote of the registered and qualified electors from the entire city at large. 
(f)  The districts are defined and designated in section 5-1 for the sole purpose of districts from which candidates shall file and qualify by selecting the district in which such candidate resides. The mayor and candidates selecting district 5 shall be elected at large without regard to the district of the city wherein they reside. 
(g)  If a councilperson elected in districts 1, 2, 3 or 4 ceases to reside in the district for which he filed, qualified and resided in at the time he was elected, he shall forthwith forfeit his office in accordance with and subject to the exception to forfeiture recognized in City Code section 2-27. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10; Ord. No. 4063, § 4, 6-3-15) 
Sec. 5-3. - Adoption of county uniform election date, etc., procedures. 
    The city has adopted and shall follow the provisions of Laws of Florida, chapter 83-498 regarding uniform election dates in the county. The city reserves the right to revise election dates pursuant to F.S. § 100.3605(2). 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-4. - Date of election; run-off elections. 
    The names of the person qualified shall appear as candidates on the ballot for an election to be held on the second Tuesday in March of each election year. In the event that one candidate for any office shall receive a majority of the votes of the registered and qualified electors of the city actually voting for said office at such election, such person shall be deemed elected to such office. In the event that as to any office no candidate receives such a majority, then the two who received the highest vote shall continue to be voted upon at an election to be held on the fourth Tuesday of March and the one who then obtains a majority of the votes cast by the registered and qualified electors of the city for said office shall be deemed elected to such office. Election dates affected by any countywide or statewide election held in March will coincide with the date for the countywide or statewide election. If the initial election is held less than two weeks prior to the fourth Tuesday in March, then a run-off election, when necessary, shall be held the fifth Tuesday in March or the first Tuesday in April whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10; Ord. No. 4063, § 5, 6-3-15) 
Sec. 5-5. - Notice of mayoral and/or council election. 
    The city clerk shall cause to be published once each week for two weeks preceding any election in a newspaper of general circulation published in the municipality a notice stating the date of such election, the offices to be filled, and the time and place where such election shall be held. If no such newspaper is published in the city, then such notice shall be given by posting a copy thereof in at least three public and conspicuous places in the city, one of which shall be upon the bulletin board in the city hall. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-6. - Notice of special election or referendum. 
    As required by F.S. § 100.342, in any special election or referendum not otherwise provided for, there shall be at least 30 days' notice of the election or referendum by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The publication shall be made at least twice, once in the fifth week and once in the third week prior to the week in which the election or referendum is to be held. If there is no newspaper of general circulation in the city, the notice shall be posted in no less than five places within the territorial limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-7. - Purposes of special election. 
    Special elections shall be held for such purposes as may be required and as provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-8. - Polling places-Designation. 
    Those polling places designated, from time to time, by the city clerk within the city are hereby adopted. The city clerk shall coordinate with the Palm Beach County supervisor of elections for such purpose and shall obtain any necessary assistance from the county to the extent required by law as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-9. - Same-Police attending. 
    The chief of police shall designate one police officer for each polling place, who shall be required to be present during the time the polls are open and until the election is completed. He shall be subject to all lawful commands of the city clerk and shall see that there is no interruption of good order. Such police officer shall have the power to maintain peace and to summon a posse from among the bystanders to aid him in maintaining the peace and good order at the polls. Police attendance shall be solely for public safety and election security purposes. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-10. - Preparation of ballots. 
    Immediately upon the expiration of the time for the filing of notice of candidacy for any election, the city clerk shall determine the names which should appear upon the ballot and the city clerk shall arrange for the preparation of the ballots. The ballots used in any council or mayoral election held under the authority of the Charter or this Code or other ordinances of the city shall be without party mark or designation and without any insignia or mark of any association thereon and shall be substantially in the same form as the election ballot used in all nonpartisan general state elections. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-11. - Canvassing; certification of election. 
(a)  The city clerk, the deputy city clerk and one councilperson who is not up for reelection shall constitute the canvassing board. The councilperson requested to serve on the canvassing board shall be designated by the city clerk. 
(b)  The city clerk shall give to each person who shall be elected to office a certificate of his/her election, administer the oath of office for the elected position and arrange an orientation for any newly elected official. The city clerk shall present a certification of election results to the city council at the first regular meeting of the council following the election. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-12. - State law controlling. 
    For the purpose of providing for any contingency not covered by this chapter, the provisions of the general laws of the state relating to electors and elections, so far as the law may be applicable, are adopted as a part hereof. All general laws of the state relating to elections and to the registration of persons qualified to vote therein which are not inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this chapter or of the City Charter are hereby adopted as a part hereof. The city clerk is authorized to take any action which is necessary to comply with this section. The city clerk is hereby appointed supervisor of elections for the city and is hereby assigned all appurtenant duties thereto. The city clerk is authorized to obtain any necessary assistance from the Palm Beach County Supervisor of Elections office or successor agency and to coordinate the selection, training and hiring of poll workers for city elections. City electors shall be given a preference for hiring as poll workers in city elections. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-13. - Manner of conducting generally. 
    All elections, whether general or special, conducted in the city shall be held and conducted in like manner as general state elections are conducted, unless otherwise provided in the applicable provisions of the City Code or Charter. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-14. - Filling a vacancy in candidacy. 
(a)  If the death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot of a qualified candidate following the end of the qualifying period results in only one candidate remaining on the ballot for that mayoral or council office, the remaining candidate shall be declared elected and no election for that office shall be required. 
(b)  If the death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot of a qualified candidate following the end of the qualifying period results in there being no candidate remaining on the ballot for that mayoral or council office, the vacancy in office shall be filled pursuant to section 2-30 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-15. - Commencement of term of elected officials. 
    For elections occurring after the effective date of this section, the term of office for the mayor and councilpersons shall commence upon certification of the election results for such mayoral and council positions, pursuant to section 5-11 above. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-16. - City Charter amendments. 
(a)  Purpose. This Code section shall prescribe the method of proposing Charter amendments to the city's electors in a manner consistent with the provisions of F.S. § 166.031. Those limited Charter amendments that are expressly authorized by F.S. § 166.031(5), to be accomplished without electoral approval shall not be subject to this section 5-16. 
(b)  Charter amendment proposed by city council. The city council may propose amendments to the Charter to the electors by ordinance. The council ordinance shall provide the full text of the proposed Charter amendment, the proposed ballot question(s), the form for publication of the notice of election, and shall call the election for a date certain. The council ordinance shall be drafted by the city attorney in the same manner in which the city attorney drafts other council ordinances. 
(c)  Charter amendment proposed by electors. Electors of the city may propose amendments to the City Charter by petition, as authorized by F.S. § 166.031. To the extent authorized by law, each petition proposing amendments to the Charter shall be commenced, in the form, filed, certified as to its sufficiency and/or withdrawn in the same manner as an ordinance proposed by initiative pursuant to article IV of the City Charter, except that the percentage of electors required for a Charter amendment petition shall be the percentage provided by F.S. § 166.031, and any withdrawal must be made at least 45 days before the election. A Charter amendment proposed by petition of electors which is legally sufficient and meets the requirements of that statute shall be submitted to the electors of the city pursuant to council resolution. The council resolution shall be adopted no later than the date necessary in order to meet the time requirements for submission of the measure to the electorate in accordance with F.S. § 166.031. The council resolution shall also set forth the ballot question(s) in accordance with F.S. § 101.161, provide for notice of election in accordance with F.S. § 100.342, and shall direct the placement of the ballot question(s) on the appropriate election ballot. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 5-17. - Initiative and referendum petition procedures. 
    The detailed provisions which are set forth in article IV of the City Charter shall control the procedure for the initiative process by which the adoption of ordinances are proposed by the electors and the procedure for the referendum process by which the repeal of existing ordinances are proposed by the electors. 
(Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 10-20-10) 
Chapter 6 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Garbage and refuse, ch. 7; health and sanitation, ch. 8; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; nuisances, ch. 11; pension and retirement programs, ch. 14; firefighters pension plan, § 14-46 et seq.; personnel, ch. 15; security and fire warning systems, ch. 17; fire alarm systems, § 17-51 et seq.; property insurance premium tax levied for firefighters municipal pension program, § 18-21; railroad cars blocking streets designated as fire crossings prohibited, § 19-26; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; fire limits and fire hazards, § 22-101 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; fire flow and hydrant requirements in subdivisions, § 30-68. 
State Law reference- Fire prevention and protection, F.S. ch. 633. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose. 
    This chapter shall provide the city with rules and regulations to improve public safety by: 
(1)  Promoting the control of fire hazards; 
(2)  Regulating the installation, use, and maintenance of equipment; 
(3)  Regulating the use of structures, premises, and open areas; 
(4)  Establishing the responsibilities and procedures for code enforcement; and 
(5)  Setting forth the standards for compliance and achievement of these objectives. 
(Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-1), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 6-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The fire chief of the city fire department shall be responsible for the enforcement of the fire prevention code of the city. The fire chief may detail qualified members, as established in Florida Statutes, of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. To assist in the performance of the responsibilities and duties placed upon the fire chief, a bureau of fire prevention in the fire department is hereby created. 
(b)  This bureau shall operate under the supervision of the fire chief. The fire chief shall designate a fire official of the city fire department as fire marshal. The fire marshal shall be the administrator of the bureau division of fire prevention. The fire marshal shall be responsible for the direct administration and enforcement of the fire prevention code as may be set forth by the fire chief. The fire marshal shall be appointed on the basis of examination or other methods for determining qualifications. The fire chief may also designate such number of technical inspectors as from time to time shall be authorized by the city manager. Such technical inspectors shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. 
(Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-9), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 6-3. - Duties of fire chief. 
    The fire chief shall prepare instructions for the fire marshal and the fire marshal's assistants, and forms for their use in the reports required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-10), 12-1-93) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-161 et seq.; firefighters' pension plan, § 14-46 et seq. 
Sec. 6-4. - Bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the bureau of fire prevention to enforce all laws and ordinances covering the following: 
(1)  The prevention of fires. 
(2)  The storage, sale and use of combustible, flammable or explosive materials. 
(3)  The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing systems and equipment. 
(4)  The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes. 
(5)  The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire, from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters and all other places in which numbers of persons work, live or congregate, from time to time, for any purpose. 
(6)  The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires. 
(7)  The maintenance of fire cause and loss records. 
(b)  The bureau shall have such powers and perform such other duties as are set forth in other sections of this chapter, and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law. The fire chief may delegate any powers or duties under this chapter to the fire marshal. 
(c)  The bureau of fire prevention shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire. The fire marshal shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case. Every fire shall be reported in writing to the bureau of fire prevention within five days after the occurrence of the same by the fire department officer in whose jurisdiction such a fire has occurred. Such report shall be in such form as shall be prescribed by the fire marshal of the city, and shall contain a statement of all the facts relating to the cause, origin and circumstances of such fire, and the extent of the damage thereof, and the insurance upon such property, and such other information as may be required, including the injury, death or rescue of persons. 
(Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-11), 12-1-93) 
Cross reference- Firefighters' pension plan, § 14-46 et seq.; personnel, ch. 15. 
Sec. 6-5. - Permits. 
    Before permits may be issued as required by this Code, the fire marshal or the fire marshal's assistants shall inspect and approve the receptacles, processes, vehicles, buildings or storage places to be used for any such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-12), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 6-6. - Inspections. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises on a periodic basis and shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the same and for safeguarding of life and property from fire. 
(b)  Whenever any inspector shall find in any building, or upon any premises or other places, combustibles or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulations of waste paper, boxes, pallets, shavings or any highly flammable materials especially liable to fire, and to which is so situated as to endanger property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of the occupants in case of fire, the inspector shall order the same to be removed or remedied. Such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings, subject to the appeals procedure provided for in the fire prevention code of the city. 
(c)  Any owner or occupant failing to correct fire code violations within a period of 45 days after issuance of a written warning, or a period of time longer than 45 days if so specified in the written warning, shall be issued a citation in accordance with section 6-8 and F.S. § 633.052, and shall be liable to any penalties as provided in section 6-8. 
(d)  The service of any such written warning may be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy of the same to such occupant personally, or leaving it with any adult person in charge of the premises, or, in the case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of such premises, and/or by mailing a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such a written warning upon the owner of a premises, such a written warning may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the person a copy of the written warning, or by mailing such copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's last known post office address. 
(Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-13), 12-1-93) 
Secs. 6-7-6-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2911, § 1, adopted Jan. 2, 2002, repealed § 6-7 in its entirety. Former § 6-7 pertained to violations and penalties and derived from Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-8), adopted Dec. 1, 1993. For similar provisions see § 6-32. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 6-31. - Code adopted. 
    In accordance with F.S. §§ 633.0215 and 633.025 the "Florida Fire Prevention Code" adopted by the state fire marshal in Rule 4A-60 of the Florida Administrative Code, as may be amended, including NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code (2000 edition) and NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (2000 Edition), both as modified by Rule 4A-60 of the Florida Administrative Code, is deemed adopted by reference, as fully as if set out at length herein, as the minimum firesafety code, and is hereby amended by the "Riviera Beach Local Amendments to the Florida Fire Prevention Code". Three copies of the "Florida Fire Prevention Code" and the "Riviera Beach Local Amendments to the Florida Fire Prevention Code" shall be on file and are open to inspection by the public in the office of the city clerk of the City of Riviera Beach, Palm Beach County, Florida. The same are hereby adopted as the code of the City of Riviera Beach, Palm Beach County, Florida for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion and providing for issuance of permits and collection of fees. 
(Ord. No. 2911, § 2, 1-2-02) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2911, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Jan. 1, 2002, repealed the former § 6-31, and enacted a new § 6-31 as set out herein. The former 6-31 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-2), adopted Dec. 1, 1993. 
Sec. 6-32. - Violations, penalties. 
    The provisions of this Code and any orders issued pursuant thereto may be appealed and / or enforced under the procedures and penalties of Chapter 162 Florida Statutes as may be amended or recodified from time to time; or any other means lawfully available for the enforcement of this Code. Additionally, the city may seek an injunction in circuit court to enforce any order issued pursuant to this Code. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code or standard hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith; or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder; or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder; or failed to operate in accordance with any certificate or permit issued thereunder; and from which no appeal has been taken; or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified in accordance with the provisions of the codes of the City of Riviera Beach or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by the provisions set forth in Florida Statutes. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified the application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. Each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2911, § 2, 1-2-02) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2911, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Jan. 2, 2002, repealed the former § 6-32, and enacted a new § 6-32 as set out herein. The former § 6-32 pertained to amendments to the fire prevention code and derived from Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-3), 12-1-93. 
Sec. 6-33. - Additions, insertions, and changes to fire code. 
    These amendments, which shall be known as the "Riviera Beach Local Amendments to the Florida Fire Prevention Code," are as follows: 
The following addition to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
1-4.6.1 Buildings subject to this code are to be inspected to assure fire code compliance per the following schedule: 
Occupancy Type Inspection 
Cycle Assembly Annual Educational Annual Day Care Center Annual Health Care Annual Ambulatory Health Care Annual Detention/Correctional Annual Residential Board and Care Annual Apartments (3-6 units with common area) Every 3 Years Apartments (3-6 units without common area) Every 5 Years Apartments (7-20 units) Annual Apartments (over 20 units) Annual Hotel / Dormitories Annual Lodging or Rooming Houses Annual Mercantile Annual Business Every 2 Years Industrial / Manufacturing Annual Storage Every 2 Years Special Property Use Annual  
Additional inspections may be scheduled by the city based on new construction, alteration of building construction or occupancy, or in response to complaints or observed fire code violations. 
The following addition to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
1-4.6.2 If consent is not granted, the authority having jurisdiction shall obtain an inspection warrant as provided for in Florida Statutes, section 933.20 through 933.30. 
The following modification to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
3-4.7 No grills of any kind shall be kindled or maintained on balconies or within 10 ft (3 m) of combustible patios on ground floors. Exception: Single-family dwellings. 
The following modification to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
3-5.1 Fire lanes shall be provided for all of buildings when any portion of the facility or building is set back more than 150 ft (46 m) from a public road as measured by an approved exterior route around the facility or building or exceeds 30 ft (9 m) in height and any portion of the facility or building is set back over 50 ft (15 m) from a public road. All measurements for fire lanes shall be made in an approved manner around the outside of the building and along an approved access road way. When measuring for fire lane distances, consideration shall be taken when dealing with retaining walls, fencing, swales, berms, or similar obstructions. 
The following modification to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
3-6 Access boxes. The authority having jurisdiction shall have the authority to require an access box to be installed in an accessible location where access to or within a structure or area is difficult because of security. Access boxes shall be required for every building with a required fire sprinkler system or fire alarm system. The access box shall be a type approved by the authority having jurisdiction and shall contain keys or other devices necessary to gain access as required by the authority having jurisdiction. The operator of the premises shall immediately notify the authority having jurisdiction, and provide the new keys or other devices, any time a lock is changed or rekeyed and a key or other device to that lock is contained in the access box. 
The following modification to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
7-2.2.2 New buildings more than three stories in height or new buildings over 50 ft (15 m) in height above grade and containing intermediate stories or balconies shall be equipped with an automatic standpipe system installed in accordance with the provisions of this section and NFPA 14, Standard for the Installation of Standpipe, Private Hydrant, and Hose Systems. 
The following addition to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
7-3.1.3 Where required by this Code or the referenced codes and standards listed in Chapter 32, automatic sprinkler systems shall be continuously monitored by a certified central station fire alarm system providing service that complies with all requirements of NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm Code. 
The following addition to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
7-3.2.1.1 All new buildings totaling 5,000 square feet or more of gross floor area shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with 7-3.1.1. For the purposes of this section, gross floor area shall be computed by determining the entire square footage of floor area under roofs, coverings or permanent awnings, regardless of any separations. The square footage of each floor level shall be counted separately and combined to achieve a total gross floor area. 
The following addition to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
7-3.2.1.2 All existing buildings not protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system and totaling 5,000 square feet or more of gross floor area undergoing alterations or renovations causing any increase in gross floor area shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with 7-3.1.1. For the purposes of this section, gross floor area shall be computed by determining the entire square footage of floor area under roofs, coverings or permanent awnings, regardless of any separations. The square footage of each floor level shall be counted separately and combined to achieve a total gross floor area. 
The following addition to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
7-3.2.1.3 All existing buildings totaling less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area for which alterations or renovations cause an increase in gross floor area to 5,000 square feet or more shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with 7-3.1.1. For the purposes of this section, gross floor area shall be computed by determining the entire square footage of floor area under roofs, coverings or permanent awnings, regardless of any separations. The square footage of each floor level shall be counted separately and combined to achieve a total gross floor area. 
The following addition to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
7-3.2.2 Basement areas, below grade areas, and underground parking areas or garages of new occupancies exceeding 2500 ft2 (232.3 m2) shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
The following addition to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
7-5.1.1 An approved water supply capable of supplying the required fire flow for fire protection shall be provided to all premises upon which facilities, buildings or portions of buildings are hereafter constructed or moved into this jurisdiction. On-site fire hydrants and mains capable of supplying the required fire flow shall be provided when any portion of the facility or building protected is in excess of 350 feet from a water supply on a public street, as measured by an approved exterior route around the facility or building. All measurements for hydrants shall be made in an approved manner around the outside of the building and along an approved access road way. When measuring for hydrant distances, consideration shall be taken when dealing with retaining walls, fencing, swales, berms, or similar obstructions. 
The following addition to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
7-5.1.2 The authority having jurisdiction may determine the number and approve the location of fire hydrants for buildings or portions of buildings, other than one-and two-family dwellings, that are constructed and located in such a manner that access to public fire hydrants is minimal or of a distance such that the authority having jurisdiction can demonstrate that firefighting operations would be impaired. 
The following addition to the Florida Fire Prevention Code is created to read: 
7-5.1.3 Where an automatic fire sprinkler system and/or standpipe system is required by this code or some other code, the fire department connection shall be located within 150 feet of a public or private fire hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 2911, § 2, 1-2-02) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2911, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Jan. 2, 2002, repealed the former § 6-33, and enacted a new § 6-33 as set out herein. The former § 6-33 pertained to adoption of fire code appendices and derived from Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-3), 12-1-93. 
Sec. 6-34. - Fire rescue fee schedule 
    The following fees shall be established for permits, certificates, approvals, and other functions performed under this Code and shall be payable to the City of Riviera Beach. Such fees shall accompany such application for such permit, approval, certificate, or other related fee related code provisions. 
Water Flow Tests 
A fee of $50.00 shall be paid for all flow tests performed by Riviera Beach Fire Rescue. 
Inspection Fees 
The schedule for new construction fire rescue plan review and inspection is as follows: 
Plan Review and 1st Inspection New Construction Inspection and Plan Review Fee $2.25 per $1000 of improvement costs ($15.00 minimum)  
The schedule for existing building fire rescue inspections, per building, based on fixed property use, shall be as follows: 
Occupancy 1st 
Inspection Assembly Occupancy of 50-299 persons $50.00 300-999 persons 75.00 1,000-4,999 persons 150.00 5,000 persons or > 250.00 Educational Day Care/Preschool 30.00 All Others 75.00 Healthcare/Institutional 5000 sq. ft. and under 50.00 5001-15,000 sq. ft. 100.00 15,001-30,000 sq. ft. 150.00 30,001-100,000 sq. ft. 200.00 100,001 sq. ft. or > 300.00 Apartments, Transient Lodging 24 units and < 50.00 25-100 units 75.00 101-500 units 150.00 501 units or > 250.00 Residential Board and Care, Adult Living Facilities 24 client license and < 50.00 25-50 client license 75.00 51 client license and > 150.00 Mercantile, Office, Storage, Industrial, and Manufacturing 5000 sq. ft. and under 50.00 5001-15,000 sq. ft. 100.00 15,001-30,000 sq. ft. 150.00 30,001-100,000 sq. ft. 200.00 100,001 sq. ft. or > 300.00 Marinas (Docks) 50 boat slips and < 50.00 51-100 boats slips 150.00 101-250 boats slips 200.00 251 boat slips and > 300.00 Temporary Structures, Tents 30.00 Commercial LP Gas Facilities 50.00 Mulching Facilities 150.00 Other-All subject occupancies not listed 50.00  
Re-Inspections 
There shall be a $25.00 dollar charge for each re-inspection which requires any additional trip to a building or job site by a fire inspector. This fee shall be applicable to new construction and existing inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2911, § 2, 1-2-02) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2911, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Jan. 2, 2002, repealed the former § 6-34, and enacted a new § 6-34 as set out herein. The former § 6-34 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-4), 12-1-93. 
Sec. 6-35. - Application of code. 
    The provisions of the fire prevention code of the city shall apply equally to both public and private property, and it shall apply to all structures and their occupancies, except as otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-6), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 6-36. - Construction of code. 
    This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the city for the preservation and protection of the public health, peace, safety and welfare, and all provisions of the fire prevention code of the city shall be liberally construed for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2608, § 1(6-7), 12-1-93) 
Chapter 8 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; code enforcement, § 2-311 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; animals, ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; garbage and refuse, ch. 7; burying of garbage, trash, etc., prohibited, § 7-2; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; nuisances, ch. 11; parks and recreation, ch. 13; health and sanitation on watercraft, § 13-57; utilities, ch. 20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Pollution of Lake Worth prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place in the waters of Lake Worth within the city any offal, trash, waste, garbage, oil or the waste of any by-product from any industrial or manufacturing plant. 
(Code 1957, § 10-7) 
Sec. 8-2. - Waste from houseboats; purpose of section. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person upon any houseboat or other boat or vessel stationed within 200 feet of the shoreline in the waters of Lake Worth within the city to allow any trash, garbage or the excreta or refuse from any toilet or privy on the boat to escape into the waters of the lake. 
(b)  This section is a sanitary measure for the purpose of preventing the pollution of Lake Worth at or near the shore, and shall be construed to effect this purpose. 
(Code 1957, § 10-8) 
Cross reference- Equipment for waste disposal on watercraft, § 13-60. 
Secs. 8-3-8-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Assessment charge for liens imposed by city, § 2-3; code enforcement, § 2-311 et seq.; garbage and refuse, ch. 7; accumulation of debris, etc., on private property prohibited, § 7-4. 
State Law reference- Florida litter law, F.S. § 403.413. 

Sec. 8-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aircraft means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons, but does not include a parachute or any other device used primarily as safety equipment. 
    Authorized private receptacle means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in this chapter. 
    Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature which: 
(1)  Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; 
(2)  Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
(3)  Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; or 
(4)  While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
    Commercial purpose means for the purpose of economic gain. 
    Commercial vehicle means a vehicle that is owned and used by a business, corporation, association, partnership or sole proprietorship or any other entity conducting business for a commercial purpose. 
    Dump means to dump, throw, discard, place, deposit or dispose of. 
    Garbage is putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Law enforcement officer means any law enforcement officer of the city and any employee of the city's parks and recreation department designated by the department head as a litter enforcement officer. 
    Litter means garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined in this section and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this article, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    Motor vehicle means an automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, semi-trailer, truck tractor, or semi-trailer combination or any other vehicle that is powered by a motor. 
    Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the U.S. post office in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
    Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
    Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling house, building, or other structure. 
    Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Vessel means a boat, barge or airboat or any other vehicle used for transportation on water. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-17. - Dumping litter prohibited. 
    Unless otherwise authorized by law or permit it is unlawful for any person to dump litter in any manner or amount: 
(1)  In or on any public highway, road, street, alley or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or any other public lands, except in containers or areas lawfully provided therefor. When any litter is thrown or discarded from a motor vehicle, the operator or owner of the motor vehicle, or both, shall be deemed in violation of this section; 
(2)  In or on any freshwater lake, river, canal or stream or tidal or coastal water of the city, including canals. When any litter is thrown or discarded from a boat, the operator or owner of the boat, or both, shall be deemed in violation of this section; or 
(3)  In or on any private property unless prior consent of the owner has been given and unless such litter will not cause a public nuisance or be in violation of any state or local law, rule or regulation. 
Sec. 8-18. - Litter in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
Sec. 8-19. - Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
Sec. 8-20. - Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. 
    No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
Sec. 8-21. - Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
    No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying public places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
Sec. 8-22. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. 
    No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
Sec. 8-23. - Truck loads causing litter. 
    No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
Sec. 8-24. - Litter in parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided in this article. 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 13. 
Sec. 8-25. - Litter in lakes and fountains. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
Sec. 8-26. - Throwing or depositing handbills in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. 
Sec. 8-27. - Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on vehicles. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle without the prior express consent of the vehicle owner, and unless the handbill will not cause public nuisance or be in violation of the laws, rules or regulations. 
Sec. 8-28. - Exemption for mail and newspapers. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers as defined in section 8-16, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
Sec. 8-29. - Dropping litter from aircraft. 
    No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object. 
Sec. 8-30. - Posting notices prohibited. 
    No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
Sec. 8-31. - Litter on occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
Sec. 8-32. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
    The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
Sec. 8-33. - Litter on vacant lots. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
Sec. 8-34. - Clearing of litter from open private property by city. 
(a)  Notice of violation. The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property within the city or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to such owner at his last known address. 
(b)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within 72 hours after receipt of written notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section, or within ten days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the city code enforcement division because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or agent, the code enforcement officer is hereby authorized and empowered to initiate the city's payment for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the city. 
(c)  Charge included in tax bill. When the city has effected the removal of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner, and such charge shall be due and payable by such owner at the time of payment of such bill. 
(d)  Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within 90 days after the disposal of such litter, as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, then, and in that case, the code enforcement officer shall cause to be recorded in the public records of the county a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location of the property on which said work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. Such costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes, and further shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of five percent if such is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which such charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. 
Sec. 8-35. - Penalties; enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who dumps litter in violation of this article in an amount not exceeding 15 pounds in weight or 27 cubic feet in volume and not for commercial purposes is guilty of a noncriminal infraction, punishable by a civil penalty of $50.00. In addition, the court may require the violator to pick up litter or perform other labor commensurate with the offense committed. 
(b)  Any person who dumps litter in violation of this article in an amount exceeding 15 pounds in weight or 27 cubic feet in volume, but not exceeding 500 pounds in weight or 100 cubic feet in volume and not for commercial purposes, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082, F.S. § 775.083 or F.S. § 775.084. In addition, the court shall require the violator to pick up litter or perform other community service commensurate with the offense committed. Further, if the violation involves the use of a motor vehicle, upon a finding of guilt, whether or not adjudication is withheld or whether imposition of sentence is withheld, deferred or suspended, the court shall forward a record of the finding to the department of highway safety and motor vehicles, which shall record a penalty of three points on the violator's driver's license pursuant to the point system established by F.S. § 322.27. 
(c)  Any person who dumps litter in violation of subsection (b) in an amount exceeding 500 pounds in weight or 100 cubic feet in volume or in any quantity for commercial purposes or dumps litter which is a hazardous waste as defined in F.S. § 403.703 is guilty of a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or F.S. § 775.083. In addition, the court may order the violator to: 
(1)  Remove or render harmless the litter that he dumped in violation of this section; 
(2)  Repair or restore property damaged by, or pay damages for any damage arising out of, his dumping litter in violation of this section; or 
(3)  Perform public service relating to the removal of litter dumped in violation of this section or to the restoration of an area polluted by litter dumped in violation of this section. 
(d)  A court may enjoin a violation of this section. 
(e)  A motor vehicle, vessel, aircraft, container, crane, winch or machine used to dump litter that exceeds 500 pounds in weight or 100 cubic feet in volume is declared contraband and is subject to forfeiture in the same manner as provided in F.S. §§ 932.703 and 932.704. 
(f)  If a person sustains damages arising out of a violation of this section that is punishable as a felony, a court, in a civil action for such damages, shall order the person to pay the injured party threefold the actual damages or $200.00, whichever amount is greater. In addition, the court shall order the person to pay the injured party's court costs and attorney's fees. A final judgment rendered in a criminal proceeding against a defendant under this section estops the defendant from asserting any issue in a subsequent civil action under this paragraph which he would be estopped from asserting if such judgment were rendered in the civil action, unless the criminal judgment was based upon a plea of no contest or nolo contendere. 
(g)  For the purposes of this section, if a person dumps litter from a commercial vehicle, that person is presumed to have dumped the litter for commercial purposes. 
(h)  In the criminal trial of a person charged with violating this section, the city does not have the burden of proving that the person did not have the right or authority to dump the litter or that litter dumped on private property causes a public nuisance. The defendant has the burden of proving that he had authority to dump the litter and that the litter dumped does not cause a public nuisance. 
(i)  It shall be the duty of all law enforcement officers to enforce the provisions of this section. 
Chapter 9 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; minority employment and affordable housing opportunity plan, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Discrimination in the treatment of persons, F.S. ch. 760. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1-9-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING AND PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10. 
State Law reference- Fair Housing Act, F.S. § 760.20 et seq. 

Sec. 9-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission means the commission on human rights. 
    Discrimination or discriminatory housing practice means any difference in treatment based upon race, color, religion or national origin or any act that is unlawful under this article. 
    Financial institution includes any person, as defined herein, engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing losses. 
    Housing accommodation or dwelling means any building, mobile home or trailer, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, mobile home or trailer, structure or portion thereof or any real property as defined herein used or intended to be used for any of the purposes set forth in this subsection. 
    Mortgage broker means an individual who is engaged in or performs the business or services of a mortgage broker as the same are defined by Florida Statutes. 
    Open market means the market which is informed of the availability for sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, whether informed through a real estate broker or mortgage broker or by advertising by publication, signs or by any other advertising methods directed to the public or any portion thereof indicating that the property is available for sale, purchase, rental or lease. 
    Owner includes a lessee, sublessee, cotenant, assignee, managing agent or other person having the right to ownership or possession, or the right to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation. 
    Place of public accommodation, resort or amusement includes any place, store or other establishment, either licensed or unlicensed, which supplies goods or services to the general public or which solicits or accepts the patronage or trade of the general public or which is supported directly or indirectly by government funds except that: 
(1)  A private club is not a place of public accommodation, resort or amusement if its policies are determined by its members and its facilities or services are available only to its members and their bona fide guests; and 
(2)  Place of public accommodation, resort or amusement does not include beauty shops or barber shops nor a roominghouse or boardinghouse containing not more than four rooms for rent or hire and which is within a building occupied by the proprietor as his residence. 
    Real estate broker or real estate salesman includes any individual, qualified by law, who for a fee, commission, salary or for other valuable consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of receiving or collecting same, lists, sells, purchases, rents or leases any housing accommodations including options thereupon or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate such activities or who advertises or holds himself out as engaged in such activities or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan, secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance, upon transfer of any housing accommodation or who is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for collection of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he undertakes to promote the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation through its listing in a publication issued primarily for such purpose or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
    Real property includes buildings, structures, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives and condominiums. 
(Code 1957, § 6A-3) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-42. - Housing policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health and general welfare to assure equal opportunity to all persons to live in decent housing facilities regardless of race, color, religion or national origin and to that end to prohibit discrimination in housing by any person. 
(Code 1957, § 6A-1) 
Sec. 9-43. - Policy for places of public accommodation. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its police power for public safety, public health and general welfare to assure equal opportunity to all persons regardless of race, color, religion or national origin, to enjoy the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages and accommodations of a place of public accommodation, resort or amusement. 
(Code 1957, § 6A-2) 
Sec. 9-44. - Unlawful practices. 
(a)  In connection with any of the transactions set forth in this section which effect any housing accommodation on the open market or in connection with any public sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, it shall be unlawful within the city for a person, owner, financial institution, real estate broker or real estate salesman or any representative of the above, to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell, purchase, rent or lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold any housing accommodation from a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin or place of birth; 
(2)  Discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; 
(3)  Refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase, rent or lease any housing accommodation from or to a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin or place of birth; 
(4)  Refuse to negotiate for the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation to a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin or place of birth; 
(5)  Represent to a person that any housing accommodation is not available for inspection, sale, purchase, rental or lease when in fact it is so available or to refuse to permit a person to inspect any housing accommodation, because of his race, color, religion or national origin or place of birth; 
(6)  Make, publish, print, circulate, post or mail or cause to be made, published, printed, circulated, posted or mailed any notice, statement or advertisement or to announce a policy or to sign or to use a form of application for the sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing accommodation or to make a record of inquiry in connection with the prospective sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing accommodation, which indicates any discrimination or any intent to make a discrimination; 
(7)  Offer, solicit, accept or use a listing of any housing accommodation for sale, purchase, rental or lease with the understanding that a person may be subjected to discrimination in connection with such sale, purchase, rental or lease or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; 
(8)  Induce directly or indirectly or attempt to induce directly or indirectly the sale, purchase, rental or lease, or the listing for any of the above of any housing accommodation by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race, color, religion or national origin or place of birth in the area to be affected by such sale, purchase, rental or lease will or may result in either: 
a.  The lowering of property values in the area; 
b.  An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area; or 
c.  A decline in the quality of the schools serving the area; 
(9)  Make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale, purchase, rental or lease or the anticipated listing for any of the above or the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation in the city for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce any such listing or any of the above transactions; 
(10)  Engage in or hire to be done or to conspire with others to commit acts or activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause panic, incite unrest or create or play upon fear with the purpose of either discouraging or inducing or attempting to induce, the sale, purchase, rental or lease or the listing for any of the above of any housing accommodation; 
(11)  Retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person because he had opposed a practice declared unlawful by this article, or because he had filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, hearing or conference under this article; 
(12)  Aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the practices prohibited by this article or to obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this article or any order issued thereunder; 
(13)  Resist, prevent, impede or interfere with the commission or any of its members or representatives in the lawful performance of its or their duty under this article; 
(14)  By canvassing, commit any unlawful practices prohibited by this article; 
(15)  Otherwise deny to or withhold any housing accommodation from a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin or place of birth; 
(16)  For any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part, in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; or 
(17)  Deny any qualified person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, religion or national origin. 
(b)  It is an unlawful practice for a person to deny an individual the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages and accommodations of a place of public accommodation, resort or amusement as defined on the ground of race, color, religion or national origin. 
(Code 1957, § 6A-5) 
Sec. 9-45. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the rental or lease of any housing units in a housing accommodation which contains not more than four housing units, one or more of which is occupied as a residence by the owner or a member of his family. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operating, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of same religion or from giving preference to such persons unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin. 
(Code 1957, § 6A-6) 
Sec. 9-46. - Violations. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article or to fail to comply with any order of the commission. 
(Code 1957, § 6A-4) 
Chapter 10 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; charge for unpaid checks and drafts given in payment of obligations to the city, § 2-4; City of Riviera Beach Advertising and Industrial Promotion Committee created, § 2-61 et seq.; code enforcement, § 2-311 et seq.; adult entertainment code, ch. 2.5; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; restrictions on location of alcoholic beverage establishments, § 3-5; fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; health and sanitation, ch. 8; fair housing policies, § 9-41 et seq.; peddling foodstuffs, § 12-22; security and fire warning systems, ch. 17; burglar alarms, § 17-21 et seq.; fire alarm systems, § 17-51 et seq.; solid waste management, ch. 17.5; taxation, ch. 18; weekly reports required for bicycle vendors, § 19-167; vehicles for hire, ch. 21; certificate of public convenience, licenses and permits for vehicles for hire, § 21-41 et seq.; minority employment and affordable housing opportunity plan, ch. 26; signs, ch. 28; zoning, ch. 31; landscaping regulations, § 31-596 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public through the administration and regulation of businesses and professions. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-2. - Applicability. 
    Unless otherwise expressly exempted by law, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all businesses and professions within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-3. - Scope of chapter. 
    Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises or personal property than is imposed or required by existing provisions of laws and ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-4. - Compliance with chapter; business registration. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person(s) or entity directly or indirectly to conduct any business, profession or occupation or to use in connection therewith any vehicle, premises, machine or device, in whole or in part, for which a registration, license or permit is required by any law or ordinance of this city without a license or permit therefor being first procured and kept current and in effect at all times as required by this chapter or other laws or ordinances of the city. 
(1)  Occupational licenses shall be required for any person or entity who maintains a permanent business location or branch office or transacts business with sufficient nexus within the city jurisdiction for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession or occupation except, where exempted by law. 
(2)  Those businesses, occupations and professions exempted from occupational license shall obtain a business regulation registration for a fee of $25.00. Contractors who obtain a Palm Beach County county-wide license will continue to pay the $2.00 registration fee pursuant to the Special Act Chapter 70-858 Laws of Florida 6/14/70. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-5. - Occupational license tax. 
    Occupational license is a tax levy for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business profession or occupation within the jurisdiction of the city. Issuance of the occupational license receipt does not guarantee or certify the competence, legitimacy or quality of the licensee. The occupational license tax is not regulatory except where specified pursuant to F.S. ch. 205. The amount of the tax is designated by classification and schedule of fees in article V of this chapter. Possession of or issuance of a license does not permit a use normally not permitted or illegal by licensee or holder of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-6. - Administration. 
    The provision of this article shall be enforced by the code and licensing division of the department of community development and environmental control (CDEC). The CDEC director or his designees shall make all investigations reasonably necessary for the enforcement of this article. All police officers may also inspect or examine businesses located within the city to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-7. - Authority to inspect. 
    All persons authorized herein to inspect all licensees and businesses shall have the authority to enter, at all reasonable times, the following premises: 
(1)  Those for which a license is required. 
(2)  Those for which a license was issued and at the time of inspection are operating under such license. 
(3)  Those for which the license has been revoked or suspended. 
(4)  Persons inspecting licensees, their businesses or premises, as herein authorized, shall report all violations of this chapter or other laws and ordinances to the code administrator and shall submit such other reports as the code administrator may order. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-8. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Provisional order. When an inspector has reported the violation of this chapter or any law or ordinance, the code administrator shall issue to the violator a provisional order to comply. 
    The provisional order and all other notices issued in compliance herewith shall be in writing, shall be served upon violator and shall apprise respondent of his specific violations. In the absence of the person affected or local designated agent or employee, a copy of such notice shall be affixed to a structure on the premises. Depositing such notice in the U.S. mail shall constitute service thereof provided the mail is certified with return receipt. 
(b)  Police officers may enforce provisions of this chapter by filing a notice to appear in court to violators. 
(c)  Summary action. When the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee imposes immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare and upon the recommendation of the code administrator, the city inspectors and police officers shall have the authority to summarily order cessation of a business and to close a business and premises, suspending the license and business operation. A special hearing of the nuisance abatement board shall be held within 10 days after the city has acted summarily. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-9. - New businesses, location changes. 
    All new businesses and changes in location of existing businesses will require inspections by the fire department and building division upon payment of the required inspection fee, pursuant to section 22-33, schedule of permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-10. - Zoning approval. 
(a)  All applicants for license will require zoning approval for location prior to the processing of any license permit or registration. 
(b)  Any license issued prior to zoning approval will automatically be voided if business use on license is not permitted in the zoning district. The city will refund the license tax fee without any additional responsibility or liability on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-11. - Garage sales, yard sales and other permit required. 
    Residents of the city will be permitted the maximum of three garage sales a year with a permit. The first such sale in a residential district will be permitted each year without a fee. The second and third sale permit will have a $10.00 permit fee. Any nonpermitted sales will subject the violator with a first violation fine of $25.00 and a second violation and each violation thereafter a fine of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-12. - Special promotions and outdoor displays. 
(a)  Businesses located in the city will conduct all business inside the store or the building. All merchandise, promotional material and temporary signage will be displayed inside the business and not in the parking lot or outside grounds. Vehicle, heavy equipment and boat dealerships, marinas and boat yards shall be exempt from this provision. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, any business may have a special promotion or grand opening with a permit giving conditions and requirements. All permitted special promotions, sales and outside displays will be limited to a maximum of 14 days. 
A fee of $25.00 will be paid for each permit. Any such event held without a permit will result in a fine of $50.00 for the first violation and $100.00 for each subsequent violation. 
(c)  [Reserved.] 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95; Ord. No. 3059, § 3, 5-6-09) 
Sec. 10-13. - Going-out-of-business sales. 
    Any business located in the city must obtain a permit to have a going-out-of-business sale. The sale cannot be in duration longer than 30 days. All going-out-of-business sales must be an actual closure and the business will surrender its license to do business in the city to obtain the 30-day permit. The permit fee is $100.00. A fine for nonpermitted going-out-of-business sales is $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-14. - Temporary, illegal, nonpermitted signage. 
    All illegal signage located on public right-of-ways, public easements and public properties will be confiscated and disposed of by the city. Any signage on private property will be removed by the city, after warning, if such signage constitutes an immediate danger to health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-15. - Commercial property standards. 
    Commercial property licensed and located in the city will be maintained in good condition and repair. All commercial buildings and structures will receive routine maintenance to the exterior through necessary repairing of damaged exteriors and repainting of unpainted areas caused by weather, wear, chipping, cracking and chalking. The facades of all commercial structures will be maintained in a manner to preserve the esthetics quality and property values of the city. Any graffiti or spray paint type of vandalism will be removed or repainted within ten days of notice. All parking lots and landscaping will be maintained in accordance with applicable codes, including all right-of-ways and easements adjacent to commercial property. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Sec. 10-16. - Denial, revocation or suspension. 
(a)  A license or permit under this chapter may be denied or any license or permit other than an occupational license granted may be revoked or suspended by the city council after due notice and hearing, for any one of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the conduct of a business, occupation or profession. 
(3)  Any violation of this chapter or any rule or order made pursuant to this chapter or violation of the laws and ordinances of the city, county, state or United States. 
(4)  Conviction or admission of guilt, including a plea of nolo contendere, with the last ten years, to a crime against the laws of this state or any other state or of the United States which relates to pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers or which involves larceny, dealing in stolen property, receiving stolen property, burglary, embezzlement, obtaining property by false pretenses, possession of altered property, or any fraudulent or dishonest dealing or any felony drug offense. 
(5)  Conducting a business, occupation or profession licensed or permitted under this chapter in an unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, nuisance or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(6)  Committing a fraudulent act in connection with any purchase or sale, or engaging in any practice, purchase, or sale which is a violation of the law. 
(7)  Found guilty in a civil action of fraud, embezzlement, misrepresentation or deceit. 
(8)  Revocation, suspension or denial of a business or occupational registration, permit or license by any department or agency of the state, after notice had been given to applicant. 
(9)  Failure to pay occupational license tax or permit fees owed to the city, after notice had been given to applicant. 
(10)  Failure to obtain or renew a county license. 
(11)  Any licensee who fails or refuses to comply with the regulations and code of ordinances of the city or has been ruled by final order of the code enforcement board as a repeat offender pursuant to F.S. 162.06(3). 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation or suspension of a license shall be given in writing by the code administrator setting forth specifically the grounds therefor and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be delivered or mailed to the licensee at the licensee's place of business at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  In the event the city determines to deny, revoke or suspend a license, the city shall enter a written final order setting forth its findings and conclusions. Denial, revocation or suspension of the license of a licensee shall also constitute a denial, revocation or suspension of the license of such licensee's business associates. 
(Ord. No. 2681, § 1, 10-4-95) 
Secs. 10-17-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, adopted June 21, 2000, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 10-31-10-48, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 10-31. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "the City of Riviera Beach Cable Television Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined herein or in any franchise agreement that might be granted hereunder shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and as hereinafter amended (collectively the "Communications Act"), and, if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. 
    Access channel means any channel on a cable system set aside without charge by the franchisee for educational and/or local governmental use. 
    Affiliate means any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with a franchisee. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an application as defined herein. 
    Application means any proposal, submission or request to (1) construct and operate a cable television system within the city; (2) sell, assign or otherwise transfer a franchise or transfer control of the franchisee; (3) renew a franchise; (4) modify a franchise; or (5) seek any other relief from the city pursuant to this article, a franchise agreement, the Cable Communications Act, or other applicable law. An application includes an applicant's initial proposal, submission or request, as well as any and all subsequent amendments or supplements to the proposal and relevant correspondence, and all written and oral representation and/or made or provided by franchisee whether in writing, in a public hearing, or in any other type of communication between the franchisee and the city's officers, staff, agents and attorneys. 
    Basic cable service or basic service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals, and educational, or governmental access channels. 
    Communications Act or Cable Act means the Communications Act of 1934, and amendments thereto including, but not limited to Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as those Acts may hereinafter be amended. 
    Cable service means (a) the one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming service; or (ii) other programming service, and (b) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable system, cable television system, or system, means any facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city. Such term does not include (i) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; (iii) a facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., except that such facility will be considered a cable system to the extent it is used in the transmission of video programming, directly to subscribers unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on demand service; (iv) an open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996; and (v) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating as an electric utility system. The foregoing definition of "cable system" shall not be deemed to circumscribe the valid authority of the city to regulate the activities of any other communications system or provider of communications services including, but not limited to, telephony and open video systems. 
    City means the City of Riviera Beach, Florida, a municipal corporation of the State of Florida, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
    Control of a franchisee or applicant means possession of the ability to direct or cause the direction of the management or policies of a franchisee or applicant, or the operation of a franchisee's system, either directly or indirectly, whether through ownership of voting securities, by contract or understanding, or in any other manner. 
    Fair market value means the price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, or any successor governmental entity thereto. 
    Franchise means the right granted by the city to a franchisee in a franchise agreement to construct, maintain and operate a cable system to provide cable services under, on, and over streets, roads and any other public ways, rights-of-ways, or easements within all or specified areas of the city. The term does not include any license or permit that may be required by this article or other laws, ordinances or regulations of the city for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city or for disturbing or carrying out any work on any street. 
    Franchise agreement means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this article between the city and a franchise that sets forth the terms and conditions under which the franchise will be exercised. 
    Franchise area means the entire area within the legal boundaries of the city and such other areas as may hereinafter be annexed or incorporated by the city or, alternatively, that area designated in a franchise agreement. 
    Franchisee means any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article who has entered into a franchise agreement with the city. 
    Gross revenues means all revenues derived directly or indirectly by the cable operator, from or in direct or indirect connection with the provision of cable services. Gross revenues, in accordance with G.A.A.P., shall include but not be limited to monthly fees charged subscribers for any cable service, including but not limited to, basic, optional, premier, per-channel, or per-program service; installation, disconnection, reconnection or charge of service fees; wiring fees; leased channel fees; revenues from rental or sales of converters or other equipment local advertising revenues; revenues from program guides; revenues from home shopping channels and revenues from internet access and high speed data transmission provided through any portion of the cable system. This provision shall be read broadly to prevent the avoidance of franchise fees by a cable operator through arrangements with affiliates. Gross revenues shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the cable operator which are imposed directly on any subscriber or user by the state, or other governmental unit and which are collected by the cable operator on behalf of said governmental unit. 
    Institutional network means a voice, data and/or video communications system constructed, operated and/or maintained by the franchisee for the city, the transmissions on which are generally available only to, and intended to be sent and received by, persons other than cable subscribers generally. 
    Interconnection means the electronic connection of two or more cable systems for the purpose of sharing access channel programming or other signals. 
    Law means all duly enacted and applicable federal, state, county and city laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders. 
    Leased access channel means a channel designated in accordance with Section 612 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 532, for commercial use by persons unaffiliated with the franchisee. 
    Overbuild means a cable system constructed to serve subscribers in an area of the city actually served by an existing franchised cable system. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture, organization or legal entity of any kind, and any lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof, but shall not mean the city. 
    Service tier means a category of cable service provided by a franchisee and for which a separate charge is made by the franchisee. 
    State of the art shall mean that technology or those services made available on an operational, non-experimental basis by a multiple system operator to subscribers in any community in the State of Florida with a population equivalent to or smaller than that of the City of Riviera Beach. 
    Street or streets means the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, road, boulevard, concourse, driveway, freeway, thoroughfare, parkway, sidewalk, bridge, tunnel, park, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, court, lane, path, alley, way, drive, circle, easement, or any other public right-of-way or public place, including public utility easements dedicated for compatible uses, or any other property in which the city holds any kind of property interest or over which the city exercises any type of lawful control, including but not limited to any public right-of-way controlled by Palm Beach County of the State of Florida located within the territorial limits of the City of Riviera Beach, and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon, as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to construct and operate a cable system. 
    Subscriber means any person who lawfully receives cable service delivered over the cable system. 
    Subscriber base means the total number of residential and commercial subscribers within the city. For purposes of calculating subscribers served under bulk contracts, the franchisee shall count each subscriber served as one subscriber or shall use equivalency measures provided by applicable law. 
    System malfunction means any cable system equipment, facility or signal failure or malfunction that results in the loss of any audio or video service on one or more channels to one or more subscribers. A malfunction is major if it affects 50 or more subscribers. 
    Transfer of a franchise means any transaction in which (a) an ownership or other interest in a franchisee or its cable system is transferred from one person or group of persons to another person or group of persons so that control of a franchisee is transferred; or (b) the rights and/or obligations held by a franchisee under a franchise agreement are transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons. A transfer shall be considered "pro-forma" when it involves a transfer to a person, group of persons or business entity wholly owned by the franchisee and will not result in a change of control or ownership of the franchisee. 
    Two-way capability means the incorporation into a cable system of all appropriate design and engineering characteristics and features so that two-way transmission, including but not limited to, addressability, over the system can be implemented and activated. 
    Video channel or channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel, including the associated audio signal, as television channel is defined by the FCC by regulation or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-33. - Intent and purposes. 
(a)  It is the intent of the city and the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the grant of one or more franchises for the construction and operation of a cable system within the city; to provide for the regulation, to the extent provided for by law, of each cable system within the city in the public interest; to provide for the payment of fees and other valuable consideration by a franchisee to the city for the use of streets by its cable system; to promote the widespread availability of quality cable service to city residents and businesses, the city, and other public institutions; to encourage the development of cable and other communications technology and cable systems as a means of communication between and among members of the public, city businesses, the city, and other public institutions; to promote competitive cable rates and services; to promote the safe and efficient use of city streets; to enhance and maximize the communicative potential of streets used by cable systems; and to encourage the provision of a diversity of information sources to city residents, businesses, the community, the city, and other public institutions by cable technology. 
(b)  Recognizing the continuing development of communications technology and uses, it is the policy of the city to encourage experimentation and innovation in the development of cable system uses, services, programming and techniques that will be of general benefit to the community to the extent all such experiments and innovations are consistent with applicable laws. 
(c)  It is the intent and policy of the city to exercise the maximum authority permitted by law over public rights-of-way within the city. Therefore no person may construct or operate a cable system or any other communications or telecommunications transmission facility for the purpose of providing non-cable services including, but not limited to, open video systems and telephony service in the city without specific authorization from the city for such non-cable services unless otherwise expressly authorized by prevailing law. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-34. - Grant of authority; franchise. 
(a)  The city may grant one or more non-exclusive franchises in accordance with this article. 
(b)  No person may construct or operate a cable system or any other communications transmission facilities over, on, or under public streets in the city without a franchise granted by the city unless otherwise expressly authorized by applicable law, and no person may be granted a cable television franchise without having entered into a franchise agreement with the city pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Unless otherwise expressly authorized by applicable law, any franchise granted pursuant to this article is solely for the provision of cable service and shall not be construed to authorize the provision of telephone, non-cable video or other telecommunications service. However, any person including but not limited to a franchisee shall, unless otherwise prohibited by applicable law, submit an application to the city for the privilege of providing other telecommunications services including, but not limited to telephone service and/or non-cable video programming services. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-35. - Franchise characteristics. 
(a)  A franchise authorizes use of city streets for installing cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, underground conduit, ducts, conductors, amplifiers, vaults, and other facilities as necessary and pertinent to operate a cable television system within a specified area of the city, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize the franchisee to provide service to, or install cables, wires, lines, underground conduit, or any other equipment or facilities upon private property without owner consent (except for use of compatible easements pursuant to Section 621 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2)), or to use publicly or privately owned conduits without a separate agreement with the owners. 
(b)  A franchise is non-exclusive and will not expressly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems within the city, or affect the city's right to authorize use of city streets to other persons to operate cable systems or for other purposes as it determines appropriate. 
(c)  All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets, and the city reserves the right to reasonably designate where a franchisee's facilities are to be placed within the streets. 
(d)  A franchise shall be a privilege which is in the public trust and is personal to the original franchisee. No transfer of a franchise shall occur without the prior consent of the city and unless application is made by the franchisee, and city approval obtained, pursuant to section 10-38 hereof and the franchise agreement. 
(e)  A franchise granted to an applicant pursuant to this article to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system within the city, shall be deemed to constitute both a right and an obligation on the part of the franchisee to provide the services and facilities of a cable television system as required by the provisions of this article and the franchise. All provisions of the franchisee's application and all written and oral representations and or material provided by franchisee in its applications, public hearing, or in any correspondence by the city and franchisee or the franchisee and any other person shall be deemed to be material and made for the purpose of inducing the city to grant the franchise in the form accepted. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, in the event that franchisee, its parent, affiliate or subsidiary elects to offer to subscribers video programming services through any means or method not included within the definition of a cable system, including but not limited to an "open video system", franchisee shall remain subject to all terms and conditions of the cable television franchise granted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-36. - Franchisee subject to other laws; police power; no waiver. 
(a)  A franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and city laws. A franchisee shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the city, the eminent domain power of the city and any other powers granted the city by the Constitution of the State of Florida. 
(b)  Except as may be specifically provided in this article or under the terms of a franchise agreement and subject to the Communications Act, the failure of the city, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a right or to require compliance or performance under this article or a franchise agreement shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-37. - Interpretation of franchise terms. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all franchises granted on or after the effective date hereof, including awards of initial franchises, modifications, transfers or renewals of franchises. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to a franchise agreement as if fully set forth in the franchise agreement, and the express terms of this article will prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in a franchise agreement unless such franchise agreement expresses an explicit intent to waive a requirement of this article. 
(c)  This article is not intended to create private rights of a contractual nature enforceable against the city. 
(d)  Except as to matters which are governed by federal law or regulation, a franchise agreement will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-38. - Applications for grant, renewal, modification or transfer of franchises. 
(a)  A written application shall be filed with the city for (i) grant of an initial franchise; (ii) renewal of a franchise under either the formal or informal procedures in accordance with Section 626 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. 546; (iii) modification of a franchise agreement; (iv) a transfer of a franchise; or (v) any other relief from the city pursuant to this article or a franchise agreement. In the case of any application submitted pursuant to this section, except an application for an initial grant, the city manager may waive submission of certain information required herein, upon request of the franchisee. 
(b)  To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall be submitted together with five copies, and shall be accompanied by the required application filing fee as set forth in subsection (i) hereof, conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain all required information. All applications shall include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application. 
(c)  All applications accepted for filing shall be made available by the city for public inspection. Where said application contains information designated in writing by the applicant as proprietary, the city shall not make such information available to the public to the extent it is permitted to keep the information confidential pursuant to applicable law. 
(d)  An application for the grant of a new franchise may be filed pursuant to a request for proposals issued by the city or on an unsolicited basis. The city, upon receipt of an unsolicited application, may issue a request for proposals. If the city elects to issue a request for proposals upon receipt of an unsolicited application, the applicant may submit an amended application in response to the request for proposals, or may inform the city that its unsolicited application should be considered in response to the request for proposals, or may withdraw its unsolicited application. An application which does not conform to the requirements of a request for proposals may be considered non-responsive and denied on that basis. 
(e)  An application for the grant of an initial franchise shall contain, at minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant and identification of the ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and addresses of all persons with five percent or more ownership interest in the applicant, including the names and addresses of parents or subsidiaries holding such ownership interests directly or indirectly; the persons who control the applicant; all officers and directors of the applicant; and any other cable system ownership interest of each named person; 
(2)  An indication of whether the applicant, or any person controlling the applicant, or any officer, director or person with five percent or more ownership interest in the applicant, has been adjudged bankrupt, had a cable or telecommunications franchise or license revoked, or been found by any court or administrative agency to have violated a security or antitrust law, or to have committed a felony, or any crime involving moral turpitude; and, if so, identification of any such person and a full explanation of the circumstances; 
(3)  A demonstration of the applicant's technical, legal and financial ability to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification of key personnel; 
(4)  A statement prepared by a certified public accountant regarding the applicant's financial ability to complete the construction and operation of the cable system proposed; 
(5)  A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable system ownership, construction and operation, and identification of communities in which the applicant or any person controlling the applicant or having more than a five percent ownership interest in applicant has, or has had, a cable or telecommunications franchise or license or any interest therein; 
(6)  Identification of the area of the city to be served by the proposed cable system, including a description of the service area's boundaries; 
(7)  A description of the services and physical facilities proposed, including channel capacity, performance characteristics, headend, and access facilities; upon request, the applicant shall make information on technical design available for inspection; 
(8)  Where applicable, a description of the construction of the proposed system, including an estimate of plant mileage and its location, the proposed construction schedule, a description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and information on the availability of space in conduits including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities; 
(9)  If applicant is currently operating a cable system within the city, a description of the existing system and capacity and the operator's plans to upgrade the system; 
(10)  If applicant or applicant's parent, or any subsidiary or affiliate of applicant is currently operating a SMATV system or open video system within the city, a list of all such locations; 
(11)  For informational purposes, the proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each service tier, installation, converters, and other equipment or services, and the applicant's ownership interest in any proposed services including, but not limited to, program and data to be delivered over the cable system; 
(12)  A demonstration of how the applicant's proposal will reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including a description of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent community needs assessment conducted by or for the city; 
(13)  A description of any non-cable telecommunications services offered or proposed to be offered by the applicant or its parent, affiliate or subsidiary and franchisee's plan with respect to the availability of such services to subscribers in the city; 
(14)  Pro forma financial projections for the first five (5) years of the franchise term, including a statement of projected income, and a schedule of planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules; 
(15)  If an applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already served by an existing cable franchisee, the identification of the area where the overbuild would occur, the potential subscriber density in the area which would encompass the overbuild, and the ability of the streets to accommodate an additional system; 
(16)  Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article and information that the city may request of the applicant that is relevant to the city's consideration of the application; and 
(17)  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the proposal meets all federal and state law requirements. 
(f)  An application for modification of a franchise agreement shall include, at minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The specific modification requested; 
(2)  The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the financial impact on the applicant if the modification is approved or disapproved; 
(3)  A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the requested modification meets the standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 545; 
(4)  Any other information necessary for the city to make an informed determination on the application for modification; and 
(5)  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and certifying that the application is consistent with all federal and state law requirements. 
(g)  An application for renewal of a franchise shall comply with the requirements of section 10-54 hereof. 
(h)  An application for approval of a transfer of a franchise shall comply with the requirements of section 10-55 hereof. 
(i)  To be acceptable for filing, an application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the following amount, as appropriate: 
(1)  For a new or initial franchise ..... $15,000.00 
(2)  For renewal of a franchise ..... $10,000.00 
(3)  For a transfer of a franchise (other than a pro forma transfer) ..... $5,000.00 
(4)  For a pro forma transfer of a franchise ..... $2,000.00 
(5)  For modification of a franchise agreement pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 545 ..... $2,000.00 
(6)  For any other relief ..... $1,000.00 
    The purpose of the filing fee is to defray a portion of the city's cost in processing an application. The filing fee is therefore intended to be a charge incidental to the awarding or enforcing of a franchise within the meaning of Section 622(g)(2)(D) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(D), and may not be deducted from the franchise fee imposed in a franchise agreement or passed through to subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-39. - Grant of franchises. 
(a)  The city may grant a cable franchise for a period not to exceed ten years to serve the city. 
(b)  In evaluating an application for a franchise, the city may consider, among other things, the following factors: the applicant's technical, financial, and legal qualifications to construct and operate the proposed system; the adequacy of the proposed construction arrangements, facilities, equipment, and services based on the public convenience, safety and welfare; the applicant's experience in constructing and operating cable systems and providing cable service in other communities, if any; the ability of city streets to accommodate the proposed system; the potential disruption to users of city streets and any resultant inconvenience to the public; and whether the proposal will meet reasonably anticipated community needs and serve the public interest. Evaluation by the city shall not be based on the content of the programming the applicant proposes to provide. 
(c)  The city may, and if required by applicable law shall, hold a public hearing to consider an application or applications. The applicant(s) shall be notified of the hearing no less than ten days in advance and shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Based upon the application(s), the testimony presented at the public hearing, any recommendations of the city manager or staff, and any other information relevant to the application(s), the city shall decide by resolution whether to grant or deny a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-40. - Commencement of service. 
    Upon the grant of a franchise: 
(1)  Prior to the date of the council's consideration of the grant of the franchise, the applicant shall file an acceptance of the franchise accompanied by any and all payments due. All bonds, certificates of insurance or other obligations as required in a franchise agreement shall be filed by the franchisee with the city within 45 calendar days from the date of the city resolution approving the franchise agreement. This period may be extended for good cause by the city manager. If the final executed acceptance is not filed with the city within 30 calendar days from the date of the city resolution, or if the period is not extended by the city, the franchise grant will be null and void without further action by the city. The city may, at its option, grant franchisee an extension not to exceed 30 days. The grant of such extension(s) will not confer on franchisee the right to an automatic acceptance, transfer, modification or renewal. 
(2)  Applications for the grant of an initial franchise, a renewed franchise, a franchise agreement modification, or a franchise transfer may be subject to a processing fee in addition to the filing fee in an amount not to exceed the reasonable and justifiable out-of-pocket costs to the extent that the filing fee does not cover the costs incurred by the city in considering the application, including consulting and legal costs. Prior to the date of consideration of the resolution approving or denying the franchise agreement or modification or transfer thereof by the city council, the city shall notify the franchisee of the estimated amount of any processing fee. Such fee shall be due and payable on the date of the grant of the franchise with 45 days of the grant, the city shall notify the franchise of any additional processing fees. If the remainder of processing fee is not paid to the city within 30 calendar days of the date of the city notice to the franchisee, any approval granted by said resolution will be null and void. This processing fee is therefore intended to be a charge incidental to the awarding or enforcing of a franchise within the meaning of Section 622(g)(2)(D) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(D), and may not be deducted from the franchise fee imposed in a franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-41. - Insurance; surety; indemnification. 
(a)  A franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain, throughout the entire term of the franchise including any renewals thereof, the following liability insurance coverage insuring the city and the franchisee: worker's compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all requirements of Florida Law and comprehensive general liability insurance with contractual coverage with respect to the construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system, and the conduct of franchisee's business in the city, in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit including, for bodily injury or death, broad form property damage liability, and infringement of copyrights. 
(b)  All insurance policies shall be qualified to do business in the State of Florida; shall be with companies with a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition; and in a form approved by the city manager or designee. The city may require coverage and amounts in excess of the above minimums where necessary to reflect changing liability exposure and limits or where required by law. 
(c)  A franchisee shall keep on file with the city certificates of insurance evidencing payment of the required premiums and evidencing that the city, its officers, boards, council, commissioners, agents and employees are listed as additional insureds. Upon reasonable notice and request, franchisee shall make all insurance policies available for city inspection. 
(d)  All insurance policies shall name the city, its officers, boards, council, commissioners, agents and employees, as additional insureds and shall further provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless 30 days prior written notice thereof has been given to the city. A franchisee shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of proof that the franchisee has obtained alternative insurance satisfactory to the city which complies with this article. 
(e)  A franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its officials, boards, council, commissioners, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses arising out of the willful or negligent acts or omissions of the franchisee or its officers, agents, employees or contractors relating to construction, maintenance or operation of its cable system, the conduct of franchisee's business in the city, provided, however, that franchisee's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the misconduct or gross negligence of the city, its officials, boards, commissioners, agents or employees. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the city's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings; and claims arising out of copyright infringements or a failure by the franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or providers of programs to be delivered by the cable system, claims arising out of Section 638 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. 558, and claims against the franchisee for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trade mark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and obtaining indemnification of the reasonable costs associated therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-42. - Security fund. 
(a)  Prior to a franchise becoming effective, the city shall require a franchisee to post with the city a cash security deposit to be used as a security fund to ensure the franchisee's faithful performance of and compliance with all provisions of this article, the franchise agreement, and other applicable law, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of the city, and the payment by the franchisee of any claims, liens, fees, or taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system. The amount of the security fund shall be the amount that the city determines, under circumstances existing at the time, that is necessary to protect the public, to provide adequate incentive to the franchisee to comply with this article and the franchise agreement, and to enable the city to effectively enforce compliance therewith. The franchise agreement shall provide for the procedures to be followed with respect to the security fund. 
(b)  In any franchise agreement entered into pursuant to this article the city may agree that a franchisee may, in lieu of the security fund, file and maintain with the city a bond with an acceptable surety in an amount sufficient to indemnify the city against any losses it may suffer in the event the franchisee fails to comply with one or more of the provisions of its franchise. Said bond shall be obtained at the sole expense of the franchisee and remain in effect for the full term of the franchise plus at minimum an additional six months thereafter. The franchisee and its surety shall be jointly and severally liable under the terms of the bond for any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result of the franchisee's nonperformance, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal of any property of the franchisee in the event of default, a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. The bond shall provide for 30 days prior written notice to the city of any intention on the part of the franchisee to cancel, fail to renew, or otherwise materially alter its terms. Neither the filing of an indemnity bond with city, nor the receipt of any damages recovered by the city thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the franchisee or limit the liability of the franchisee under the terms of its franchise for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(c)  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund or an indemnity bond are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this article or authorized by other law or the franchise agreement, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund or indemnity bond will affect any other right the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-43. - Construction bond. 
(a)  Prior to any cable system construction, upgrade, or other work in the street, a franchisee shall establish in the city's favor a construction bond in an amount specified in the franchise agreement or other authorization as necessary to ensure the franchisee's faithful performance of the construction, upgrade, or other work, and restoration of any property distributed by such work. 
(b)  In the event a franchisee subject to such a construction bond fails to complete the cable system construction, upgrade or other work in the streets in a safe, timely and competent manner in accord with the provisions of the franchise agreement, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee, or the cost of completing or repairing the system construction, upgrade or other work in the streets, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. The city may also recover against the security fund any amount recoverable but exceeding that available under the bond. 
(c)  Twelve months from the date of completion and activation of the system construction, upgrade or other work in the streets and payment of all construction obligations of the cable system to the satisfaction of the city, the city shall eliminate the bond. However, the city may subsequently require a new bond or an increase in the amount of the existing bond for any subsequent construction, upgrade or other work in the streets. 
(d)  The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition; shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney; and shall contain the following endorsement: 
"This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until 60 days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(e)  The rights reserved by the city with respect to any construction bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the city may have under this article, the franchise agreement, or at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-44. - Minimum facilities and services. 
(a)  The following minimum requirements for facilities and services apply to all franchises granted by the city. The city may require in a franchise agreement that a franchisee exceed these minimum requirements where it determines, under circumstances existing at the time of the application, that the additional requirements are necessary to meet the city's future cable related needs and interests or to serve the public interest. 
(1)  Any cable system constructed, upgraded, reconstructed, or rebuilt after the effective date of this article shall have a minimum capacity of 750 MHZ or the equivalent thereof providing no less than 78 video channels available for immediate or potential use. A franchise agreement may provide for a larger minimum channel capacity requirement. 
(2)  The city may require in a franchise agreement that a franchisee provide access channels, facilities and other support for public, educational and/or governmental use, including but not limited to an access channel dedicated to the city and, provision of an institutional network for the use of the city. 
(3)  The city may require any cable system operating pursuant to a franchise granted, renewed, modified, or transferred on or after the effective date hereof, to cablecast city council meetings live to all subscribers. 
(4)  A cable system shall provide leased access channels as required by federal law. 
(5)  A franchisee shall provide no less than one service outlet and one on-line access connection to all city buildings and all public and private schools within its franchise area at no cost to the city or school involved, and shall charge not more than its time and material costs for any additional service outlets or equipment provided to such facilities. Where available monthly education guides shall be provided at no cost to all connected schools. 
(6)  The system shall be installed and operated with an emergency alert system in the City of Riviera Beach in compliance with the rules of the Federal Communications Commission; provided, however, that, notwithstanding any such FCC rules, the system shall be configured such that in the event of a local emergency as reasonably determined by the City of Riviera Beach, Palm Beach County, and to the extent permitted by FCC regulations, audio and video signals distributed over the system for the delivery of appropriate signals necessitated by such emergency. Palm Beach County and the franchisee has negotiated procedures, which govern activation of the emergency alert system. In the event of an emergency, however, the city or Palm Beach County may take such actions, as it deems necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city or Palm Beach County. 
(7)  A franchisee shall provide to its subscribers information regarding the availability of equipment capable of decoding closed circuit captioning information for the hearing impaired. 
(8)  Standard installation shall consist of a drop, not exceeding 125 feet from the cable plant to the nearest part of a subscriber's residence. Residential drops in excess of 125 feet may be charged according to the franchisee's rate schedule. 
(b)  Except for cable systems in operation on the effective date hereof a franchise agreement shall require that a franchisee make cable service available to every dwelling within the City of Riviera Beach. 
(c)  In the event a franchisee lawfully operating in a franchise area that is less than the entire city desires to provide service to an area of the city already being served by a franchised cable operator, then the franchisee wishing to expand service shall agree to construct and operate its system on terms no more favorable and no less burdensome than those pursuant to which the existing operator is subject. 
(d)  Upon request of the city, a franchisee shall interconnect its system to any or all other cable systems operating within the city. Where technically and economically feasible a franchisee shall interconnect with systems in any adjacent community for the purpose of transmitting education and government programming. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, unless expressly provided otherwise in a franchise agreement, a franchisee shall at all times during the term of any franchise granted, modified, renewed or transferred pursuant to this article make available to subscribers in the city at minimum the level of quality, technology products and services made available by that franchisee or its affiliate to any other subscribers in the Palm Beach County, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-45. - Technical standards. 
(a)  Any cable system within the city shall at minimum satisfy the technical standards of the FCC or other applicable federal or state technical standards, including any such standards as hereinafter may be amended or adopted. Antennas, supporting structures, and outside plant used in the system shall be designed to comply with all generally accepted industry practices and standards and with all federal, state, county, city and/or utility laws, ordinances, rules and regulations now or hereafter enacted. 
(b)  All construction, installation and maintenance shall comply with the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electric Code, and all local codes, laws and accepted industry practices, and as hereinafter may be amended or changed. 
(c)  At the times required by FCC rules, or other applicable law the franchisee shall perform at its expense proof of performance tests designed to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article, the franchise agreement, and FCC requirements. The franchisee shall provide the proof of performance test results promptly to the city. The city, upon reasonable notice, shall have the right to inspect the cable system facilities during and after their construction to ensure compliance with the requirements of the franchise agreement, this article, and FCC standards. A franchisee has the right to be present at all such inspections. 
(d)  The franchisee shall provide the city ten (10) business days advance written notice when a proof of performance test required in subsections (c) above is scheduled so that the city may have an observer present. 
(e)  A franchisee shall not design, install or operate its facilities in a manner that will interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the facilities of any public utility, the cable system of another franchisee, or individual or master antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast signals. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-46. - Access channels and facilities. 
(a)  Applications for an initial franchise, renewal, modification or transfer may, and, at the city's request, shall include proposals for the provision of access channels and equipment and facilities and financial support relating to such channels and production of cable programming sufficient to meet community needs. 
(b)  Any franchisee shall, at minimum, make available to the city at no cost to the city one channel for the exclusive use of the City of Riviera Beach for education and/or government non-commercial programming as designated by the city. 
(c)  A franchisee granted an initial franchise, renewal, modification or transfer on or after the date hereof shall provide, at the request of the city, studio, facilities, equipment, technical services and financial support for production of live and video-taped municipal programs, including but not limited to, live cablecasting of city council meetings, as agreed in a franchise agreement. 
(d)  Applications for an initial grant, renewal or transfer franchise may and, at the city's request, shall include proposals for the provision of an institutional network interconnecting city, educational institutions, and/or other public facilities. 
(e)  A franchise agreement may allow franchisee to provide to the city financial support in lieu of some or all of the obligations imposed pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-47. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  A franchisee, as compensation for the privilege granted under a franchise pursuant to this article for the use of the city's streets to construct and operate a cable system, shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount up to a maximum of five percent of the franchisee's gross revenues derived from the operation of its cable system within the city during the term of its franchise. In the event the Communications Act or other applicable law is amended to permit the city to assess a franchise fee of a greater amount than that specified above, a franchisee shall pay the maximum amount permitted by such amendment to the Communications Act or other applicable law. However, the city council shall hold a public hearing to consider any such increase prior to requiring the franchisee to assess the greater amount. 
(b)  A franchisee shall pay the franchise fee due to the city on a quarterly basis. Payment for each quarter shall be made to the city not later than 45 calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter. 
(c)  A franchisee shall file with the city, within 60 days after the expiration of each calendar year or portion thereof during which its franchise is in force, a financial statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to calculate the franchise fee for the preceding year or portion thereof and a detailed explanation of the method of computation. The statement shall be certified by a duly authorized corporate officer. The franchisee will bear the cost of the preparation of such financial statements. 
(d)  Any acceptance by the city of any franchise fee payment shall not be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for additional sums payable. 
(e)  The franchise fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any other tax, fee or assessment. 
(f)  The city, or its representative, may from time to time but not more than once in any 12 month period, and upon reasonable notice, inspect, copy and audit any and all books and records of the franchisee relevant to the determination of gross revenues and the computation of franchise fees due, and may re-compute any amounts determined to be payable under the franchise. In the case of any franchise granted, renewed, modified or transferred on or after the effective date hereof the cost of the audit will be borne by the franchisee if, as a result of the audit, the city determines that the franchisee has underpaid the franchise fees owed in an amount equal to or exceeding four percent of the franchise fees actually paid. A franchisee shall make all books and records necessary to satisfactorily perform the audit readily available to auditors in Palm Beach County for inspection. Such information shall not be made available to the public pursuant to section 10-48(d). 
(g)  In the event that a franchise fee payment is not received by the city on or before the due date set forth in subsection (c) above, or is underpaid, any franchisee granted an initial franchise, renewal, modification or transfer on or after the date hereof will be charged interest from the due date at an interest rate equal to three percent above the interest rate for three-month Federal Treasury Bills at the most recent United States Treasury Department sale of such Treasury Bills occurring prior to the date of the due date of the franchise fee payment. In addition, the franchisee will pay a late charge of eighteen percent per annum of the amount of the unpaid or underpaid franchise fee payment, provided, however, that such rate does not exceed the maximum amount allowed under Florida Law. Any interest and/or late charges paid by franchisee is intended to be a charge incidental to the enforcing of a franchise within the meaning of Section 622(g)(2)(D) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. §542(g)(2)(D), and may not be deducted from the franchise fee imposed by this article or any franchise agreement. 
(h)  When a franchise terminates for whatever reason, the franchisee shall file with the city within 90 calendar days of the date it ceases operations in the city, a financial statement, audited by an independent certified public accountant and certified by the franchisee's chief or other duly authorized financial officer, showing the gross revenues received by the franchisee since the end of the previous fiscal year. Adjustments will be made at that time for franchise fees due to the date that the franchisee's operations ceased. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-48. - Reports and Records. 
(a)  Any franchisee granted an initial franchise, renewal, modification or transfer on or after the effective date of this article shall upon request of the city, within six months of the close of its fiscal year, provide the city an annual report that includes at minimum the following information: 
(1)  A summary of the previous year's activities in development of the system, including but not limited to, services initiated or discontinued, number of subscribers for each tier or type of service (including gains and losses), homes passed, and miles of cable distribution plant in service. The summary shall also include a comparison of any construction, including system upgrades, during the year with any projections previously provided to the city, as well as rate and charge increases and/or decreases for the previous fiscal year. 
(2)  Audited financial statements, including a statement of income, balance sheet, and a statement of sources and applications of funds. At minimum, corporate statements shall be audited by an independent certified public accountant and statements applicable to the local system shall be certified by the franchisee's chief financial officer or other duly authorized financial officer of the franchisee. The statement shall include notes that specify all significant accounting policies and practices upon which it is based. A comparative statement shall be provided comparing the current year with the previous year. Additionally, a franchisee shall file with the city a financial statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to calculate the franchise fee for the preceding year or portion thereof and a detailed explanation of the method of computation. 
(3)  (a) Full and complete plats, maps and records showing the exact locations of its facilities located within the public streets, ways and easements of the city; (b) a copy of updated plats, maps and records depicting the location of all cable plants, showing areas served and locations of all trunk lines and feeder lines in the city. When available, such maps will be provided to the city in digitized format at franchisee's expense. 
(4)  A summary of subscriber or resident complaints, identifying the number and nature of complaints and their disposition. Where complaints involve recurrent system problems, the nature of each problem and the corrective measures taken shall be identified. More detailed information concerning complaints shall be submitted upon request of the city. 
(5)  A summary of the number of outages, number of planned outages, number of outages during prime viewing hours (8:00 p.m. 11:00 p.m. daily), and number of outages by duration. 
(6)  Upon written request, if the franchisee is a corporation, a list of officers and members of the board of directors; the officers and members of the board of directors of any parent corporation; and if the franchisee or its parent corporation's stock or ownership interests are publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report. 
(7)  Upon written request, if the franchisee is a partnership, a list of the partners, including any limited partners, and their addresses; and if the general partner is a corporation, a list of officers and members of the board of directors or the corporate general partner, and the officers and directors of any parent corporation; and where the general partner or its parent corporation's ownership interests are publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report. 
(8)  Upon written request, a list of all persons holding five percent or more ownership interest in the franchisee and any parent corporation. 
(9)  A copy of the franchisee's rules and regulations applicable to subscribers of the cable system. 
(10)  Upon written request, franchisee shall permit the city manager or his designee to inspect records to determine the number of senior citizen, economically disadvantaged or handicapped subscribers receiving any rate discounts, the number of multiple dwelling buildings and units therein receiving any discount pursuant to section 10-51(a) hereof, and the amount of any such discounts for specific services if franchisee offers separate rates or discounts for those categories of subscribers and duration of any such contracts. 
(11)  A full schedule and description of services, service hours and location of the franchisee's customer service office or offices available to subscribers in the city, and a schedule of all rates, fees and charges for all services provided over the cable system. 
(b)  A franchisee shall provide the following documents to the city as received or filed, without regard to whether the documents are filed by the franchisee or an affiliate: 
(1)  Annual report of the franchisee or its parent or any affiliate of franchisee which controls franchisee and issues an annual report; 
(2)  Upon written request of the city, copyright filings reflecting the operation of the system; 
(3)  Upon written request of the city, FCC Forms 325, Annual Report of Cable Television Systems, and 395A, Cable Television Annual Employment Report, for the system, or their successor forms; 
(4)  Upon written request of the city, any filing made at the FCC or any state or federal agency regarding the franchisee's cable system, including proof-of-performance tests and radio frequency signal leakage tests. 
(5)  Any and all pleadings, petitions, applications, communications, reports and documents (collectively referred to as "filings") submitted by or on behalf of the franchisee or an affiliate to the FCC or any county, state or federal agency, court or regulatory city council which filings may impact the franchisee's operations within the city or that may impact the city's rights or obligations under this article or the franchise agreement issued pursuant to this article, and any and all responses, if any to the above mentioned filings. 
(6)  Any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy. 
(7)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the franchisee agrees to provide the city, within 30 days of filing or receipt of such, any document that may impact the construction, operation or maintenance of the franchisee's cable system. 
(c)  A franchisee shall within 15 days of receipt of a request from the city make a complete set of books and records available for inspection, copying and audit by the City in Palm Beach County, for purposes of ascertaining compliance with requirements of this article and the franchise agreement. 
(d)  Upon written request by the franchisee and to the extent allowed by applicable law, information of a proprietary nature submitted by the franchisee to the city pursuant to this article or a franchise agreement will not be made available for public inspection to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-49. - Customer service requirements. 
(a)  A franchisee shall maintain all parts of its system in good condition and in accordance with standards generally observed by the cable television industry. Sufficient employees shall be retained to provide safe, adequate, and prompt service for all of its customers and facilities. 
(b)  Business office. 
(1)  A franchisee shall maintain an office and service center located within the city or within five miles of the city limits to which subscribers may telephone without incurring added message units or toll charges. This business office shall be at minimum open from 8:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Saturday and at least one evening per week or such comparable hours as may be agreed with the city manager. Where a franchisee does not maintain an office within the city, franchisee shall maintain a payment location within the city where subscribers can make payments in person. This business office shall be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received by telephone 24 hours per day, seven days per week including holidays. The office shall be adequately equipped and staffed to enable subscribers to pay bills and to pick up and return all cable television customer premises equipment during office hours. 
(c)  Franchisee shall maintain a publicly listed local, toll-free telephone number and employ a sufficient number of telephone lines, personnel and answering equipment or service to allow reasonable access by subscribers and members of the public to contact the franchisee on a full-time basis, 24 hours per day, seven days per week including holidays. Knowledgeable, qualified franchisee representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries, Monday through Friday from 8:30 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.; and on Saturday from 8:30 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. With respect to those calls received during the hours which franchisee is not required to provide qualified franchisee representatives under this subsection, an answering machine or service capable of receiving and recording service complaints shall be employed. Franchisee shall comply with the telephone answer time standards set forth in subsection (d) below. 
(d)  Franchisee shall answer all customer service and repair telephone calls made under normal operating conditions within 30 seconds, including wait time and within an additional 30 seconds to transfer the call. Customers shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(e)  A franchisee shall employ and maintain sufficient qualified personnel and equipment to be available (i) to accept payments; (ii) to exchange or accept converters or other equipment; (iii) to initiate service installations, undertake normal repairs, and initiate action with respect to subscriber service complaints on Monday through Friday, from 8:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., and on Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m.; and (iv) to enable a service technician to respond to any service call received between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays, by the end of the next day, seven days a week including holidays. 
(f)  Franchisee must meet each of the following standards no less than 95 percent of the time under normal operating conditions as measured on a quarterly basis: 
(1)  Standard installation work shall be performed within seven calendar days after an order has been placed except in those instances where a subscriber specifically requests an installation date beyond the seven calendar day period. "Standard" installations are up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system. If scheduled installation is neither started nor completed as scheduled, the subscriber will be telephoned by an employee of the franchise the same day. Evening personnel shall also attempt to call subscribers at their homes between the hours of 5:30 and 8:00 p.m. If the call to the subscriber is not answered, an employee of the franchisee shall telephone the subscriber the next day; 
(2)  Franchisee will respond to service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. Other service problems will be responded to promptly and in no event later than 48 hours after the problem becomes known. All service interruptions, and service problems within the control of franchisee, will be corrected within 72 hours after receipt of a complaint; 
(3)  The appointment window alternatives made available for installations, service calls, repairs, and other installation activities will be either a specific time, a four-hour time block during normal business hours, or at the election and discretion of the subscriber, "all day"; 
(4)  Franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment; and 
(5)  If at any time an installer or technician is running more than 30 minutes late for a scheduled appointment, an attempt to contact the customer will be made and the appointment rescheduled as necessary at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
(g)  Subscribers who have experienced two missed installation or service appointments due to the fault of franchisee shall receive installation free of charge. If the installation was to have been provided free of charge or if the appointment was for service or repair, the subscriber shall receive a credit or cash refund of no less than twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(h)  Disconnection. 
(1)  Voluntary disconnection. 
a.  A subscriber may terminate service at any time. 
b.  A franchisee shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who so requests from the franchisee's cable system. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination of service may be required of subscribers by any franchisee. So long as the subscriber returns equipment within three business days of the disconnection, no charge may be imposed by any franchisee for such voluntary disconnection, or for any cable services delivered after the date of disconnect request. 
c.  A subscriber may be asked, but not required, to disconnect the franchisee's equipment and return it to the business office. 
d.  Any security deposit and/or other funds due the subscriber shall be refunded on disconnected accounts after the converter has been recovered by the franchisee. The refund process shall take a maximum of 30 days from the date disconnection was requested to the date the customer receives the refund. 
(2)  Involuntary disconnection. If a subscriber fails to pay a monthly subscriber or other fee or charge, the franchisee may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet; however, such disconnection shall not be effected until 45 days after the due date of the monthly subscriber fee or other charge, and ten days advance written notice of intent to disconnect to the subscriber in question. If the subscriber pays within 45 days of the due date and after notice of disconnection has been given, the franchisee shall not disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment by the subscriber in full of all proper fees or charges, including the payment of the reconnection charge, if any, the franchisee shall promptly reinstate service. 
(3)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the franchisee from removing its property from a subscriber's premises upon the termination of service consistent with applicable law. At the subscriber's request, a franchisee shall remove all of its facilities and equipment from the subscriber's premises within seven calendar days of the subscriber's request. Where removal is impractical, such as with buried cable or internal wiring, facilities and equipment may be disconnected and abandoned rather than removed, unless there is a written agreement stating otherwise, provided, however, that such agreement must be consistent with applicable law and FCC rules. 
(i)  Franchisee shall intentionally interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Franchisee shall use its best efforts to insure that such interruptions shall occur only during the hours of 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Franchisee shall maintain a written log for all intentional service interruptions. 
(j)  Franchisee shall promptly notify the city manager's office if a service interruption affects two hundred or more subscribers for a time period greater than four hours. 
(k)  Franchisee shall cause all its field employees to wear a picture identification badge indicating their employment by franchisee. This badge shall be clearly visible to the public. 
(l)  A franchisee shall develop written procedures for the investigation and resolution of all subscriber or city resident complaints, including, but not limited to, those regarding the quality of service and equipment malfunction, which procedures shall be subject to the review and approval by the city manager. A subscriber or city resident who has not been satisfied by following the franchisee's procedures may file a written complaint with the city manager, who will investigate the matter and, in consultation with the franchisee as appropriate, attempt to resolve the matter. A franchisee's good faith or lack thereof in attempting to resolve subscriber and resident complaints in a fair and equitable manner may be considered in connection with the franchisee's renewal application. Franchisee shall maintain a complete list of all complaints not resolved within seven days of receipt and the measures taken to resolve them. This list shall be compiled in a form to be approved by the city manager. It shall be compiled on at minimum, a quarterly basis. The list for each calendar month shall be supplied to the city manager no later than the 15th day of the next month. Franchisee shall also maintain a list of all complaints received, which list will be available to the city manager. 
(m)  Franchisee shall permit the city manager or designee to inspect and test the system's technical equipment and facilities upon reasonable notice. Any notice of not less than three business days shall be considered reasonable. 
(n)  Franchisee shall abide by the following requirements governing communications with customers, bills and refunds: 
(1)  Each franchisee shall provide to subscribers written information in each of the following areas at the time of installation, at least once annually, and at any future time upon request by the subscriber: 
a.  How to use the cable service; 
b.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
c.  The products and services offered; 
d.  Prices and service options; 
e.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; 
f.  The franchisee's procedures for the receipt and resolution of customer complaints, the franchisee's address and telephone number to which complaints may be reported, and the hours of operation; 
g.  The telephone number and address of the city's office and the county's office designated to handle cable television complaints and inquiries; 
h.  The availability of a "lock-out" device; 
i.  The availability of an input selector, or A/B switch, and identification of those local broadcast stations not carried on franchisee's system; and 
j.  The franchise's information collection and disclosure policies for the protection of a subscriber's privacy. 
(2)  In addition, each franchisee shall provide written notice in its monthly billing, at the request of the city manager, of any city meeting regarding requests or applications by the franchisee for renewal, transfer or modification of its license. Said notices shall be made at franchisee's expense and said expense shall not be considered part of the franchise fee assessed pursuant to this article and shall not be regarded as a franchise fee, as the term is defined in Section 622 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 542. 
(3)  Franchisee's bills will be clear, concise and understandable. 
(4)  Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than the earlier of 30 days or the customer's next billing cycle following the resolution of a refund request, or the return of the equipment supplied by the franchisee if service is terminated. 
(5)  Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(6)  A franchisee shall provide subscribers, the city manager, and the city council with at least 30 days advance written notice of any changes in rates, charges, channel lineup, or initiations or discontinuations or changes of service or services offered over the cable system. 
(o)  A franchisee shall, upon an affected subscriber's request, provide a pro-rated 24-hour credit to the subscriber's account for any period of four hours or more within a 24-hour period during which a subscriber experienced an outage of service or substantial impairment of service, whether due to a system malfunction or other cause. 
(p)  Billing. 
(1)  The franchisee's first billing statement after a new installation or service change shall be pro-rated as appropriate and shall reflect any security deposit. 
(2)  The franchisee's billing statement must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
(3)  The franchisee's billing statement must show a specific payment due date not earlier than 20 days after the date the statement is mailed. Any balance not received by the due date may be assessed a late charge consistent with applicable law. The late charge will appear on the following month's billing statement. 
a.  A franchisee may impose a monthly fee for any delinquent balance owed by subscribers of cable or related services, subject to the following: 
i.  At least ten days before the date the fee is imposed, the subscriber shall be given written notice on the bill or by separate notice, of (a) the number of days after which the fee will be imposed if the balance is not paid; and (b) the amount of the fee that will be imposed; and 
ii.  The fee for delinquent payment shall not exceed $5.00 per month, which is deemed reasonable to be imposed by the franchisee but in no event shall exceed eighteen percent per annum on the unpaid balance or the maximum amount of interest allowed by law, whichever is less. 
iii.  If a customer disputes a bill on or before the due date, the franchisee shall waive a late fee during the period until a final resolution of the dispute is agreed upon between the franchisee and the city. 
b.  Subscribers shall not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure by the franchisee, its employees, or contractors, including failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber, or failure to properly credit the subscriber for a payment timely made. 
(4)  The franchisee must notify the subscriber that he or she can remit payment in person at the franchisee's office in the city and inform the subscriber of the address of that office. 
(q)  Alteration of service. A franchisee may not substantially alter the service being provided to a subscriber (including by re-tiering, restructuring a tier or otherwise) without the express affirmative permission of such subscriber, unless it complies with this subsection. 
(1)  If a franchisee wishes to alter the service being provided to a subscriber (including by re-tiering, restructuring a tier or otherwise) in such a way that the subscriber will no longer be able to obtain the same package of services then the franchisee must provide the subscriber with 30 days' notice of such alteration, explain the substance and the full effect of the alteration, and provide the subscriber the right within the 60 day period following notice, to opt to receive any combination of services offered by the franchisee. 
(2)  Except as provided herein, no charge may be made for any service or product which the subscriber has not affirmatively indicated, in a manner separate and apart from payment of the regular monthly bill, that he or she wishes to receive. 
(r)  Franchisee shall certify in writing to the city as of January 1 of each year based upon internal due diligence by the franchisee that to the best of franchisee's knowledge it is in substantial compliance with the standards set forth in this section 10-49. Said certification to be made as of a date within 30 days of January 1st. At the request of the city, the franchisee shall submit such documentation, as may be required, to demonstrate franchisee's compliance with this section 10-49. This documentation shall be submitted within 30 days of the franchisee's receipt of the city's request. 
(s)  Responsibility for the administration of this article and any franchise granted hereunder and for the resolution of all complaints against a franchisee regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and related matters, including the authority to order refunds or fees is hereby delegated to the city manager, or his designee, who is empowered, among other things, to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy arising from operations of the franchisee, either on behalf of the city, the franchisee or any subscriber, in accordance with the best interests of the public. In cases where requests for service have been ignored or unfilled or for whatever reason are unsatisfactory, the city manager shall have the power to require the franchisee to provide service if in the opinion of the city manager such request for service is reasonable. Provided, that any person aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, including franchisee, may appeal the matter to the city council for hearing and determination. The city council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the city manager, and may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy arising from the operations of the franchisee under any franchise granted pursuant to this article. No adjustment, settlement, or compromise, whether instituted by the city manager or by the city council shall be contrary to the provisions of this article or any franchise agreement issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-50. - Subscriber privacy. 
    A franchisee shall at all times protect the privacy of all subscribers to the full extent required by Section 631 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551 and state law. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-51. - Discrimination prohibited. 
(a)  No franchisee may in its rates or charges, or in the availability of the services or facilities of its system, or in any other respect, make or grant undue preferences or advantages to any subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of subscribers or potential subscribers, nor subject any such persons or group of persons to any undue prejudice or any disadvantage, provided, however, that a franchisee may offer promotional or discount rates to certain, but not all, subscribers for a limited time without violating the provisions of this section 10-51. A franchisee shall not deny, delay, or otherwise burden service or discriminate against subscribers or users on the basis of age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, handicap, national origin, marital status, or political affiliation, except for discounts for senior citizens, the economically disadvantaged or handicapped that are applied in a uniform and consistent manner. A franchisee may also offer bulk discounts to multiple dwelling buildings to the extent such discounts are otherwise permissible by law. 
(b)  A franchisee shall not deny cable service to any potential subscriber because of the income of the residents of the area in which the subscriber resides. 
(c)  A franchisee shall not refuse to employ, nor discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, handicap, national origin, marital status, sexual orientation or political affiliation. The franchisee shall comply with federal, state and local laws and regulations governing equal employment opportunities, as the same may be from time to time amended. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-52. - Use of streets. 
(a)  Any pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved area taken up or any excavations made by a franchisee shall be done under the direction of the city under permits issued for work by the proper officials of the city or where necessary the county, and shall be done in such manner as to give the least inconvenience to the inhabitants of the city. A franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore any such pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved areas in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done, and shall also make and keep full and complete plats, maps and records showing the exact locations of its facilities located within the public streets, ways, and easements of the city. 
(b)  Except to the extent required by law, a franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove, any of its property when required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street construction, street resurfacing or widening, change of street grade, installation or sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of municipal or public utility improvements; provided, however, that the franchisee shall, in all such cases, have the privilege of abandoning any property in place. 
(c)  A franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting same, and the franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance, except in the case where the requesting person is the city, in which case no such payment shall be required. The franchisee shall be given not less than 14 calendar days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(d)  A franchisee shall have the authority to trim the trees or other natural growth upon and overhanging the streets so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, cables and other equipment of the franchisee, except that, at the option of the city, such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the franchisee. 
(e)  A franchisee shall use, with the owner's permission, existing underground conduits or overhead utility facilities whenever feasible. Copies of agreements for use of conduits or other facilities shall be filed with the city as required by the franchise agreement or upon city request. 
(f)  All wires, cable lines, and other transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be installed and located to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. The city may issue such rules and regulations concerning the installation and maintenance of a cable system installed in, on, or over the streets, as may be consistent with this article and the franchise agreement. 
(g)  All safety practices required by law shall be used during construction, maintenance and repair of a cable system. A franchisee shall not place facilities, equipment or fixtures where they will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer or other utility facilities, or obstruct or hinder in any manner the various utilities serving the residents of the city of their use of any street or any other public rights-of-way. 
(h)  A franchisee shall, at all times: 
(1)  Install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the city's building code and electrical safety ordinances and any other applicable building or electrical safety code, and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the city. 
(2)  Keep and maintain in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair, all structures, lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under, and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways or places of the city, wherever situated or located. 
(i)  On streets where electrical and telephone utility wiring is located underground, either at the time of initial construction of a cable system or at any time thereafter, a franchisee's cable shall also be located underground at the franchisee's expense. Between a street and a subscriber's residence, a franchisee's cable must be located underground if both electrical and telephone utility wiring are located underground. If either electric or telephone utility wiring is aerial, a franchisee may install aerial cable except where a property owner or resident requests underground installation and agrees to bear the additional cost of such installation over and above the cost of aerial installation. 
(j)  In the event the use of any part of a cable system is discontinued for any reason so as to result in franchisee's failure to provide service to any portion of its franchise area for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street without complying with the requirements of this article or a franchise agreement, or the franchise has been terminated, canceled or expired, the franchisee, within 30 days or such longer time period as may be determined by the city in its sole discretion after written notice by the city, shall commence removal from the streets of all such property as the city may require. 
(k)  The city may extend the time for the removal of franchisee's equipment and facilities for a period not to exceed 180 days, and thereafter such equipment and facilities may be deemed abandoned. 
(l)  In the event of such removal or abandonment, the franchisee shall restore the area to as good a condition as prior to such removal or abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-53. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity, the city may apply any one or combination of the following remedies in the event a franchisee violates this article, its franchise agreement or applicable local, state or federal law: 
(1)  Impose liquidated damages in an amount of not less than $300.00 per day or part thereof per violation, or as expressly provided below or in a franchise agreement. Payment of liquidated damages by the franchisee will not relieve the franchisee of its obligation to comply with the franchise agreement and the requirements of this article. 
a.  In the event of a material failure to complete the system construction or reconstruction, unless the council specifically approves the resulting delay or default by motion or resolution, due to the occurrence of conditions beyond the company's control, company shall pay $500.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, the deficiency continues. 
b.  In the event of a failure to provide upon written request, date, documents, reports, information, or to cooperate with the city during an application process or cable system review, company shall pay $100.00 per day, or part thereof, each violation occurs or continues. 
(2)  Revoke the franchise pursuant to the procedures specified in section 10-56 hereof. 
(3)  In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the city may seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Whenever the city finds that a franchisee granted a franchise pursuant to this article has allegedly violated one or more terms, conditions or provisions of a franchise, a written notice shall be given to franchisee. The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the alleged violation so as to afford franchisee an opportunity to remedy the violation. Franchisee shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to either correct the violation or diligently be acting toward correction of the problem. Franchisee may, within ten business days of receipt of notice, notify the city that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by franchisee to the city shall specify with particularly the matters disputed by franchisee and shall stay the running of the above-described time. 
(1)  The city shall hear the franchisees dispute at a regularly or specially scheduled meeting. Company shall have the right to subpoena and cross-examine witnesses. The city shall determine if franchisee has committed a violation and shall make written findings of fact relative to its determination. If a violation is found, company may petition for reconsideration. 
(2)  If after hearing the dispute the claim is upheld by the city, franchisee shall have ten business days from such a determination to remedy the violation or failure. 
(3)  In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the city shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the city determines are appropriate to the public interest. 
(4)  The time for franchisee to correct any alleged violation may be extended by the city if the necessary action to correct the alleged violation is of such a nature or character to require more than 30 days within which to perform provided franchisee commences the corrective action within the 30 day period and thereafter uses reasonable diligence to correct the violation. 
(c)  Failure of the city to enforce any requirements of a franchise agreement or this article shall not constitute a waiver of the city's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-54. - Renewal of franchise. 
    Renewal shall be conducted in a manner consistent with Section 626 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. 546. The following additional requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Upon completion of the review and evaluation process set forth in Section 626(a)(1)(2) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. 546, should that process be invoked, the city shall notify the franchisee that it may file a renewal application. The notice shall specify the information to be included in the renewal application and the deadline for filing the application, which shall be no earlier than 21 calendar days following the date of the notice. 
a.  The application shall comply with the requirements of section 10-38(a), (b), (c), (d), and (i) hereof and provide the specific information requested in the notice. If the franchisee does not submit a renewal application by the date specified in the city's notice to the franchisee given pursuant to this subsection, the franchisee will be deemed not to be seeking renewal of its franchise. 
b.  Upon receipt of the renewal application, the city shall publish notice of its receipt and make copies available to the public. The city, following prior public notice, may hold one or more public hearings on the renewal application. 
(2)  In the event a public hearing on the renewal application is held, or in the event that the city council considers the renewal application without a public hearing, the city council will either: 
a.  Pass a resolution agreeing to renew the franchise, subject to the negotiation of a franchise agreement satisfactory to the city and the franchisee; or 
b.  Pass a resolution that makes a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed. 
(3)  If a preliminary assessment is made that a franchise should not be renewed, at the request of the franchisee or on its own initiative, the city will commence a proceeding in accordance with Section 626(c) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. §546(c) to address the issues set forth in Section 626(c)(1)(A)-(D) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. §546(c)(1)(A)-(D). 
(4)  Any request to initiate a renewal process or proposal for renewal not submitted within the time period set forth in Section 626(a) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(a), shall be deemed an informal proposal for renewal and shall be governed in accordance with Section 626(h) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(h). The city may hold one or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on an informal proposal for renewal may be received. Following such public hearings or other procedures, the city council shall determine whether the franchise should be renewed and the terms and conditions of any renewal. 
(5)  If the city council grants a renewal application, the city and the franchisee shall agree on the terms of a franchise agreement, pursuant to the procedures specified in of this article, before such renewal becomes effective. 
(6)  If renewal of a franchise is lawfully denied, the city may acquire ownership of the cable system or effect a transfer of ownership of the system to another person upon approval of the city council. Any such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. 
(7)  If renewal of a franchise is lawfully denied and the city does not purchase the cable system or approve or effect a transfer of the cable system to another person, the city may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the former franchisee's expense. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the city may have the removal done at the former franchisee's and/or surety's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-55. - Transfers. 
(a)  No transfer of a franchise or any rights contained in a franchise agreement shall occur without prior approval of the city. 
(b)  An application for a transfer of a franchise shall meet the requirements of section 10-38 hereof, and provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including details on the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the transferee, and on the potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and service. Except in the case of a pro forma transfer, the application shall provide, at a minimum, the information required in subsections 10-38(e)(1)-(5) and (e)(14) with respect to the proposed transferee. The information required in subsections 10-38(e)(6)-(e)(13) shall also be provided whenever the proposed transferee expects material changes to occur in those areas. 
(c)  An application for approval of a pro forma transfer of a franchise shall be considered granted on the ninety-first calendar day following the filing of such application with the city unless, prior to that date, the city notifies the franchisee to the contrary. An application for approval of a pro forma transfer of a franchise shall clearly identify the application as such, describe the proposed transaction, and explain why the applicant believes the transfer is pro forma. Unless otherwise requested by the city within 30 calendar days of the filing of an application for a pro forma transfer, the applicant shall be required only to provide the information required in subsections 10-38(e)(1), (3) and (14) with respect to the proposed transferee. 
(d)  In making a determination on whether to grant an application for a transfer of a franchise, the city council shall consider the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the transferee to operate the system; whether the incumbent cable operator is in compliance with its franchise agreement and this article and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment to cure such noncompliance; and whether operation by the transferee would adversely affect cable services to subscribers, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest. 
(e)  No application for a transfer of a franchise shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this article and the franchise agreement, and that it will assume the obligations and liabilities of the previous franchisee under this article and the franchise agreement. 
(f)  Approval by the city of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city under this article or the franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-56. - Revocation or termination of franchise. 
(a)  A franchise may be revoked by the city council for a franchisee's failure to construct, operate or maintain the cable system as required by this article or the franchise agreement, or for any other material violation of this article or material breach of the franchise agreement. To invoke the provisions of this subsection (a), the city shall give the franchisee written notice, by certified mail at the last known address, that franchisee is in material violation of this article or in material breach of the franchise agreement and describing the nature of the alleged violation or breach. If within 30 calendar days following receipt of such written notice from the city to the franchisee, the franchisee has not cured such violation or breach, or has not commenced corrective action and such corrective action is not being actively and expeditiously pursued, the city may give written notice to the franchisee of its intent to revoke the franchise, stating its reasons. 
(b)  Prior to revoking a franchise under subsection (a) hereof, the city council shall hold a public hearing, upon 30 calendar days notice, at which time the franchisee and the public shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Following the public hearing the city council may determine whether to revoke the franchise based on the evidence presented at the hearing, and other evidence of record. If the city council determines to revoke a franchise, it shall issue a written decision setting forth the reasons for its decision. A copy of such decision shall be transmitted to the franchisee. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) hereof, any franchise may, at the option of the city following a public hearing before the city council, be revoked 120 calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding, unless within that 120 day period: 
(1)  Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or 
(2)  Such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise agreement and has executed an agreement, approved by a court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise agreement. 
(d)  In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment or property of a franchisee, the city may revoke the franchise, following a public hearing before the city council, by serving notice upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise will be revoked and will terminate 30 calendar days after serving such notice, unless: 
(1)  The city has approved the transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder; and 
(2)  The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the city to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and this article. 
(e)  If the city revokes a franchise, or if for any other reason a franchisee abandons the cable system, terminates or fails to operate or maintain service to its subscribers, the following procedures and rights are effective: 
(1)  The city may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the former franchisee's expense. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the city may have the removal done at the former franchisee's and/or surety's expense. 
(2)  The city, by resolution of the city council, may acquire ownership, or effect a transfer, of the cable system at an equitable price. 
(3)  If a cable system is abandoned by a franchisee, the city may sell, assign or transfer all or part of the assets of the system. 
(f)  Where the city has issued a franchise specifically conditioned in the franchise agreement upon the completion of construction, system upgrade or other specific obligation by a specified date, failure of the franchisee to complete such construction or upgrade, or to comply with such other specific obligation as required may result in the forfeiture of the franchise, unless the city, at its discretion and for good cause demonstrated by the franchisee, grants an extension of time. 
(g)  Except as provided in subsection (f), no adverse action against a franchisee may be taken by the city pursuant to this section except after a noticed public hearing at which the franchisee is given an opportunity to participate. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-57. - Continuity of service mandatory. 
(a)  It is the right of all subscribers to receive all available services from the franchisee as long as their financial and other obligations to the franchisee are satisfied. 
(b)  In the event of a termination or transfer of a franchise for whatever reason, the franchisee shall ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. The franchisee shall cooperate with the city to operate the system for a temporary period not to exceed one year following termination or transfer as necessary to maintain continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period the cable system shall be operated under such terms and conditions as the city and the franchisee may agree, or such other terms and conditions that will continue, to the extent possible, the same level of service to subscribers and that will provide reasonable compensation to the cable operator. 
(c)  In the event a franchisee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the city may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as the franchisee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city or until a permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for the franchisee, the franchisee shall reimburse the city for all costs or damages resulting from the franchisee's failure to perform that are in excess of the revenues from the system received by the city. Additionally, the franchisee will cooperate with the city to allow city employees and/or city agents free access to the franchisees' facilities and premises for purposes of continuing system operation. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-58. - Rates. 
(a)  At such time as federal and state law permit rate regulation, the city reserves all rights to implement and impose such regulation, and may do so by amendment to this article, by separate ordinance, by amendment to a franchise agreement, or in any other lawful manner. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the city from regulating rates for cable services to the full extent permitted by law. 
(c)  Should a franchisee desire to change any rate or charge, it shall comply with all laws with respect thereto. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a franchisee shall provide to the city manager notice of any and all changes to all subscriber rates no less than 30 days prior to the effective date of such change. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-59. - Performance evaluation. 
    The city may conduct periodic, but not more than once during any 12 month period unless for specific cause, performance evaluations of a franchisee as the city determines is necessary. A franchisee shall cooperate with these evaluations reasonably and in good faith. If the city implements a survey of cable subscribers in connection with a performance evaluation, the city may require a franchisee to distribute the city's questionnaire to its subscribers at the city's expense. Upon request and upon reimbursement of the city's copying costs, the franchisee may inspect or receive copies of all responses. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-60. - Administration. 
(a)  The city manager, either directly or through a duly appointed designee, shall have the responsibility for overseeing the day-to-day administration of this article and franchise agreements. The city manager shall be empowered to take all administrative actions on behalf of the city, except for those actions specified in this article that are reserved to the city council. The city manager may recommend that the council take certain actions with respect to the franchise. The city manager shall keep the city council apprised of developments in cable and provide the city council with assistance, advice and recommendations as appropriate. 
(b)  To the extent permitted by federal and state law, the city council shall have the sole authority to regulate rates for cable services, grant franchises, authorize the entering into of franchise agreements, modify franchise agreements, renew or deny renewal of franchises, revoke franchises, and authorize the transfer of a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-61. - Force majeure. 
    In the event a franchisee's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this article or the franchisee's franchise agreement is prevented by a cause or event not within the franchisee's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided, however, that franchisee uses all reasonable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this article and any franchise agreement granted or renewed hereunder, causes or events not within a franchisee's control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes, loss of utility service not as a result of any action or inaction by franchisee and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court (unless such order is procured at franchisee's behest). Causes or events within franchisee's control, and thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, franchisee's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of franchisee's directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-62. - Applicability. 
    This article shall be applicable to all cable franchises granted, renewed, modified or transferred after the effective date hereof, and shall apply to all cable franchises granted prior to the effective date of this article to the full extent permitted by state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-63. - Municipal cable system ownership authorized. 
(a)  To the full extent permitted by law, the city may acquire, construct, own, and/or operate a cable system. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit in any way the ability or authority of the city to acquire, construct, own, and/or operate a cable system to the full extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Sec. 10-64. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to amend this article as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers. 
(b)  Any such law amendments or additional regulations adopted by the city shall be incorporated into this article and complied with by all franchisees within 30 days of the date of adoption of such additional regulations. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to the extent permitted by law to exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire the property of the franchisee's cable system. 
(d)  The city shall at all times have the right, upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours, to examine and copy a franchisee's records and to inspect a franchisee's facilities to the extent needed to monitor a franchisee's compliance with and performance under this article and the franchisee's franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 10A, 6-21-00) 
Secs. 10-65-10-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NEWSRACKS 

Sec. 10-70. - Short title. 
    This ordinance shall be known and cited hereinafter as the "Newsrack Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2407, § 1, 1-4-89) 
Sec. 10-71. - Rules of construction. 
    For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise stated in this ordinance, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text herein. 
(1)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(4)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "maintained for" or "occupied for." 
(5)  The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated association or any other legal entity. 
(6)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(7)  The word "includes" shall limit a term to the specified example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(8)  The provisions of this ordinance shall be liberally construed. 
(Ord. No. 2407, § 1, 1-4-89) 
Sec. 10-72. - Definitions. 
    Advertising circular means any publication that contains only advertising and no news reports. 
    Bike path means that portion of a right-of-way improved, designed or ordinarily used for bicycle traffic. 
    Distributor means the person responsible for placing and maintaining the newsrack, the owner of the newsrack or the publisher of the newspaper placed therein. Pedestrian individuals who sell newspapers in, on or around the public right-of-ways shall not be considered to be distributors subject to this ordinance. 
    Median means the portion of a divided highway separating a traveled way for traffic and opposing directions. The median width is expressed as the dimensions between the through land edges and includes the shoulders, if any. 
    Newsrack means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser located, placed, installed, used or maintained for the display, sale or distribution of newspapers or other news periodicals or advertising circulars. 
    Right-of-way means that area dedicated to public use or otherwise owned by a public agency for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, swales, bike paths and sidewalks. 
    Roadway means that portion of the right-of-way improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Sidewalk means any surface within a right-of-way provided for the primary use of pedestrians. 
    Swale means any area within a right-of-way which is not either a bike path, sidewalk or roadway. The term shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2407, § 1, 1-4-89) 
Sec. 10-73. - Standards for maintenance and installation. 
    Newsracks shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  No newsrack shall be used for advertising or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold or distributed therein. Not more than one (1) advertising sign (not exceeding two feet by one foot) shall be placed on a newsrack. Provided, however, this subsection shall not limit the placement of the name of the newspaper or periodical distributed from the newsrack on any number of locations on the newsrack. 
(2)  Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. In good repair shall mean, at a minimum, that the newsrack operates as intended. 
(Ord. No. 2407, § 1, 1-4-89) 
Sec. 10-74. - Standards for location and placement. 
(a)  It is the intent of this ordinance to prohibit the placement of newsracks that obstruct or interfere with the safe placement of newsracks that obstruct or interfere with the safe and efficient movement of pedestrians, bicycles or vehicular traffic. 
(b)  The location or placement of newsracks, via a paved or stabilized area within the public right-of-way, can cause vehicles to interfere with or obstruct the usual safe flow of traffic or traffic blockage which should be, to the extent possible, discouraged. Therefore, whenever feasible, newsracks located within the public right-of-way shall be located such that the newsrack does not create a safety hazard for motor vehicles and shall be accessible via a paved or stabilized "pull-off area" so as to permit vehicles to safely exit from a traveled lane of traffic to the area within the right-of-way where the newsrack is located. 
(c)  No newsrack shall be used or maintained if it projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway, bike path or sidewalk or which rests, wholly or in part upon or over, any portion of any roadway or bike path. 
(d)  No newsrack or any portion thereof shall be permitted to rest onto, upon, in or over any swale, sidewalk, median, roadway or bike path when such installation, use or maintenance poses a threat to the safety of persons or property, or when such newsrack unreasonably obstructs the flow of pedestrian, bicycle or motorized vehicular traffic. 
(e)  No more than one newsrack containing the same issue or edition or the same publication shall be located within the same block or 300 feet, whichever is the lesser distance, on the same side of the street. Provided, however, a distributor may locate newsracks in excess of this limitation by demonstrating a public need for the excess newsracks. 
(1)  A public need may be established by the following method, but such method is not exclusive. After notice to the city manager, the distributor may monitor the sales activity of the newspaper at a particular location for a period of seven days. If during that one-week test period the distributor can demonstrate that the average circulation from that newsrack equals or exceeds 75 percent of the capacity of the newsrack, then a public need is established and an additional newsrack may be placed at that location. 
(2)  Provided, further, this limitation shall not apply on any site that is zoned or used for commercial uses. 
(3)  The provisions of this section shall not [apply to newsracks] containing two or more of the same issues or editions, but shall apply to the placement of new newsracks or the addition of issues or editions after the effective date of this ordinance. 
(f)  Any newsrack which, as used or maintained, presents a safety hazard to pedestrians, bicyclists or motorists because of the newsrack's location or proximity to swales, sidewalks, bike paths, medians or road right-of-ways shall be relocated within a reasonable time following notice by the city of the unsafe location of the newsrack to the distributor. 
(Ord. No. 2407, § 1, 1-4-89) 
Sec. 10-75. - Newsracks located on private property. 
    Any newsracks located totally on private property shall also be subject to and comply with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2407, § 1, 1-4-89) 
Sec. 10-76. - Abandonment. 
    In the event a newsrack remains empty for a period of 30 continuous days, it shall be deemed abandoned and may be treated in the manner as provided in this ordinance for newly placed newsracks in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2407, § 1, 1-4-89) 
Sec. 10-77. - Enforcement of newsrack violations. 
(a)  Upon the determination by the chief of police, the city engineer and the city manager that a newsrack has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this ordinance, a notice of violation pursuant to the city's code enforcement board ordinance (codified as article VI of chapter 2 of this Code) may be issued to the distributor of the newsrack by a city code inspector. In addition, a copy of the notice may be posted on the offending newsrack. 
(b)  If a distributor has been found in violation of this ordinance after a duly conducted hearing of the city's code enforcement board, failure to properly correct the offending condition within the time prescribed by the code enforcement board shall entitle the city to remove the offending newsrack in addition to any fines the code enforcement board may have imposed upon the newsrack distributor or landowner of the land on which the offending newsrack is placed. Any newsrack removed herein shall be stored by the city at the distributor's expense for a period of 90 days. The newsrack shall be released to the distributor upon a proper showing of ownership and payment of all storage charges. In the event the newsrack is not claimed within the 90-day period, the newsrack may be sold at public auction and the proceeds applied first to storage charges, then toward any fines which have accumulated against the distributor pursuant to an order of the code enforcement board. At least ten days prior to the auction the city clerk shall publish a description of the newsrack, the location from which it was removed and a notice of the auction in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and shall provide the distributor, if it has been identified on the newsrack or if otherwise known, with written notice of the auction by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  In the event a newsrack distributor appeals the decision of the code enforcement board pursuant to the provisions of section 2-337, the removal of the newsrack shall be stayed pending final disposition of the appeal, if any, to the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 2407, § 1, 1-4-89) 
Secs. 10-78-10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL EVENTS, PUBLIC FAIRS, PARADES, EXPOSITIONS, CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND EXHIBITIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-91. - Definitions. 
    As used in this ordinance the term: 
    Applicant means any person, group or entity that applies for approval to conduct, perform or participate in a special event, public fair, exposition, circus, carnival, exhibition or parade. 
    Approval means a process of meeting the requirements of this ordinance as outlined providing for the health, safety and well-being of the citizens of Riviera Beach. 
    Event means any activity which occurs in the City of Riviera Beach involving the open participation, attendance and involvement of persons and which is not normal to any licensed or regular routine business or private activities. This includes, but is not limited to, special events, public fairs, parades, expositions, circuses, carnivals and exhibitions. Any business activity which by such conduct may create infringement or impacts upon adjacent businesses or properties or excessive demands and uses of services of the city may be declared an "event" subject to the requirements of this ordinance. Residential yard or garage sales are not considered "events" for purposes of this ordinance. 
    City means the jurisdiction and boundaries of the City of Riviera Beach. 
    City manager means the chief executive official of the city responsible to the council. 
    Council means the elected governing body of the city. 
    Vendors means every person, entity or organization engaged in the business of carnivals, traveling shows, exhibitions, concessions involved in sales of merchandise, food, services or trade of any kind. Vendors include all organizations, individuals and entities whether profit or nonprofit. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89) 
Secs. 10-92-10-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 10-111. - Permit from city required. 
    No event may be conducted in the city without a permit. Such permit shall be issued in the following manner: 
The applicant shall present the city manager a written request for the permit at least 30 days prior to the event. The request shall be accompanied by a fee of $50.00 for processing such permit and making any required investigation. These fees collected herewith shall be deposited in a special fund account known as "special events fund." This permit fee may be waivered when the event is co-sponsored by the city. An applicant must meet all requirements of this ordinance prior to issuance of a permit. All permits will require final approval by majority vote of the council. Upon approval by city council, a permit for the event shall be issued by the code enforcement division. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-112. - Application for permit. 
    The application for permit will be submitted 30 days prior to the event. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected any temporary structure without obtaining a permit. No event will take place in the city without a permit. The application will be in writing outlining the following information: 
(1)  Dates of the event. 
(2)  Planned location of event. 
(3)  Routes requested if a parade. 
(4)  Types of construction of structures used. 
(5)  Seating capacity. 
(6)  Location of any electrical wiring. 
(7)  Structural details and calculations of seats and supports. 
(8)  Location of all exits. 
(9)  Toilet facilities and locations. 
(10)  Trash receptacles and locations. 
(11)  Parking facilities. 
(12)  Security for the event. 
(13)  Crowd control; parades number and location of parade marshals. 
(14)  Location of fire equipment. 
(15)  Location of first aid station and medical assistance; ambulance standby service. 
(16)  List of employees, vendors and participants. 
(17)  Any information pertinent to public health, safety and welfare. 
(18)  Insurance coverages: 
a.  Liability insurance. 
b.  Cleanup and damage bond. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-113. - Public liability insurance required. 
(a)  Amount; types of coverage. The applicant for a permit under this ordinance shall furnish a certificate of insurance, naming the city as "additional insured," of a comprehensive general liability and/or public liability policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Florida. The limits of insurance should be at least $1,000,000.00 combined single limit (CSL) for injuries to any person, persons or property resulting from any one accident. On occasions, additional insurance coverages might be requested, such as products liability, builders' risk, automobile liability, sports accident, workers' compensation, etc. For some events with high potential for serious losses or accidents, a hold harmless agreement might also be requested by the city. 
(b)  Duration of coverage. The required policy(ies) shall be in force and effect at the time such property and structure is to be used for any event in the city. The provision of policy(ies) shall extend from the time of permit until time of evacuation of site. 
(c)  Cancellation, change in policy; notification. Should any of the required policies and/or coverages be cancelled before the expiration date thereof, the insurance carrier issuing the policy is required to notify the named insured with ten days' written notice of any cancellation and/or change in the policy. 
(d)  Denial or cancellation of permit. Any applicant for a permit or permit holder for an event without the specified insurance coverages and limits as required will be denied a permit or will have the permit cancelled if one was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-114. - Cash or surety bond. 
    The applicant for a permit under this article shall deposit with the city clerk a cash or surety bond, which shall have as surety thereon a surety company authorized to do business in this state in the sum of $5,000.00, conditional upon saving the city harmless from all liability or causes of action which might arise by virtue of granting of a permit to the applicant and conditioned further that no damage will be done to the streets, sewers, trees or adjoining property and that no paper, dirt, litter or other debris will be permitted to remain upon the streets or upon any private property by such applicant. Such cash or surety bond will be returned to the applicant upon certification by an agent of the city that all conditions of this article have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-115. - Fire department approval. 
    The chief of the fire department or his designated representative will determine applicant requirements for a permit for the requested event. These requirements will include but not be limited to necessary precautions to provide for health, safety and welfare of citizens: 
(1)  Location of structure. 
(2)  Maximum attendance. 
(3)  Equipment needed such as fire extinguisher or other equipment deemed necessary for fire protection. 
(4)  Deposits for any required city fire department services. 
(5)  Adequate aisles, seats and platform poles. 
(6)  Lighted and unobstructed passage ways. 
(7)  Rescue and ambulance service, first aid station. 
(8)  Sufficient No Smoking and Exit signs. 
(9)  Proper safeguarding of any use of flame or flammable materials and cleanup of any straw, dry grass or combustible trash from the structure or assembly areas. 
(10)  Review of any and all procedures plus any policies of applicant relative to the event. 
(11)  Inspection of any materials, canvas parts or other materials used in any event for structure, displays, floats or exhibitions. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-116. - Police department approval. 
    All permits must be approved by the chief of police or designated representative. The police department will determine the following impacts or requirements: 
(1)  Traffic impacts on the city. 
(2)  Increased police personnel demands. 
(3)  Security requirements for the event. 
(4)  Crowd control requirements. 
(5)  Any other requirements deemed necessary for the safety, health, welfare and good order of the city and its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-117. - Public works department review. 
    The director of public works will review all applications for special events determining the following impacts or needs: 
(1)  Any special equipment, bleachers, etc. 
(2)  Barricades for streets, crowd and traffic control. 
(3)  Any impacts on city right-of-ways. 
(4)  Any personnel requirements. 
(5)  Requirements for disposal of litter, trash and solid waste. 
(6)  Any other requirements for the event that may be necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-118. - Department of parks and recreation review. 
    Any application requesting use of a city park or property will be reviewed by the director of parks and recreation or a designated representative for any impact or requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-119. - The community development department. 
(a)  Building division. The building division will conduct any inspections and adopt rules and regulations under the authority of the building official. Any structures to be erected or used in connection with any event shall be inspected and approved by the building official or a designated representative. 
(b)  State inspector. Amusement devices and temporary structures must be inspected [for compliance with] state safety standards for operation of same by a state inspector prior to operation and issuance of permit. 
(c)  Code enforcement division. The code enforcement division will conduct any inspection or investigation to assure the protection of public health and promotion of safety and welfare. 
(1)  The code enforcement division will investigate all vendors in any event and license them accordingly. Any unlicensed vendor will be given a cease and desist order. Failure to comply with this order will result in police action. 
(2)  The code enforcement division shall issue the permit after approval by city council and compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89; Ord. No. 2812, § 1, 4-21-99) 
Sec. 10-120. - License fees and other fees. 
    All vendors not licensed by the city will be required to be licensed before conducting business in this city. License fees will be paid to the occupational license section pursuant to Ordinance No. 2088, which is not codified in the present code but is on file in the city clerk's office. Any permitted event can require registration fees to vendors, participants and exhibitors collected by the applicant. Any person not registered would be a trespasser and subject to trespassing laws and codes. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-121. - Mobile, itinerant and street vendors within one mile of event. 
    All participants in the events will be required to pay registration fees to said applicant obtaining a permit or cease any business in the area. Registration fees will be required of all vendors regardless of tax status, exempt or nonprofit. Failure to pay registration fees will result in a license fee of $500.00 per day. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-122. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  If the city building official or designated representative determines any structure of applicant's being used for permit location or premises where event is to be held, is being operated or maintained in violation of this Code or other ordinances and laws of the state or city, the permit may be revoked. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any use of such structure after revocation of permit. 
(c)  Any person whose permit has been revoked may appeal to this city's code enforcement board within five days after receipt of a notice of revocation for a hearing. The decision of the code enforcement board will be final. If no appeal is taken within five days, then action of the building official or city representative will be final. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 12-20-89) 
Secs. 10-123-10-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3050, § 2, adopted Sept. 17, 2008, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, §§ 10-131-10-154, pertained to occupational license taxes and derived from Ord. No. 2682, § 1, adopted Sept. 20, 1995; Ord. No. 2711, § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 1996; and Ord. No. 2945, § 1, adopted July 2, 2003. 

Sec. 10-131. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following terms and phrases shall have meanings ascribed to them in this article, except when context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business, profession and occupation do not include the customary religious, nonprofit charitable, and nonprofit educational institutions in the State of Florida which institutions are more particularly defined and limited as follows: 
(1)  Religious institutions means churches and ecclesiastical or denominational organizations or established physical places for worship in the State of Florida at which nonprofit religious services and activities are regularly conducted and carried on, also includes church cemeteries. 
(2)  Educational institutions means state tax supported or parochial, church and nonprofit private schools, colleges or universities conducting regular classes and courses of study required for accreditation by or membership in the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, the department of education, or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. Nonprofit libraries, art galleries and museums open to the public are defined as educational institutions and eligible for exemption. 
(3)  Charitable institutions means only nonprofit corporations operating physical facilities in this state at which are provided charitable services, a reasonable percentage of which are without cost to those unable to pay. 
    Classification means the method by which an occupation, business or group of businesses is identified by size, type or both. 
    Local business tax means the fees charged and the method by which the city grants the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession, or occupation within its jurisdiction. It does not mean any fees or licenses paid to any board, commission, or officer for permits, registration, examination, or inspection. Unless otherwise provided by law, these are deemed to be regulatory and in addition to, but not in lieu of, any local business tax imposed under the provisions of this Code. 
    Merchandise means any goods, wares, commodities, and items more specifically enumerated herein below, bought or sold in the usual course of business or trade. 
    Merchant means any person engaged in the business of selling merchandise at retail or wholesale. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, syndicate, or other group or combination acting as a unit, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, trustee, executor, administrator, receiver, or other fiduciary and includes the plural as well as the singular. 
    Receipt means the document that is issued by the city which bears the words "Local Business Tax Receipt" and evidences that the person in whose name the document is issued has complied with the provisions of this chapter relating to the business tax. The receipt does not regulate a business and does not guarantee the quality of the work of a business. 
    Retail merchant means any merchant who sells to the consumer or for any purpose other than resale, except sales to manufacturers and sales to the United States government, the state, or any political subdivision of either of them, shall be considered wholesale sales. 
    Sale means the transfer of ownership, title, or possession, transfer, exchange, or barter, whether conditional or otherwise, for a consideration. 
    Stock of merchandise means the full cash value of merchandise or goods on hand for the applicant's fiscal year, and not the amount of capital stock invested in the business. 
    Collector means the city officer designated by this article to collect the business tax. 
    Taxpayer means any person liable for taxes imposed under the provisions of this article; any agent required to file and pay taxes imposed hereunder and their heirs, successors, assignees and transferee of any such person or agent. 
    Wholesale merchant means any merchant who sells to another for the purpose of resale. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-132. - Business tax receipt required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to conduct any business, profession or occupation or to use in connection therewith any vehicle, premises, machine or device, in whole or in part, for which a business tax receipt or permit is required by any law or ordinance of this city without a business tax receipt or permit therefor being first procured and kept in effect at all times as required by this article or chapter or other laws or ordinances of the city. Such business tax receipts shall be required of: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within this city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within this jurisdiction. 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within this city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within this jurisdiction. 
(3)  Any person who does not qualify under subsection (1) or (2) and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce if the business tax receipt is not prohibited by Section 8 of Article 1 of the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-133. - Business tax levied; same to be on basis of one year. 
    A tax is hereby imposed upon every business engaged in or carried on either wholly or in part, within this city in respective amounts set forth in the classification and fee schedule. Every person, engaging in, carrying on, managing or practicing any business, profession or occupation; either wholly or in part within the jurisdiction of this city is hereby required to pay to the city a tax in the amount designated by classification and fee schedule. A business tax receipt is not valid for more than one year and all business tax receipts expire on September 30 of each year except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-134. - Duration and proration of business tax receipt; issuance of same. 
(a)  All business tax receipts shall be renewed by the city collector beginning July 1 of each year and are due and payable on or before September 30 of each year and expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax is due and payable on or before the first working day following September 30 
(b)  Any person who engages in or manages any business, occupation or profession without first obtaining a business tax receipt as required by this article is subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the tax due, in addition to other penalties provided by law or ordinance. 
(c)  Any person who engages in any business, occupation or profession covered by this article, who does not pay the required business tax within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due and who does not obtain the required business tax receipt is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorney's fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of up to $250.00 pursuant to F.S. 205.053(3). 
(d)  Business tax receipts that are not renewed when due and payable are delinquent and subject to delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October plus an additional five percent penalty for each subsequent month of delinquency until paid. However, the total delinquency may not exceed 25 percent of the business tax receipt for the delinquent establishment. All delinquent business tax receipts expire after January 31 and subject the delinquent person to additional penalties as provided in this article or other laws or ordinances. 
(e)  New business tax receipts issued between October 1 and April 1 shall require the full tax for any one year be paid. For each business tax receipt issued between April 1 and July 1, one-half of the full amount of tax for one year shall be paid. For each business tax receipt due between July 1 and September 30, one-fourth of the full amount of tax for one year shall be paid. 
(f)  The fact that the business tax receipt recipient has not received a bill or notice from the city for the license tax due shall not be defense in any prosecution for violation of this chapter or justification for waiver of any penalty, provided the city has mailed renewal notices on July 1 and September 1. 
(g)  Upon payment of such tax, the collector shall issue to the person paying same, a business tax receipt in which shall expire at the end of the period that such business tax receipt is issued as specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-135. - Transfer of business tax receipt. 
(a)  Any business tax receipt may be transferred to a new owner, when there is a bona fide sale of a business, upon payment of a transfer fee of $25.00 and evidence of sale. 
(b)  Upon written request and presentation of the original business tax receipt, any business tax receipt may be transferred from one location to another approved location in this city upon payment of a transfer fee of $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-136. - Taxation as to professions. 
    The business tax receipt provided in the business tax receipt schedule for professions such as architects, physicians, lawyers, real estate salesmen and similar professions shall be construed to mean that each individual shall pay the tax provided; whether practicing by individuality or in partnership or employed by another. Professional persons practicing in the employment of a government agency are exempt from this provision. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-137. - Affidavits as to the amount of stock in trade, number of units or other declaration. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of a business tax receipt fee applied for depends upon the amount of stock in trade carried or the number of units being used by a business tax receipt recipient or any other facts not within the personal knowledge of the collector, no business tax receipt shall be issued until the applicant, therefore, has made and filed with the collector an affidavit, duly authenticated, setting forth the amount of stock in trade, number of units or other facts which determines the business tax receipt fee. 
(b)  The collector may request an affidavit as to quantities or other information as may be required to accurately determine the correct tax. Any recipient shall be subject to perjury and false report ordinances and laws for filing fraudulent affidavits to avoid or understate taxes. 
(c)  Any business tax receipt issued upon any false statement made under oath on the application shall be considered as void from the beginning and shall not protect the holder thereof from prosecution for transacting business without a business tax receipt or during business with a greater stock in trade or number of units. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-138. - Evidence of engaging in business; prosecution and penalties. 
(a)  The fact that a person represents himself as being engaged in any business for which a business tax receipt is required for the transaction of business or the practice of a profession shall be evidence of the liability of such person to pay for a business tax receipt. Soliciting business, displaying a sign or advertising which indicates the conducting of a business or profession shall be sufficient evidence that such person is conducting a business and required to obtain a business tax receipt. Such person does not have to actually transact any business or practice a profession to be liable. Any person with a commercial listing in the telephone directory, city directory or cross reference directory shall be presumed to operate a business or profession and subject to acquiring a business tax receipt. 
(b)  In any prosecutions under this article, the fact that such person is open for business shall be prima facie evidence of engaging in such trade, business, profession or occupation and the burden shall be upon the defendant to refute the same. 
(c)  Each day or a part of a day that any provision of this chapter is in violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, for which such persons or their agents, servants or employees may be prosecuted. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-139. - Agents responsible for obtaining a business tax receipt. 
    The agents or other representatives of nonresidents who are doing business in the city shall be personally responsible for compliance with this article by their principals and of the business they represent. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-140. - Each location to have a separate business tax receipt. 
    If any person operates a business at more than one location, each location shall be considered a separate business and a separate business tax receipt is required for each location. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-141. - Tax for wholesale and retail merchant. 
    Any person who is both a wholesale and retail merchant as defined in the business tax receipt classification and fee schedule is hereby required to pay a business tax on both the wholesale and retail business. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-142. - Administration. 
    The provisions of this article shall be administered by the business tax receipt division of the department of community development. The director of community development or his designee shall perform the duties and functions of collector as stated in F.S. 213.053 and section 12-22 of the Florida Administrative Code. The designee under the supervision of director of community development shall: 
(1)  Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations necessary to the operation and enforcement of this article. 
(2)  Prepare all forms, certificates, decals and prescribe the information to be given therein as to character and other relevant matters for all necessary requirements. 
(3)  Require applicants to submit a completed and signed application with all affidavits and oaths necessary for the administration of this article. Each application will be submitted with payment of a $20.00 nonrefundable application fee. 
(4)  Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a business tax receipt, as prescribed by this article or other governing laws and ordinances. Obtain endorsements of other agencies which may have a regulatory interest in a particular business tax receipt. 
(5)  Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of their application in writing, with reasons for the denial of the business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-143. - Duplicate business tax receipt procedure. 
    A duplicate business tax receipt or special permit shall be issued by the collector to replace any business tax receipt previously issued which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed upon filing by recipient of an affidavit, sworn to before a notary public of Florida attesting to such fact. A fee of $5.00 will be assessed for replacing a business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-144. - Business tax receipts and insignia. 
    Every business tax receipt recipient under this article shall: 
(1)  Premises. 
a.  Post and maintain the business tax receipt at the location for which it is issued upon the premises in a prominent location to be seen by the public at all times. 
(2)  Vehicles. 
a.  Generally. Any general or special fees required for any kind of vehicle, for the privilege of being operated on public highways, by any statute, provision of this Code or other ordinance, shall not abrogate, limit or affect any further requirements of this article or other ordinances or laws for additional or separate business tax receipts, permits and insignia and fees for such vehicles or other uses, for and relating to the same in the business location 
b.  Motor vehicles. Affix any insignia for use in connection with a licensed motor vehicle inside the windshield or left windowing of the vehicle or as may be otherwise prescribed by the collector or by law. 
c.  Motorless vehicles. Affix any metal or durable type of insignia delivered for use in connection with a wagon or other type vehicle securely on the outside of vehicle in readily visible location. 
(3)  Persons. Carry such business tax receipt on their person when there is no physical business premises. 
(4)  Machine. Affix any city insignia delivered for use in connection therewith upon the outside of any coin vending or other business machine or device, so that it may be seen at all times. 
(5)  Inoperative business tax receipts, special permits and insignia. Any business tax receipt, special permit or insignia shall not remain posted, displayed or used after the period for which it was issued has expired, or when it has been suspended or revoked or for any other reason become ineffective. The business tax receipt recipient shall promptly return such inoperative business tax receipt, special permit or insignia to the collector. 
(6)  Unlawful possession. A business tax receipt recipient shall not loan, sell, give or assign to any other person or allow any other person to use or display or destroy, damage or remove, or have in their possession except as authorized by collector or by law, any business tax receipt or insignia which has been issued to such business tax receipt recipient. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-145. - General standards of conduct of business tax receipt recipients. 
    Every licensee under this chapter shall: 
(1)  Permit inspection. 
a.  Permit all reasonable inspections of businesses and examination of records necessary to establish business tax receipts by public authorities so authorized by law. 
b.  Comply with the governing laws, ordinances, statutes and regulations applicable to such authorized business. 
c.  Operate business or profession in such a manner not to create conditions that would affect the public health, safety, morals or welfare. 
d.  Cease business upon expiration of a business tax receipt. Businesses and professions will cease operating on premises or in this city after expiration of a business tax receipt, revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-146. - Requirement to report status of fictitious name registration. 
(a)  Applicant or new owner of business must present: 
(1)  A copy of applicants current fictitious name registration issued by the division of corporations of the department of state; or 
(2)  A written statement signed by applicant which sets forth reason applicant need not comply with the Fictitious Name Act. 
(b)  Any change in name will require a new fictitious name registration. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-147. - Requirement to exhibit state license or registration. 
    Any profession regulated by the department of business and professional regulation must exhibit an active state certificate, registration or license prior to issuance of a city business tax receipt. Thereafter, only persons applying for the first time for a local business tax receipt must exhibit such certification, registration or license. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-148. - Vending and amusement machines. 
    The business premises where a coin-operated or token-operated vending machine that dispenses products, merchandise or services or where an amusement or game machine is operated must assure that the required business tax receipt for the machine is secured. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-149. - Prerequisite for issuance of certain business tax receipts. 
(a)  Pharmacies and pharmacists. Pharmacies and pharmacists must exhibit a current permit issued by the board of pharmacy prior to issuance of a business tax receipt. 
(b)  Assisted living facilities. No business tax receipt may be issued until the applicant has been licensed by the department of health and rehabilitation services or the Agency for Health Care Administration to operate such facility at the specified location. 
(c)  Health studios or ballroom dance studios. No business tax receipt will be issued unless such business exhibits a current license, registration or letter of exemption from department of agriculture and consumer services. 
(d)  Household moving services. A business tax receipt may not be issued or renewed for the operation of a mover or moving broker under F.S. Ch. 507, unless the mover or broker exhibits a current registration from the department of agriculture and consumer services. 
(e)  Sellers of travel; consumer protection. No business tax receipt will be issued to engage in the business as a seller of travel pursuant to F.S. 559.927 unless such business exhibits a current registration or letter of exemption from the department of agriculture and consumer services. 
(f)  Pest control occupational license. No business tax receipt may be issued unless a current license has been procured from the department of agriculture and consumer services for each of its business locations in the city. 
(g)  Telemarketing businesses. A business tax receipt may not be issued for the operation of a telemarketing business unless such business exhibits a current license or registration from the department of agriculture and consumer services or a current affidavit of exemption. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-150. - Classifications and rate structure. 
    The business tax receipt classifications and fee schedule are adopted to levy business taxes for the privilege of engaging or managing any business, profession or occupation within the incorporated limits of the city. The schedule and fee structure, adopted on June 17, 2015, due to the length and context of the section, will not be codified, being placed on reserve at the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08; Ord. No. 4026, § 1, 8-7-13; Ord. No. 4064, § 1, 6-17-15) 
Sec. 10-151. - Exemptions from obtaining a business tax receipt. 
(a)  Exemption. 
(1)  Motor vehicles. Vehicles for the sale and delivery of wholesale or retail from a place of a licensed business will not have a separate business tax levy pursuant to F.S. 205.063. 
(b)  Farm agricultural, grove horticultural, floricultural, tropical piscicultural and tropical fish farm products; certain exemptions pursuant to F.S. 205.064. 
(c)  Nonresident persons regulated by the department of business and professional regulations exemption pursuant to F.S. 205.065. 
(d)  Exemption allowed certain disabled persons, the aged and windows with minor dependents pursuant to F.S. 205.162. 
(e)  Exemptions allowed disabled veterans of any war or their unremarried spouses pursuant to F.S. 205.171. 
(f)  Mobile home setup operations, local business tax receipt prohibited pursuant to F.S. 205.193. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-152. - Religious tenets; exemption. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to require a business tax receipt for practicing the legal tenets of any church. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-153. - Charitable organizations, etc., occasional sales, fundraising; exemption. 
    No business tax receipt shall be required of any charitable religious, fraternal, youth, civic, service or other such organization when the organization make occasional sales or engages in fundraising projects when the projects are performed exclusively by members thereof and when the proceeds derived from the activities are used exclusively in the charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic and service activities of the organization. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-154. - Termination of a business tax receipt upon bankruptcy. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling or sell, any goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property, advertised as or generally referred to as a bankrupt sale, wholesale's or manufacturer's closing out sale, or as goods damaged by fire, smoke, water, or other wise, before the person shall have filed an application with the city for a business tax receipt to conduct the business or make the sale. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-155. - Business tax receipt in lieu of occupational license. 
    The term "business tax receipt" as defined in this article shall replace and be used in lieu of the term "occupational license" wherever the term "occupational license" appears in this Code or any ordinance or resolution adopted by the city prior to the effective date of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Sec. 10-156. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article may be enforced through the city's code enforcement procedures and may be pursued by appropriate remedy in court at the city's discretion. 
(Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 9-17-08) 
Secs. 10-157-10-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLACEMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES FOR COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4087, § 2, adopted Sept. 27, 2016, amended former Art. VI, Divs. 1-4, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2897, § 1, adopted June 6, 2001. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-171. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "Regulations for use of Rights-of-Way by Communications Service Providers." 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-172. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent of the city to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the placement and maintenance of communications facilities and wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way within the city, adopting and administering reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with state and federal law, including F.S. §§ 337.29(3), 337.401, 362.01, as may be amended, the city's home-rule authority, and in accordance with the provisions of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, necessary to manage the placement and maintenance of communications facilities and wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way by all communications services providers and pass-through providers; and minimize disruption to the public rights-of-way. In regulating the placement and maintenance of wireless communications facilities within its public rights-of-way, the city shall be governed by and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including this article. This article is applicable only to rights of way within the city and is not applicable to the placement and maintenance of wireless communications facilities located outside of a right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-173. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined herein or in any permit that might be granted hereunder shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq., as may be amended (collectively the "Communications Act"), and, if not defined therein, as defined by Florida Statute; and, if not defined therein, be construed to mean the common and ordinary meaning. 
    Abandonment shall mean the permanent cessation of all uses of a communications facility or wireless communications facility: provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used. By way of example, and not limitation, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used, shall not be "abandonment" of a facility in public rights-of-way. 
    City means the City of Riviera Beach, an incorporated municipality of the State of Florida, in its present form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, or enlarged form. 
    Communications services shall mean the transmission, conveyance or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals, including video services, to a point, or between or among points, by or through any electronic, radio, satellite, cable, optical, microwave, or other medium or method now in existence or hereafter devised, regardless of the protocol used for such transmission or conveyance. The term includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code, or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance, or routing without regard to whether such service is referred to as voice-over-Internet-protocol services or is classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value-added. The term does not include: 
(a)  Information services. 
(b)  Placement or maintenance of wiring or equipment on a customer's premises. 
(c)  The sale or rental of tangible personal property. 
(d)  The sale of advertising, including, but not limited to, directory advertising. 
(e)  Bad check charges. 
(f)  Late payment charges. 
(g)  Billing and collection services. 
(h)  Internet access service, electronic mail service, electronic bulletin board service, or similar online computer services. 
    Communications services provider shall mean any person who, upon registering with the city, places or maintains a communications facility in the city's rights-of-way. 
    Communications facility or facility or system shall mean any permanent or temporary equipment and/or property, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, fiber optics, poles, antennae, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults, surface location markers, appurtenances, and other equipment or pathway placed or maintained or to be placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way of the city and used or capable of being used to transmit, convey, route, receive, distribute, provide or offer communications services. Communications facilities may be wired, wireless, or both. Communications facilities may be placed or maintained within city rights-of-way by communications services providers or by pass-through providers in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
    Distributed antenna system, or DAS, is a network of spatially separated antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area or structure. DAS antenna elevations are at or below the clutter level and node placements are compact. 
    FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Information service means the offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, using, or making available information via communications services, including, but not limited to, electronic publishing, web-hosting service, and end-user 900 number service. The term does not include video service. 
    Law means any local, state or federal legislative, judicial or administrative order, certificate, decision, statute, constitution, ordinance, resolution, regulation, rule, tariff, guideline or other requirements, as amended, now in effect or subsequently enacted or issued including, but not limited to, the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq. as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub L. No. 104-104 § 101(a), 110 Stat. 70 codified at 47 U.S.C., and all orders, rules, tariffs, guidelines and regulations issued by the Federal Communications Commission or the governing state authority pursuant thereto, all as may be amended. 
    Notification area shall mean within 300 linear feet of proposed communications facilities and wireless communications facilities. 
    Pass-through provider shall mean any person who, upon registering with the city, places or maintains a communications facility in the city's rights-of-way and that does not remit communications service taxes as imposed by the city pursuant to Chapter 202, F.S., as may be amended. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture, estate, trust, syndicate, fiduciary, organization or legal entity of any kind, and any lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof, and all other groups or combinations and shall include the city to the extent the city obtains or holds a certificate under F.S. Ch. 364, as may be amended. 
    Place or maintain or placement or maintenance or placing or maintaining shall mean to erect, construct, place, maintain, place, repair, extend, expand, remove, occupy, locate or relocate. A communications services provider or pass-through provider that owns or exercises physical control over communications facilities in public rights-of-way, such as the physical control to maintain and repair, is "placing or maintaining" the facilities. The provision of service only through resale or only through use of a third party's unbundled network elements is not "placing or maintaining" the communications facilities through which such service is provided. The transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of the public rights-of-way is not placing or maintaining facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
    Public rights-of-way means the area and space in, on, over, under or across the surface, the airspace above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, alley, viaduct, elevated roadway, bridge, public easement, or any other public way for which the city is the authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to such property pursuant to applicable law. Public rights-of-way shall not include any real or personal city property except as described above and shall not include city buildings, fixtures, or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
    Registrant shall mean a communications services provider or pass-through provider or other person, which seeks to use or occupy the public rights-of-way that has registered with the city in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
    Registration and register shall mean the process described in this article whereby a communications services provider or pass-through provider provides certain information to the city. 
    Stealth design shall mean a method of camouflaging any tower antenna or other telecommunications facility including but not limited to supporting electrical or mechanical equipment which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses and be as visually unobtrusive as possible. Stealth design may include a repurposed structure. 
    Video service means the transmission of video, audio, or other programming service to a purchaser, and the purchaser interaction, if any, required for the selection or use of a programming service, regardless of whether the programming is transmitted over facilities owned or operated by the video service provider or over facilities owned or operated by another dealer of communications services. The term includes point-to-point and point-to-multipoint distribution services through which programming is transmitted or broadcast by microwave or other equipment directly to the purchaser's premises, but does not include direct-to-home satellite service. The term includes basic, extended, premium, pay-per-view, digital video, two-way cable, and music services. 
    Wireless communications facility means equipment or facilities located within a city right-of-way, used to provide wireless communications service and may include, but is not limited to, antennae, towers, equipment enclosures, cabling, antenna brackets, and other such equipment. Poles for wireless communications facilities shall be of a size and configuration that is comparable to other utility poles that are traditionally and customarily located within the same or similarly sized rights-of-way. Wireless communications facilities within a right-of-way may be comprised of "distributed antenna systems." Placing a wireless communications facility on an existing tower or building does not cause the existing tower or building to become a wireless communications facility. Wireless communications facilities may be placed or maintained within city rights-of-way by communications services providers or by pass-through providers in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Secs. 10-174-10-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 10-191. - Required. 
    Each communications services provider or pass-through provider that desires to place or maintain any communications facility or wireless communications facility in, under, over or across any public rights-of-way in the city shall be required to first register with the city in accordance with the terms of this article. A communications services provider or pass-through provider with an existing communications facility or wireless communications facility in the public rights-of-way of the city as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived has ninety (90) days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived to comply with the terms of this article, including, but not limited to, registration, or be in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-192. - Application; review. 
(a)  Communications services provider or pass-through provider registration shall include the following information: 
(1)  Identity of the registrant and name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the registrant's primary contact person in connection with the registration, and that of an alternate person to contact in case of emergency; 
(2)  A description of the registrant's standard business operations and an inventory of existing facilities and equipment in the city if any. Said inventory shall exclude wires, cables and, conduit, and is only intended to capture existing above ground equipment such as antennas, poles and sheds/boxes; 
(3)  Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this article and acknowledgment that the registrant has received and reviewed a copy of this article; 
(4)  A copy of federal and/or state certification authorizing the applicant to provide telecommunications services; and 
(5)  If the registrant is a corporation, proof of authority to do business in the State of Florida, which may be satisfied by the number of the corporate certification or by other means; and 
(6)  A security fund in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The city will review the information submitted by the registrant. Such review will be conducted by the city manager or designee. If the registrant submits information in accordance with subsection 10-192(a) the registration shall be effective and the city shall notify the registrant of the effectiveness of registration in writing. If the city determines that the information has not been submitted in accordance with this section, the city shall notify the registrant of the non-effectiveness of registration, and reasons for the non-effectiveness, in writing. The city shall so reply to a registrant within 45 days after receipt of registration information from the registrant. Upon notification of the non-effectiveness of the registration, nothing herein shall preclude the registrant from filing a subsequent application correcting the basis for the non-effectiveness. A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the city noticing that it will no longer maintain facilities in the city's public rights-of-way and will no longer need permits to perform work in the city's public rights-of-way. A registrant cannot cancel a registration if the registrant continues to place or maintain any communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(c)  A registration shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the public rights-of-way. Registration under this article governs only the placement or maintenance of communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in public rights-of-way. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider or pass-through provider from obtaining required approvals and city building permits for access or pole attachment before locating its facilities on another person's facilities. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider or pass-through provider from complying with all applicable city ordinances, including this article. 
(d)  Within 30 days of any change in the information required to be submitted pursuant to subsection (a), a registrant shall provide updated information to the city. Additionally, a registrant shall renew its registration with the city by April 1 of even numbered years in accordance with the registration requirements in this article, except that a registrant that initially registers during the even numbered year when renewal would be due or the odd numbered year immediately preceding such even numbered year shall not be required to renew until the next even numbered year. Registration renewals shall include an inventory of the registrant's newly placed facilities or abandoned facilities since the prior registration or registration renewal. If no information in the then-existing registration has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure to renew a registration may result in the city restricting the issuance of additional permits until the communications services provider or pass-through provider has complied with the registration requirements of this article. 
(e)  In accordance with applicable city ordinances, codes or regulations and this article, a city issued building permit shall be required of a communications services provider or pass-through provider that desires to place or maintain a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way. An effective registration shall be a condition of obtaining a city issued building permit. Notwithstanding an effective registration, applicable city permitting requirements shall continue to apply. A permit may be obtained by or on behalf of a registrant having an effective registration if all city permitting requirements are met. 
(f)  Registration with the city shall be nonexclusive. Registration does not establish any priority for the use of the public right-of-way by a registrant or any other registrants. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this article and further subject to any additional city ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted during the term of the registration. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-193. - Fees and payments. 
    A registrant that places or maintains communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be required to pay an administrative/application fee, as set by resolution of the city council, to cover the city's actual costs of reviewing and processing permit applications. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Secs. 10-194-10-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLACEMENT AND RELOCATION OF COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 10-211. - Use of rights-of-way. 
(a)  A registrant agrees at all times to comply with and abide by all applicable provisions of the state statutes and local laws including, but not limited to, applicable zoning and building regulations not inconsistent with state and federal laws in placing or maintaining a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Except in the case of an emergency, no registrant shall construct or maintain any communications facility or wireless communications facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any public right-of-way without first filing an application with and obtaining a permit from the city therefor, pursuant to applicable permitting requirements of the city, and other applicable City Code requirements. The term emergency shall mean a condition that affects the public's health, safety or welfare, which includes unplanned out of service condition of a pre-existing service. Registrant shall still be required to provide prompt notice to the city of the placement or maintenance of a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way in the event of an emergency. For the purposes of the notice requirements herein, the city shall provide the registrant with a city contact who will be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Unless otherwise required by the City Code, the city may waive the permit requirement in cases where there will be no disruption of the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  As part of any permit application, with respect to new or existing facilities, where applicable, in the public rights-of-way, the registrant shall provide a proposal for construction of the telecommunications facility that sets forth at least the following: 
(1)  An engineering plan signed and sealed by a Florida licensed professional engineer or prepared by a person who is exempt from such registration requirements as provided in F.S. § 471.003, identifying the location of the proposed facility, including a description of the facilities to be placed, where it is to be located, and the approximate size of facilities and equipment that will be located in, on, over, or above the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  A description of the manner in which the facility will be placed (i.e. anticipated construction methods and/or techniques), the time required to construct the facility, a maintenance of traffic plan for any disruption of the public rights-of-way, information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed facility system, including information that identifies all above-ground facilities currently existing in the areas to which the permit application applies, and extending 1,000 feet beyond said areas within the city if available (such information shall be provided without certification as to correctness, to the extent obtained from other users of the public rights-of-way), and, if appropriate given the facility proposed, an estimate of the cost of restoration to the public rights-of-way. Such plan shall include the timetable for construction for each phase of the project, and the areas of the city which will be affected, and an inventory of all existing communications facilities or wireless communications facilities that the registrant or the registrant's predecessors in interest has previously placed in the areas to which the permit application applies, and extending 1,000 feet beyond said areas within the city, as well as any other areas within the city which the city finds reasonably necessary to review the permit application. 
(3)  The city may request such additional information as it finds reasonably necessary to review an application for a permit to perform work in the public rights-of-way. 
(4)  Subject to the limitations set forth in Florida Statute, Section 337.410(3), as amended, an administrative fee, as set by resolution of the city council, to cover the city's actual costs of reviewing and processing the permit application. 
(5)  Prior to the issuance of any permit pertaining to the placement and maintenance of communication facilities or wireless communications facilities within the public rights-of-way located in residential zoning districts, the city council shall be notified by issuance of a memorandum by the city manager or designee showing the location of the proposed communication facilities or wireless communications facilities. Additionally, the city manager or designee shall require the applicant to issue notice of the work to property owners who adjoin such rights-of-way (the "notification area"), and based on the scope of the proposed work, the number of affected property owners, and the potential severity of the impact to such property owners, shall further require the applicant to hold a public information meeting for purposes of answering questions and taking comments from affected property owners. Comments may be submitted in person or in writing to the city. The process for submitting written comments shall be provided to all property owners in the notification area by the applicant. The notification area may be expanded at the city's discretion and notice shall be affected in a manner deemed appropriate by the city manager or designee. Should a public information meeting be required, the applicant shall submit a report to the city manager or designee, no later than ten days after such meeting, stating the public comments received and any responses provided by the applicant. The applicant shall meet with city staff no later than 15 days after submittal to review comments received at the public information meeting and attempt to resolve all negative comments or issues raised. No permits shall be issued by the city until this process, if required, has been completed by the applicant. 
(d)  The city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional communications facilities or wireless communications facilities within the public rights-of-way, if there is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests to occupy or use the rights-of-way, for the protection of existing facilities in the public rights-of-way, for city plans for public improvements or development projects which have been determined by the city to be in the public interest, to prevent interference with the operations of public safety telecommunications services, or to accommodate traffic safety issues raised by the city, the county. Florida Department of Transportation or any other agency with regulatory authority over any right-of-way within the city. Nothing in this article shall affect the city's authority to add, vacate, or abandon public rights-of-way, and the city makes no warranties or representations regarding the availability of any added, vacated or abandoned public rights-of-way for communications facilities. 
(e)  All communications facilities and wireless communications facilities shall be placed, located and maintained so as not to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the public and to cause unreasonable interference with the rights and convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the public rights-of-way. Except as provided herein, all communications facilities and wireless communications facilities shall have the capacity to permit multiple users where feasible. All communications facilities and wireless communications facilities shall be placed and maintained so as not to create interference with the operations of public safety telecommunications services. The registrant shall be liable for costs and expenses for the displacement, damage or destruction of any irrigation system or landscaping within the public rights-of-way, to the extent not covered by the construction bond. The registrant shall make such repairs upon request of the affected property owner. In the event the registrant fails to make the appropriate repairs, to restore such property to as good a condition as existed prior to commencement of work, the affected property owner may file a complaint with the city manager or a designee. In this instance, the registrant shall be given prior written notice of the necessary repairs by the city manager or designee. If such repairs are not performed in a reasonable and satisfactory manner within the 30 calendar days after receiving notice, the city may cause the repairs to be made at the facility owner's expense, utilizing city employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, and require reimbursement within 30 days after the submission of the bill by the city to the registrant. After 30 days, the city may obtain reimbursement from the security fund. The prior written notice described in this paragraph shall be considered a final written decision for purposes of the appellate rights outlined in section 10-231. 
(f)  The registrant shall endeavor, when practicable, to place all communications facilities or wireless communications facilities underground. In the event that a registrant demonstrates to the city that there is no underground alternative for certain wireless facilities, including antenna and structures that physically support antenna, which must be placed above-ground to be functional, above ground placement of such facilities shall be permitted by the city. To the extent not inconsistent with public service commission regulations, the city may require the use of trenchless technology (i.e., directional bore method) for the placement of facilities in the public rights-of-way as well as joint trenching or the co-location of facilities in existing conduit. In making such requests, the city shall take into consideration several factors including inconvenience to the public and other users of rights-of-way and the technical feasibility of such requests. Every registrant which places or constructs telecommunications facilities underground shall maintain appropriate participation in the regional notification center for subsurface placements. 
(g)  The city manager or designee may issue such additional rules and regulations concerning the placement or maintenance of a communications facility or wireless communications facility in the public rights-of-way, as may be consistent with applicable law and not inconsistent with this article. 
(h)  Stealth design is required in order to minimize the visual impact of above ground communications facilities and wireless communications facilities. The use of foliage and vegetation around ground equipment is required by the city based on conditions of the specific area where the ground equipment is to be located. In order to avoid the clustering of multiple items of ground equipment in a single area, a maximum of two (2) ground equipment boxes may be grouped together in any single location. In addition, such locations must be spaced a minimum of two thousand (2,000) linear feet of right-of-way apart from each other, unless technical documentation is provided by the applicant to support a smaller distance and is approved by the City Manager. Should said separation result in the potential location of more than six (6) communications utility poles on one linear mile of a city block, the City Council shall be notified by a memorandum from the City Manager. Stealth poles shall not be included in the quantity limitation described herein. Individual ground equipment boxes shall not exceed three (3) feet wide, by three (3) feet deep by five (5) feet high in size. The size and height of wireless communications facility poles shall not exceed the average size and height of existing utility poles located in the same right-of-way within the city. Nothing contained in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit the co-location of antennas on existing poles due to antenna height requirements. 
(i)  Wireless communications facilities shall be located in expressway, and major or minor arterial rights-of-way, as defined in section 30-1 of the City's Code of Ordinances, whenever possible. Placement of wireless communications facilities in collector street, cul-de-sac, local street and marginal access street rights-of-way. as defined in section 30-1 of the City's Code of Ordinances, shall be prohibited unless the applicant cannot otherwise provide service to a particular customer or customers without doing so, and the inability to place facilities in such rights-of-way is necessary to accomplish requirements of nondiscriminatory treatment of the applicant in relation to the city's treatment of other telecommunications service providers. In such circumstances, the applicant shall include with its city building permit application, sufficient evidence consistent with industry standards, to justify such placement. Whenever wireless communications facilities must be placed in a right-of-way with residential uses on one or both sides, neither poles, equipment, antennas or other structures shall be placed in front of a residential structure. If a right-of-way has residential structures on only one side, the wireless communications facilities shall be located on the opposite side of the right-of-way whenever possible. All wireless communications facilities shall be located in such a way that they do not interfere with views from residential structures. 
(j)  All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry practices and standards shall be used during construction, maintenance, and repair of the communication facilities or wireless communications facilities. 
(k)  In the event that at any time during the term of the rights granted herein the city shall lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade of, any public rights-of-way, upon reasonable notice by the city, the registrant shall make any necessary removals, relaying and relocations of its communication facilities or wireless communications facilities at its own expense, in accordance with applicable law. The city reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage, communications or other types of facilities, cables or conduits, and to do, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead placement or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the city in the public rights-of-way occupied by the registrant. Registrant may allow the city facilities to be co-located within the city's public rights-of-way through the use of a joint trench during registrant's construction project. Such joint trench projects shall be negotiated in good faith by separate agreement between registrant and the city and may be subjected to other city rights-of-way requirements. The city further reserves without limitation the right to alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, placement, relocation or width of the public rights-of-way within the limits of the city and within said limits as same may from time to time be altered. 
(l)  A registrant shall obtain any and all required permits and pay any and all required fees before commencing any construction on or otherwise disturbing any public rights-of-way as a result of its construction, except as provided herein. The registrant shall, at its own expense, restore such property to as good a condition as existed prior to commencement of work. A registrant shall guarantee its restoration for a period of 12 months after the completion of such restoration. If such restoration is not performed in a reasonable and satisfactory manner within 30 calendar days after the completion of construction, the city may, after prior written notice to registrant, cause the repairs to be made at the facility's owner expense, utilizing city employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, in accordance with F.S. § 337.402, as may be amended, and require reimbursement within 30 days after the submission of the bill by the city to the registrant. Alternatively, at the sole discretion of the city, the city may seek to recover expenses, costs and loss from restoring the right-of-way, against the registrant's construction bond pursuant to section 10-225. A permit from the city constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities on public rights-of-way in accordance with this article, and does not create a property right or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way. 
(m)  All ongoing placement, construction and maintenance of a communications facility or wireless communications facility located in the public rights-of-way shall be subject to the city's periodic inspection for compliance with this article, or any applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(n)  The city makes no warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability or availability of the city's public rights-of-way for the registrant's communications facilities or wireless communications facilities and any performance of work, costs incurred or services provided by registrant shall be at registrant's sole risk. 
(o)  A registrant shall cooperate with the city by providing timely and complete information requested under this section. Upon completion of any placement or construction of new facilities in the public right-of-way, at no cost to the city, the registrant shall provide such information, as may be requested, showing the exact location of its facilities and structures, including but not limited to, as-built plans, maps, geographical information systems, plats, construction documents, drawings and any other information the city may find reasonably necessary. Such plans shall be provided in digitized format showing the two-dimensional location of the facilities based on the city's geographical database datums, or other format acceptable to the city manager or designee. All information required by this section shall be maintained in accordance with F.S. § 202.195, as may be amended. 
(p)  In the interest of the public's health, safety and welfare, upon request of the city, a registrant shall coordinate placement or maintenance activities under a permit with any other work, construction, placement or repairs that may be occurring or scheduled to occur within a reasonable timeframe in the subject public rights-of-way. The city may require a registrant to alter reasonably its placement or maintenance schedule for permitted work as necessary so as to minimize disruptions and disturbance in the public rights-of-way. The city may provide a more definite time frame based on specific city construction or maintenance schedules. 
(q)  Waivers to the requirements of this division may be granted by the city manager or designee as provided in this subsection. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral use of city rights-of-way by communications service providers and pass-through providers, in violation of state or federal law. The waiver provisions listed in this subsection apply only where a registrant's application for the placement or relocation of a communications facility or wireless communications facility in a city right-of-way does not meet the criteria for approval as required by this division. A request for a waiver shall include all information described in this subsection and any other reasonable information the city may require. The city may deny the request for a waiver if it does not comply with the requirements of this subsection. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of a waiver from the requirements of this division: 
(1)  In the event that the applicant files for a waiver, the applicant shall file the appropriate waiver application fee. 
(2)  The city manager or designee shall consider the following factors in determining whether to grant a waiver: 
(i)  A detailed explanation, with supporting data, as to why a waiver from the requirements of this division is required in order to allow the registrant/applicant to have nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral use of city rights-of-way. This may include, as appropriate, evidence that a waiver is required to avoid an undue burden/hardship on the applicant and that a waiver is necessary in order to close a significant gap in the applicant's service to the affected area, evidence that the application of the requirements of this division is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare; or evidence that the application of the requirements of this division creates a result that is inconsistent with the intent of this division. The foregoing examples are not intended to be exhaustive of the items that an applicant may present to the city when requesting a waiver under this subsection. 
(ii)  Availability of co-location opportunities, which are a preferred solution in the granting of a waiver; 
(iii)  Size and height of the proposed facilities; 
(iv)  Location and separation distances of the proposed facilities; 
(v)  Location of the nearest residential units or residentially zoned properties; 
(vi)  Adjacent and nearby topography, tree coverage and foliage; 
(vii)  Design of the proposed facilities with particular reference to elimination of visual impacts of such facilities through stealth design or adequate screening, which are a preferred solution in the granting of a waiver; 
(viii)  Any other factors the city determines to be relevant. 
(3)  In granting any waiver, the city may impose conditions to the extent the city concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effects of the proposed facility on adjoining properties or to protect the health, safety and welfare of the city and the residents. 
(r)  The city shall prohibit the installation of new wood poles for any communications facilities and wireless communications facilities. The registrant shall be able to collocate on existing wood poles located in the City that existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(s)  All communications facilities and wireless communications facilities shall be maintained graffiti free or free of any non-registrant company related stickers by the registrant. The city shall notify the registrant of any graffiti or stickers placed on the communications facilities and wireless communications facilities. The registrant shall have five days after receipt of the notice from the city to remove any graffiti or stickers from the communications facilities and wireless communications facilities. All graffiti or stickers must be removed at the sole expense of the registrant. 
(t)  All communications facilities and wireless communications facilities poles installed after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be decorative where decorative poles exist or are planned to be installed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-212. - Relocation of communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Any communications facilities or wireless communications facilities heretofore or hereafter placed upon, under, over, or along any public rights-of-way that is found by the city to be unreasonably interfering in any way with the convenient, safe or continuous use or the maintenance, improvement, extension or expansion of such public rights-of-way shall, upon written notice to the registrant or its agent, be removed or relocated, within 30 days of such notice, by such registrant at its own expense in accordance F.S. § 337.403, as may be amended. The city manager or designee may extend the time within which a registrant shall remove or relocate a telecommunications facility, for good cause shown. 
(b)  The registrant shall not in any way displace, damage, or destroy any facilities, including, but not limited to, gas, sewer, water main, pipe cable, conduit, fiber optic, or other pathway or any other facilities belonging to the city. The registrant shall be liable to the city for the costs of any repairs or replacements made necessary by any such displacement, damage or destruction, of facilities belonging to the city, and the registrant shall pay such costs upon demand. In the case of an emergency, the city may commence repairs without any prior notice to the registrant. If circumstances permit, the city shall attempt to notify the owner of the communications facilities or wireless communications facility, if known, prior to commencing repairs and shall notify the owner of the facility, if known, after repairing a facility. The term emergency shall mean a condition that may affect the public's health, safety or welfare. In the event of an emergency the city may cause the repairs to be made at the facility owner's expense, utilizing city employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, and require reimbursement within 30 days after the submission of the bill by the city to the registrant. In all other non-emergency circumstances, the registrant shall be given prior written notice. If such repairs are not performed in a reasonable and satisfactory manner within the 30 calendar days after receiving notice, the city may, cause the repairs to be made at the facility owner's expense, utilizing city employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, and require reimbursement within 30 days after the submission of the bill by the city to the registrant. 
(c)  Subject to F.S. § 337.403, as may be amended, whenever an order of the city requires such removal or change in the location of any communications facilities or wireless communications facilities from the public rights-of-way, and the registrant fails to remove or change the same at its own expense to conform to the directive within the time stated in the notice, the city may proceed to cause the communications facilities or wireless communications facilities to be removed. The expense thereby incurred except as provided in F.S. § 337.403(1)(a)-(c) , as may be amended, shall be paid out of any money available therefor, and such expense shall be charged against the registrant and/or owner of the communications facilities or wireless communications facilities and levied, collected and paid to the city. 
(d)  Subject to F.S. § 337.404, as may be amended, whenever it shall be necessary for the city to remove or relocate any communications facilities or wireless communications facilities, the registrant shall be given written notice of such removal or relocation and requiring the payment of the costs thereof, and shall be given reasonable time, which shall not be less than 20 nor more than 30 days in which to file an appeal with the city council to contest the reasonableness of the order. Upon receipt of a written appeal, the city council shall place the matter on the council's agenda for consideration within 60 working days. Should the registrant not appear, the determination of the cost to the registrant and/or owner shall be final, in accordance with F.S. 337.404, as may be amended. 
(e)  A final order of the city imposed pursuant to Florida Statutes, and applicable provisions of the City Code, if any, shall constitute a lien on any property of the owner and may be enforced as provided by Florida Statutes and any applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(f)  The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any communications facilities or wireless communications facilities located within the public rights-of-way of the city, as the city manager or designee in his/her reasonable discretion may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city shall attempt to notify the owner of the communications facilities or wireless communications facility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the owner of the facility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Secs. 10-213-10-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-221. - Termination of registration. 
(a)  The involuntary termination of a registration may only be accomplished by an action of the city council. The city may declare the registration terminated and revoke and cancel all privileges granted under that registration if (a) a federal or state authority suspends, denies, or revokes a registrant's certification to provide telecommunications service, (b) the registrant is adjudicated bankrupt by a united states district court or through any legal proceeding of any kind, or that a receiver is appointed to take possession of the assets of the registrant, (c) the registrant abandons all of its communications facilities and wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, (d) the registrant's placement and maintenance in the public rights-of-way presents an extraordinary danger to the general public or other users of the public rights-of-way, or (e) a pass-through provider fails to comply with the requirements of Sec. 10-232. 
(b)  Prior to such termination by the city resulting from a violation of any of the provisions of subsection (a), the registrant shall be notified by the city manager or designee with a written notice setting forth all matters pertinent to such violation, and describing the proposed action of the city with respect thereto. The registrant shall have 60 days after receipt of such notice within which to cure the violation, or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the city council, to accomplish the same. 
(c)  In the event of a vote by the city council to terminate a registration, the registrant shall, within a reasonable time following such termination, remove or abandon the communications facilities and/or wireless communications facilities and take such steps as are necessary to render every portion of the communications facilities and/or wireless communications facilities remaining within the public right-of-way of the city safe. However, in the event of an emergency, the city may take appropriate action in accordance with section 10-211(d) of this article. If the registrant has either abandoned its facilities or chooses to abandon its facilities, the city may either (1) require the registrant's bonding company to remove some or all of the facilities from the public right-of-way and restore the public right-of-way to its proper condition or (2) require that some or all of the facilities be removed and the public right-of-way restored to its proper condition at the registrant's expense, utilizing city employees, agents or contractors, and charge any and all costs, and require reimbursement. The obligations of the registrant and the bonding company hereunder shall survive the termination of the registration. In the event of a termination of registration, this provision does not permit the city to cause the removal of any facilities that are used to provide another service for which the registrant holds a valid certification with the governing federal and state telecommunications agencies and is properly registered with the city, for such certificated service, under this article. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-221.5. - Suspension of permits. 
(a)  Subject to section 10-231 below and to providing reasonable notice and an opportunity to cure, the city manager or designee may suspend a permit issued or deny an application for a subsequent permit to a registrant for work in the public rights-of-way for one or more of the following: 
(1)  Failure to satisfy permit conditions, or conditions set forth in this article or other applicable city ordinances, codes or regulations governing placement or maintenance of communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in public rights-of-way, including without limitation, failure to take reasonable safety precautions to alert the public of work at the work site, or to restore any public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Misrepresentation or fraud by registrant in a registration or permit application to the city; 
(3)  Failure to properly renew or ineffectiveness of registration; 
(4)  Failure to relocate or to remove facilities as may be lawfully required by the city. 
(b)  After the suspension or denial of a permit pursuant to this section, the city shall provide written notice of the reason to the registrant. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-222. - Compliance with other laws; police power. 
    Communications service providers shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws. Communications service providers shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercises of the police power of the city, to the extent not inconsistent with applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-223. - Transfer of control; sale or assignment. 
(a)  If the registrant transfers or assigns its registration incident to a sale or other transfer of the registrant's assets, the transferee or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the terms of this article. Written notice of any transfer, sale or assignment shall be provided to the city within 20 days of the effective date of the transfer, sale or assignment. In order for the transfer of registration to be effective, the transferee or assignee must comply with the registration requirements under section 10-191 of this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything in this article, pledges in trust or mortgages or other hypothecations of the assets of the registrant to secure the construction, operation or repair of its communications facilities or wireless communications facilities may be made to any person without notice to the city. Any mortgage, pledge, lease or other encumbrance of the communications facilities or wireless communications facilities shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the city by virtue of this article or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-223.5. - Abandonment of a communications facility or wireless communications facility. 
(a)  Upon abandonment of a communications facility or wireless communications facility owned by a registrant in the public rights-of-way, the registrant shall notify the city of such abandonment within 90 days. 
(b)  The city may direct the registrant by written notice to remove all or any portion of such abandoned facility at the registrant's sole expense if the city determines that the abandoned facility's presence interferes with the public health, safety or welfare, which shall include, but shall not be limited to. a determination that such facility: 
(1)  Compromises safety at any time for any public rights-of-way user or during construction or maintenance in public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Prevents a third party from locating facilities in the area of public rights-of-way where the abandoned facility is located when other alternative locations are not reasonably available. The city may require the third party to coordinate with the registrant that owns the existing facility for joint removal and placement, where agreed to by the registrant.; or 
(3)  Creates a maintenance condition that is disruptive to the public rights-of-way's use. 
(c)  In the event that the city does not direct the removal of the abandoned facility, the registrant, by its notice of abandonment to the city shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by the city or another person at such third party's cost. 
(d)  If the registrant fails to remove all or any portion of an abandoned facility as directed by the city within a reasonable time period as may be required by the city under the circumstances, the city may perform such removal and charge the cost of the removal against the registrant. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-224. - Insurance; surety; indemnification. 
(a)  A registrant shall at all times maintain the following insurance coverage insuring the registrant and naming the city, its officers, boards, council, council members, agents and employees as additional insureds: worker's compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all requirements of Florida law, commercial general liability and business automobile liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation and maintenance of the communications facilities or wireless communications facilities, and the conduct of registrant's business in the city, in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance. 
Employer's liability- $500,000.00 limit each occurrence, $500,000.00 limit per each employee. 
(2)  Commercial general liability. 
Bodily injury and property damage -$3,000,000.00 combined single limit each occurrence. Said coverage shall not exclude contractual liability, products/completed operations or independent contractors. 
(3)  Business automobile liability. 
Bodily injury and property damage -Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) combined single limit each occurrence. 
(b)  All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business in the State of Florida; shall be with sureties with a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, property/casualty edition except as provided in (d) below. All insurance coverage shall be primary over any city insurance coverage. Further, all insurance coverage shall be "by occurrence" rather than on a "claims made" basis. The city may require coverage and amounts in excess of the above minimums where necessary to reflect changing liability exposure and limits or where required by law. A registrant may provide a portion of the insurance coverage required by section 10-224(a) through excess or umbrella policies of insurance and where such policies are in a form acceptable to the city's risk manager or designee. The umbrella or excess liability shall have an aggregate limit not less than the highest "each occurrence" limit for commercial general liability, business auto liability or employer's liability. The city shall be specifically endorsed as an "additional insured" on the umbrella or excess liability, unless the certificate of insurance states the umbrella or excess liability provides coverage on a "follow-form" basis. 
(c)  A registrant shall keep on file with the city certificates of insurance which certificates shall indicate that the city, its officers, boards, council, council members, agents and employees are listed as additional insureds. In the event of a potential claim such that the city claims insurance coverage, the facility owner shall immediately respond to all reasonable requests by the city for information with respect to the scope of the insurance coverage. 
(d)  The certificates of insurance shall further provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless 30 days' prior written notice thereof has been given to the city. A registrant shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of proof that the registrant has obtained alternative insurance satisfactory to the city which complies with this article. A registrant that elects to self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by this section is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under this section. A registrant that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under this section, such as evidence that the registrant is a private self insurer under the workers compensation act. For purposes of this section, self-insure shall also include a registrant which insures through a captive insurer as defined in F.S. § 628.901, as may be amended. 
(e)  The city, by and through its risk management department, reserves the right to review, modify, reject or accept any required policies of insurance or self-insurance. including limits, coverages, or endorsements, herein from time to time. The city reserves the right, but not the obligation, to review and reject any insurer or self-insurer providing coverage because of its poor financial condition or failure to operate legally. 
(f)  A registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, release, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its officials, boards, members, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses, sustained by the city, arising out of the construction, maintenance or operation of its communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article, provided, however, that a registrant's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the negligence of the city. The city agrees to notify the registrant, in writing, within a reasonable time of the city receiving notice, of any issue it determines may require indemnification. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and at its own cost if in the city's reasonable belief there exists or may exist a conflict, potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. Nothing contained in this provision shall be construed or interpreted (1) as denying to either party any remedy or defense available to such party under the laws of the State of Florida, and (2) as a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in F.S. § 768.28, as may be amended. 
(g)  This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the city's rights, privileges and immunities as set forth in F.S. § 768.28, as may be amended. Insurance under this section shall run continuously with the presence of the registrant's facilities in the public right-of-way and any termination or lapse of such insurance shall be a violation of this section and subject to the remedies as set forth herein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may, in its sole discretion, require increased or decreased levels of insurance for any other object placed in the city's rights-of-way by way of individual license agreements. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-225. - Construction bond. 
(a)  Except in the case of an emergency, as described in section 10-212(b) of this article, prior to performing any work in the public rights-of-way, a registrant shall establish in the city's favor a construction bond in an amount specified in the permit or other authorization as necessary to ensure the registrant's faithful performance of the construction in the public rights-of-way, in accordance with applicable sections of the City Code. The amount of the construction bond shall be as set forth in the permit, and may be modified in the city manager's or designee's reasonable discretion, based on the cost of the restoration to take place in the public rights-of-way, and any previous history of the registrant concerning restoration within the public rights-of-way of the city. The city, in its discretion, may request a certified estimate of the cost of restoration by a Florida licensed professional civil engineer or certified by a person who is exempt from such requirements as provided in F.S. § 471.003. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a construction bond will be required only when the estimated cost of restoration exceeds the amount of the construction bond provided by the registrant pursuant to Section 10-226. In the event that the registrant depletes the construction bond set forth by the city, the registrant shall replenish the actual depletion of the construction bond within five business days. 
(b)  In the event a registrant fails to complete the work in a safe, timely and competent manner in accordance with the provisions of the permit and this article, or fails to complete all restoration work in the right-of-way as required in section 10-212(e) or (l), including but not limited to repair or replacement of damaged landscaping, structures, hardscape, underground utility facilities, structures or equipment, or any other item or feature disturbed by the permitted work, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the registrant, or the cost of completing the work, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. 
(c)  No less than 12 months after completion of the construction and satisfaction of all obligations in accordance with the bond, the registrant may request the city manager or designee to remove the requirement to continue the construction bond and the city shall release the bond within ten days upon approval of the city manager or designee. Notwithstanding, the city shall require a new bond for any subsequent work performed in the public right-of-way. 
(d)  The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, property/casualty edition; shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney; and shall provide that: "This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until 60 days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(e)  The rights reserved by the city with respect to any construction bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the city may have under this article, or at law or equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the construction bond will affect any other right the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-226. - Security fund. 
    At the time of registration, and as a condition of receiving its first permit to place or maintain a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way after the effective date of this article, the registrant shall file with the city, for city approval, a cash security, or a bond in the sum of $50,000.00, in a form acceptable to the city manager or a designee, which shall be referred to as the "security fund." For purposes of the bond, the registrant must have as a surety a company qualified to do business in the State of Florida. The cash security or bond, shall be to secure the full and faithful performance by the registrant of all requirements, duties and obligations imposed upon registrant by the provisions of this article, and to pay any taxes, fees or liens owned to the city. The bond shall be furnished annually, or as frequently as necessary, and shall provide a continuing guarantee of the registrant's full and faithful performance at all times. Should the city draw upon the cash security or bond, the city shall promptly notify the registrant, and the registrant shall promptly restore the cash security or annual bond, to full required amount. In the event a registrant fails to perform its duties and obligations imposed upon the registrant by the provisions of this article, subject to section 10-227, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation or indemnification, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the fund. The security or bond may be waived by the city where the city determines that the security fund is not necessary to secure the required performance under this article. The city may from time to time increase the amount of the security fund to reflect the increased risks to the city and to the public. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-227. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity or provided in this article, the city may apply any one or combination of the following remedies in the event a registrant violates this article, or applicable local law or order related to use of the public rights-of-way: 
(1)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or other law applicable to users and/or occupants of the public rights-of-way may result in imposition of penalties to be paid by the registrant to the city in an amount of not less than $250.00 per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(2)  In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the city may seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Before imposing a fine pursuant to this section, the city shall give written notice of the violation and its intention to assess such penalties, which notice shall contain a description of the alleged violation. Following receipt of such notice, the registrant shall have 30 days to either: (1) cure the violation and the city shall make good faith reasonable efforts to assist in resolving the violation, or (2) file an appeal in accordance with section 10-231. If the violation is not cured within that 30-day period, and no appeal is filed, the city may collect all fines owed, beginning with the first day of the violation, either by removing such amount from the security fund or through any other means allowed by law. 
(c)  In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the city shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the city determines are appropriate to the public interest. 
(d)  Failure of the city to enforce any requirements of this article shall not constitute a waiver of the city's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(e)  In any proceeding before the city wherein there exists an issue with respect to a registrant's performance of its obligations pursuant to this article, the registrant shall be given the opportunity to provide such information as it may have concerning its compliance with the terms of this article. The city may find a registrant that does not demonstrate compliance with the terms and conditions of this article in default and apply any one or combination of the remedies otherwise authorized by this article. 
(f)  The city manager or designee shall be responsible for administration and enforcement of this article, and is authorized to give any notice required by law. 
(g)  Nothing in this article shall affect the remedies the registrant has available under applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-228. - Force majeure. 
    In the event a registrant's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this article is prevented by a cause or event not within the facility owner's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided, however, that such owner uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this article, causes or events not within a facility owner's control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within registrant's control, and thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, registrant's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of registrant's directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-228.5. - Conditional use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  In the event registrant desires to use its existing facilities or to construct new facilities for the purpose of providing other utility or non-utility services to existing or potential consumers or resellers, by providing any other services other than the provision of communications service, or for providing any other use to existing or potential consumers, a registrant shall seek such additional and separate authorization from the city for such activities as may be required by applicable law. 
(b)  To the extent that any person or registrant leases or otherwise uses the facilities of a person that is duly registered or otherwise authorized to place or maintain facilities in the public rights-of-way of the city, such person or registrant shall make no claim, nor assert any right, which will impede the lawful exercise of the city's rights, including requiring the removal of such facilities from the public rights-of-way of the city, regardless of the effect on registrant's ability to place or maintain its own communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in public rights-of-way of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-229. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to amend this article as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers. 
(b)  This article shall be applicable to all communications facilities and wireless communications facilities permitted to be placed in the public rights-of-way, on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and shall apply to all existing communications facilities and wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, to the full extent permitted by state and federal law, except that any provision of this article regarding size, composition, or location of physical facilities shall not apply to physical facilities lawfully placed within any city right-of-way prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which such provision is derived. 
(c)  The city reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action or proceeding involving any provision of this article. Registrant agrees to advise the city of any such suits, actions or proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-230. - Reports and records; inspections. 
(a)  Upon reasonable request, a registrant shall provide the following documents to the city as received or filed: 
(1)  Any pleadings, petitions, notices, and documents, regarding any legal proceeding involving any provisions of this article which are reasonably necessary for the city to protect its interests under this article. 
(2)  Any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall affect the remedies the registrant has available under applicable law. 
(c)  In addition, the city may, at its option, and upon reasonable notice to the registrant, inspect the facilities in the public rights-of-way to ensure the safety of its residents. The city shall keep any documentation, books and records of the registrant confidential to the extent required under Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-231. - Appeals. 
(a)  Final, written decisions of the city manager or designee suspending or denying a permit, denying an application for a registration or denying an application for renewal of a registration are subject to appeal. An appeal must be filed with the city within 30 days of the date of the final, written decision to be appealed. Any appeal not timely filed as set forth above shall be waived. The city's development special magistrate shall hear the appeal. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall affect or limit the remedies the city has available under applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-232. - Pass-through provider fees and charges. 
(a)  Pass-through providers shall pay to the city on an annual basis an amount equal to $500.00 per linear mile or portion thereof of communications facilities or wireless communications facilities placed and/or maintained in the city's rights-of-way. For purposes of this section, the city's rights-of-way do not include rights-of-way that extend in or through the city but are state, county or another authority's rights-of-way. 
(b)  The amounts charged pursuant to this section shall be based on the linear miles of rights-of-way where communications facilities or wireless communications facilities are placed, not based on a summation of the lengths of individual cables, conduits, strands or fibers. 
(c)  Any annual amount charged shall be reduced for a prorated portion of any 12 month period during which the pass-through provider remits taxes imposed by the city pursuant to Chapter 202, F.S., as may be amended. 
(d)  Annual payments shall be due and payable on March 1 of each year. Fees not paid within ten days after the due date shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date due until paid. The acceptance of any payment required hereunder by the city shall not be construed as an acknowledgement that the amount paid is the correct amount due, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the city may have for additional sums due and payable. All fee payments shall be subject to audit by the city, and assessment or refund if any payment is found to be in error. If such audit results in an assessment by and an additional payment to the city, such additional payment shall be subject to interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month until the date payment is made. 
(e)  If the payments required by this section are not made within ninety (90) days after the due date, the city manager or designee may withhold the issuance of any permits to the registrant until the amount past due is paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 10-233. - No liability or warranty. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to make or hold the city responsible or liable for any damage to persons or any property whatsoever, from any cause whatsoever, arising from the use, operation or condition of the registrant's communications facilities or wireless communications facilities; or by reason of any inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect. Nor shall the issuance of any permit or the approval or disapproval of any placement or maintenance of the registrant's communications facilities or wireless communications facilities as authorized herein constitute any representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by, nor create any liability upon, the city or any official, agent or employee thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4087, § 2, 9-27-16) 
Secs. 10-234-10-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CERTIFICATE OF USE 

Sec. 10-241. - Purpose. 
    The certificate of use assures that the particular business is allowed in the zoning district where it is located. It also verifies that the structure was built for the proposed type of business. 
(Ord. No. 3078, § 1 (1), 4-7-10) 
Sec. 10-242. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certificate of use means the method by which the city grants approval for a business to exist at a given location. 
    Owner/applicant means the owner and/or operator of a business who applies for a certificate of use for premises within the city, pursuant to the terms, provisions and conditions of this article. 
    Person means, but is not limited to, an individual, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, and any other business entity. 
    Premises means all lands, structures, places, and also the equipment and appurtenances connected, or used therewith, and also any personal property which is either affixed to, or otherwise used in connection with, any such business conducted on such premises. 
    Special magistrate means a special master or special magistrate who is appointed by the city pursuant to F.S. § 162.03(2) or otherwise, who has the authority to hold hearings and assess fines against violators of the municipal codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 3078, § 1 (2), 4-7-10) 
Sec. 10-243. - Certificate of use required. 
(a)  Certificate of use required. It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to conduct any business, including home occupations, in the City of Riviera Beach, without first making application for and obtaining a certificate of use and renewing same on an annual basis. In conjunction with the certificate of use application and any renewal thereof, rental property owners shall make and file with the city an affidavit, duly authenticated, setting forth the total number of occupants that will be permitted to reside on site and in each separate rental unit. 
(b)  Existing businesses; effective date. As of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, all existing businesses, including home occupations, holding a valid business tax receipt shall be considered to have an active certificate of use and shall not be subject to an initial fee. However, all existing business locations requiring a certificate of use as of the effective date of the ordinance shall make an application within the first six months after the date of adoption of this article and shall be subject to the annual renewal fee, commencing on October 1, 2010. Said applications shall be processed by city staff and shall be available in the city's finance/utility billing department. All businesses shall renew the certificate of use on an annual basis when their business tax receipt is renewed or prior to October 1 of each year. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the revocation of a certificate of use for existing businesses which fail to make application within the six months time period as required hereinabove or which otherwise fail to comply with this article. 
(c)  Fees. In order to obtain a certificate of use, an initial fee shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the costs of all new business inspections and processing of the required documents; except for valid businesses existing as of the date of the adoption of this article. An annual renewal fee shall be paid to defray the administrative costs associated with the annual renewal of the certificate of use. The initial fee and the renewal fee shall be set by a resolution of the City of Riviera Beach City Council and added to the city's regular schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. No. 3078, § 1 (3), 4-7-10) 
Sec. 10-244. - Administration. 
    The provisions of this article shall be administered by finance in coordination with the community development department and enforced by code enforcement. community development shall: 
(1)  Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations necessary to the operation and enforcement of this article. 
(2)  Prepare all forms, certificates and decals and prescribe the information to be given therein. 
(3)  Require applicants to submit a completed and signed application with all affidavits and oaths necessary for the administration of this article. Each application will be submitted with payment of a nonrefundable application fee. 
(4)  Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a certificate of use, as prescribed by this article or other governing laws and ordinances. Obtain endorsements, when necessary, of other agencies which may have a regulatory interest in a particular business tax receipt. 
(5)  Notify any application of the acceptance or rejection of their application in writing, with reasons for the denial of the certificate of use. 
(Ord. No. 3078, § 1 (4), 4-7-10) 
Sec. 10-245. - Denial of a certificate of use by the city; suspension or revocation of certificate of use or imposition of additional conditions of approval by the special magistrate. 
(a)  Specific violations which may result in the denial of certificate of use by the city; or the suspension or revocation by the special magistrate; or by the imposition of additional conditions by the special magistrate. A certificate of use may be denied by the city upon application; or denied, suspended, revoked or conditioned by the special magistrate as provided herein pursuant to section 2-334 when it is determined that: 
(1)  An owner/applicant has misrepresented or failed to disclose material facts or information which is required to be included in the certificate of use application or any other application required by the city, the county or the state; 
(2)  An owner/applicant, as part of the business activity, has violated the city's code which regulates the use and/or operation of the premises and/or one of the following determinations is made: such conduct has become a public nuisance as set forth in the city's code or state statute; such activity violates the city's regulations as set forth in chapter 3, alcoholic beverages; such activity is manifestly injurious to the public morals; or the owner/applicant is operating the business in such a manner as to injure the health, safety, or welfare or to disturb the quiet enjoyment of the citizens in the nearby vicinity; 
(3)  The issuance of the certificate of use was contingent upon the owner/applicant's compliance with specific provisions of the city's, the county's or the state's laws and the owner/applicant has not satisfied or has violated such conditions, to include but not limited to, specific conditions of approval imposed upon the owner/applicant by development orders issued by the city; 
(4)  An owner/applicant has violated any provision of this article and has failed or refused to cease or correct the violation at the premises after having been notified to do so by the city or by an order of the special magistrate; 
(5)  The premises have been condemned by the local health authority or by the city's building official for failure to meet state and local standards; 
(6)  An owner/applicant is conducting a business from a premise but does not possess a valid and current business tax receipt as required by state and local law; 
(7)  The premises are being operated as a group home without proper licensure by all state and local licensing agencies and/or in violation of the city's zoning ordinances; or 
(8)  The premises are being operated in violation of the city's minimum housing regulations. 
(b)  Enforcement procedures. Upon determination by the city that an owner/applicant is in violation of the provisions of this article, the city shall notify, in writing, the owner/applicant of the premises of the nature of the violation and provide notice of a hearing before the special magistrate pursuant to section 2-335, enforcement procedures. The conduct for such hearing shall be in conformance with section 2-336, conduct of hearing. The special magistrate's findings and order shall constitute the final administrative action of the city for purposes of judicial review under state law. 
(1)  Issuance or denial by the city. The city must either issue or deny issuance of a certificate of use within 40 days after application is made for such certificate or for the renewal of the current certificate. An owner/applicant may also request a hearing as set forth herein before the special magistrate regarding the denial of the issuance of a certificate of use for that business by the city. The request for hearing must be in writing and filed with the city within ten days of the receipt of the written decision by the city. 
(2)  Review; closures; liens. If the owner/operator fails to seek timely appellate review of an order of the special magistrate and fails to comply timely with such order, the city may pursue enforcement procedures including the closure of all or a portion of such business. Business closings pursuant to orders of the special magistrate shall be enforced by the city's police department and the costs of such enforcement shall be placed as a lien against the owner/applicant's real and personal property by recording an order assessing such costs in the public records of Palm Beach County. No fees shall be refunded if a certificate of use is suspended or revoked or if a business is closed pursuant to this subsection. 
(3)  Orders; relevant factors. The special magistrate shall fashion an order when enforcing this article which is narrowly tailored to abate the objectionable conduct without necessarily infringing upon the conduct of the lawful enterprise, whenever possible. 
(Ord. No. 3078, § 1 (5), 4-7-10) 
ARTICLE VIII. - MOBILE VENDORS 

Sec. 10-260. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the Mobile Vendor Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3059, § 2, 5-6-09; Ord. No. 4103, § 2, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 10-261. - Intent and purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect and preserve the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of Riviera Beach. This article is being enacted to regulate mobile vendors operating in the city. 
(Ord. No. 3059, § 2, 5-6-09; Ord. No. 4103, § 2, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 10-262. - Definitions. 
    The following words, term and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning. 
    Certificate of occupancy: means a certificate issued by the City of Riviera Beach Building Official to a builder or renovator, indicating that the building is in proper condition to be occupied. 
    Disposable tableware: Eating and drinking utensils made of paper and/or plastic that are disposed of after initial use. 
    Ice cream truck: A motor vehicle utilized as the point of retail sales of prewrapped or prepackaged ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen custard, flavored frozen water or similar frozen dessert products. 
    Mobile vending unit: Any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer, kiosk, pushcart, stand or other device designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which goods, wares, merchandise or food is peddled, vended, sold, displayed, offered for sale or given away. 
    Mobile vendor: A person who peddles, vends, sells, displays, offers to sell or gives away merchandise from a mobile vending unit which is parked or located on a parcel of private property. 
    Mobile vending operation: Peddling, vending, selling, displaying, offering for sale or giving away goods, wares, merchandise or food from a mobile vending unit located on private property. 
    Prepackaged food: means any properly labeled and processed food, prepackaged to prevent any direct human contact with the food product upon distribution from the manufacturer, and prepared at an approved source. 
    Restricted mobile vendor: A mobile vendor offering only prepackaged food, snow cones, raw produce, or prepackaged ice cream from a mobile vending unit, or a mobile automobile detailer. 
    Street-side vendor or road-side vendor: A person who peddles, vends, sells, displays, offers to sell or gives away any food products, wares, or merchandise while located in or on a public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way. 
    Temporary mobile vendor: A person and or group who peddles, vends, sells, displays, offers to sell or gives away merchandise from a mobile vending unit for less than 15 days per calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 3059, § 2, 5-6-09; Ord. No. 4103, § 2, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 10-263. - Permitted locations. 
(a)  Mobile vendors, except for ice cream trucks and mobile automobile detailers, are not permitted in the following districts: RS-5, RS-6, RS-8, RML-12, RD-15, RM-15, RMH-15, RMH-20, or RM-20. 
(b)  Mobile vendors are not permitted to conduct business in any area that is a public right-of-way. 
(c)  Mobile vendors shall not operate in driveways, drive aisles, landscape medians, easements, or fire lanes. 
(d)  Mobile vendors shall not operate on vacant, unimproved lots. 
(e)  Mobile vendors shall be located only on private property where an existing, permanent business operates in a building with a certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Mobile vendors shall provide the city with a notarized copy of the "Mobile Vendor Access Agreement Form" on an annual basis. 
(f)  During the application process, mobile vendors shall submit a sketch depicting the location of the mobile vendor on the property, including the designated parking spaces. 
(g)  Mobile vendors shall be located within 100 feet of an entrance of a primary building that holds the certificate of occupancy. 
(h)  Mobile vendors shall be setback a minimum of 35 feet from all intersections. 
(i)  Mobile vendors shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from all roads. 
(j)  Mobile vendors are not allowed within 300 feet of a school, playground, or childcare facility. 
(k)  Mobile vendors are not allowed to operate within 100 feet of another licensed mobile vendor. 
(l)  Mobile vendors are prohibited in a temporary building, tent, or structure. 
(m)  Mobile vending activities located within the Marina District Upland Area are exempt from the abovementioned regulations as long as the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Mobile vending activities occur within approved areas specifically designated for mobile vending activities. 
a.  The city and CRA are authorized to designate specific areas within the Marina District Upland Area for mobile vending activities. 
(2)  The mobile vendor possesses a valid city business tax receipt, and if applicable, any required state, county, and food safety licensure. 
(Ord. No. 3059, § 2, 5-6-09; Ord. No. 4103, § 2, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 10-264. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Mobile vendors may operate only during the business hours of the primary business on the property. 
(1)  Mobile vendors are restricted to the following hours of operation: 
a.  Monday to Thursday: 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
b.  Friday and Saturday: 7:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. 
c.  Sunday: 12:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(b)  The mobile vending unit shall be removed from the site during the hours of nonoperation. Any semi-permanent structure used and/or associated with the mobile vending operation shall also be removed from the site during hours of nonoperation. 
(Ord. No. 3059, § 2, 5-6-09; Ord. No. 4103, § 2, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 10-265. - Signage. 
(a)  All signs advertising for the mobile vending unit must meet the following requirements; 
(1)  Signs must be placed flat against the mobile vending unit. 
a.  Sandwich board signs are prohibited. 
b.  Any type of design or artwork that advertises the use of the mobile vending unit is considered to be a sign. 
(2)  Signs may not be larger than nine square feet. 
(3)  No more than three signs may be placed on the mobile vending unit. 
(b)  Mobile vendors are prohibited from using right-of-way signs and off-premises signs. 
(Ord. No. 3059, § 2, 5-6-09; Ord. No. 4103, § 2, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 10-266. - Exemptions and restrictions. 
(a)  A drive through is not permitted in conjunction with the mobile vendor. 
(b)  The mobile vendor shall install signage in a visible location on the mobile vending unit in a visible location indicating that loitering is not permitted. 
(c)  The mobile vendor must keep the immediate area surrounding the mobile vending unit clean and free from litter, garbage, and debris. 
(d)  Mobile vendors providing food or beverage intended for immediate consumption must provide a trash receptacle within ten feet of the mobile vending unit. 
(e)  The use of amplified music must adhere to existing city noise regulations. 
(f)  The use of temporary or portable lighting is prohibited except that which is required to illuminate the serving area of the mobile vending unit. Lighting must be shielded from adjacent properties to protect against light trespass. 
(g)  The current business tax receipt must be posted in a visible location on the mobile vending unit, in addition to any required state, county, and food safety licensure. 
(Ord. No. 3059, § 2, 5-6-09; Ord. No. 4103, § 2, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 10-267. - Restricted mobile vendors. 
(a)  Ice cream trucks. 
(1)  Permitted sales locations. 
a.  Sales from ice cream trucks shall occur only on public roadways with a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less located within residential districts or on private ways with the consent of the owner or owners of the private roadway. 
1.  Ice cream trucks shall pull as far as practicable to the side of the right-of-way when stopping for the purpose of making sales and shall operate four-way flashers when so stopped. In no event shall an ice cream truck stopped for the purpose of making sales prevent the passage of other motor vehicles on the right-of-way. 
2.  Ice cream trucks may stop for the purpose of making sales only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., however no sales are permitted after dusk. 
3.  Sales from the ice cream truck shall occur only when the ice cream truck is lawfully stopped. 
4.  Sales shall occur only from the side of the truck away from moving traffic and as near as possible to the curb or side of the street. 
5.  Sales shall not occur to a person standing in the roadway. 
(2)  Prohibited locations. 
a.  No ice cream truck shall make any sales within 500 feet of a restaurant or retail store selling prepackaged food items. 
b.  No ice cream truck shall make any sales within 500 feet of any public school. 
c.  No ice cream truck shall stop at any time for the purpose of making sales in any area where parking is prohibited. 
(3)  Safety requirements. 
a.  Signs stating "WATCH FOR CHILDREN" must be provided on the front, back and both sides of the vehicle in at least four inches letters of contrasting colors. 
b.  A serving window capable of being closed when not in use must be provided and located on the curbside only. 
c.  The vehicle must be equipped with left and right outside rear view mirrors as well as two additional outside wide-angle mirrors on the front and back of the vehicle to enable the driver to see around the entire vehicle. 
d.  All vehicles must have operable four-way, yellow flashing hazard lights to warn approaching drivers of children. 
e.  A rear bumper cover must be installed. 
(b)  Raw produce vendors. 
(1)  Permitted locations. 
a.  Raw produce vendors shall be setback a minimum of 35 feet from all intersections. 
b.  Raw produce vendors shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from all roads. 
(2)  Prohibited locations. 
a.  Raw produce vendors shall not operate in parking spaces, driveways, sidewalks, fire lanes, rights-of-way, or public roads. 
b.  Raw produce vendors are prohibited in a temporary building, tent or structure. 
(3)  Safety requirements. 
a.  All products must be the original produce or work of the vendor. 
b.  No items offered for sale will be commercially grown, created or produced without value added by the vendor. 
c.  Produce offered for sale must be free from harmful pesticide residues and any applications must have been made according to manufacturer's directions. 
d.  All food items must be free from insects and spoilage. 
e.  All produce must be washed. 
(c)  Mobile automobile detailers. 
(1)  Permitted locations. 
a.  In all residential areas, mobile automobile detailers must operate in the driveway or parking lot. 
b.  Mobile automobile detailers shall not operate on sidewalks, fire lanes, rights-of-way, or public roads. 
c.  Mobile automobile detailers shall not block or impede traffic on any public or private road, easement, or right-of-way. 
d.  All water or other substances used by the mobile automobile detailer must be fully contained on the site where the vendor is operating. 
e.  Mobile automobile detailers shall not play music while operating in residential areas. 
f.  Mobile automobile detailers may not operate as a home occupation. Vendors are prohibited from servicing vehicles from their primary residence. 
(2)  Hours of operation. 
a.  Mobile automobile detailers are restricted to the following hours of operation in residential areas: 
1.  Monday to Thursday: 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
2.  Friday and Saturday: 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
3.  Sunday: 12:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
b.  Mobile automobile detailers are restricted to the following hours of operation in nonresidential areas: 
1.  Monday to Thursday: 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
2.  Friday and Saturday: 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
3.  Sunday: 12:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 3059, § 2, 5-6-09; Ord. No. 4103, § 2, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 10-268. - Licensing requirements. 
    Prior to the issuance of a business tax receipt, mobile food vendors must comply with the following State of Florida and local requirements as applicable: 
(1)  Mobile food vendors engaged in the selling of cooked or prepared food must be licensed by the Florida Division of Hotels and Restaurants. 
a.  Obtaining licensing from the Florida Division of Hotels and Restaurants does not guarantee approval by the City of Riviera Beach Planning and Zoning Division. 
b.  Mobile food vendors must pass all inspections conducted by the Florida Division of Hotels and Restaurants to maintain the business tax receipt for their establishment. 
c.  Current inspection results must be conspicuously posted on the mobile vending unit. 
(2)  Mobile food vendors engaged in the selling of prepackaged ice cream, popcorn, raw produce, or smoothies must be licensed by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
a.  Obtaining licensing from the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services does not guarantee approval by the City of Riviera Beach Planning and Zoning Division. 
b.  Mobile food vendors must pass all inspections conducted by Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services to maintain the business tax receipt for their establishment. 
c.  Current inspection results must be conspicuously posted on the mobile vending unit. 
(3)  Mobile food vendors must pass an inspection by the City of Riviera Beach Fire Department. 
a.  Obtaining a passing inspection does not guarantee approval by the City of Riviera Beach Planning and Zoning Division. 
b.  Mobile food vendors must pass all inspections conducted by the City of Riviera Beach Fire Department to maintain the business tax receipt for their establishment. 
(Ord. No. 3059, § 2, 5-6-09; Ord. No. 4103, § 2, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 10-269. - Parking requirements. 
(a)  Mobile food vendors shall secure a minimum of two dedicated parking spaces for customers utilizing their services. 
(1)  Parking spaces shall be marked as required by zoning regulations. 
(2)  Parking spaces must meet the size requirements established by the city. 
(b)  Mobile food vendors shall not utilize more than ten percent of the required parking for the primary business holding the certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Mobile food vendors shall not sell to customers parked in areas designated as public rights-of-way. 
(d)  Mobile food vendors shall not solicit or conduct business with any customers in motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 3059, § 2, 5-6-09; Ord. No. 4103, § 2, 10-18-17) 
Sec. 10-270. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article may be enforced through the city's code compliance procedures or as otherwise authorized in this Code and may be pursued by appropriate remedy in a court of competent jurisdiction at the city's discretion. If code compliance is utilized to enforce this article, a resulting code lien may be assessed against the private property upon which the mobile vending operation operates or operated. 
(Ord. No. 3059, § 2, 5-6-09; Ord. No. 4103, § 2, 10-18-17) 
Chapter 11 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; assessment charge for liens imposed by city, § 2-3; code enforcement, § 2-311 et seq.; animals, ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; garbage and refuse, ch. 7; burying of garbage, trash, etc., prohibited, § 7-2; accumulation of debris, etc., on private property prohibited, § 7-4; health and sanitation, ch. 8; utilities, ch. 20; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; signs, ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29. 
State Law reference- Abatement by inspection, F.S. § 60.05; nuisances injurious to health, F.S. ch. 386; public nuisances, F.S. ch. 823. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Nuisances, noise generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noises or any unreasonable noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the city. All or any of the above shall be and constitute an injurious nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a business or permit such business to be conducted in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance or in such manner as to endanger the health, morals or welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(c)  A nuisance regulated by this section shall be described as and shall include any situation or occasions where one or more people shall meet or congregate and who cause any disturbance to the neighborhood by loud noises, profane or indecent language, loud or raucous laughter or with voices or other behavior calculated to breach the peace of the citizens of the city. Indecent exposure by persons or indecent behavior are also nuisances. The loud racing or speeding of motors or scratching off of vehicles and the making of loud noises by the use of tools or banging on metal in repair shops between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and between 8:00 p.m. Saturday night and 12:00 noon Sunday are declared nuisances. 
(d)  Any servant, agent or employee in charge of a business permitting such nuisance to be maintained shall be equally responsible to the city as is the employer or owner thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12-2) 
Sec. 11-2. - Filling or leveling ground with waste, uncovering waste. 
    The filling, leveling or raising the surface of any ground or lot within the city with animal or vegetable substances, filth gathered or in cleaning yards or streets, waste material from mills or factories or the removal of the surface of any ground filled with such offensive matters or substances in such manner as to cause noisome odors or noxious gases to arise are hereby declared nuisances injurious to health. 
(Code 1957, § 12-1) 
Sec. 11-3. - Filth, offensive matter. 
(a)  Filth, the contents of cesspools, offal, garbage, foul water, dye water, refuse from factories, urine, stable manure, decayed animal or vegetable matter or other offensive substance detrimental to health, thrown, placed or allowed to remain in or upon any private premises, street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, gutter, public reservation or open lot within the city are hereby declared nuisances injurious to health. 
(b)  No person shall discharge on any street or alley or on his own, or the premises of another, any foul or fetid water or fluid substance, or throw thereon any decaying flesh or vegetable or other offensive or noisome matter. 
(Code 1957, § 12-3) 
Sec. 11-4. - Keeping hogs, diseased animals; unclean slaughterhouses. 
    Keeping, herding and feeding of hogs in pens or otherwise; the keeping of any animal affected by glanders or other contagious or pestilential disease; unclean and filthy slaughterhouses, rooms, buildings or places where sheep, hogs, cattle or other animals are slaughtered are hereby declared to be nuisances injurious to health. 
(Code 1957, § 12-4) 
Sec. 11-5. - Keeping hides, filthy rags, bones. 
    No person shall keep green or dry hides or filthy rags, bones, guano or other matter or things of offensive or noisome odors in his place of business. The city shall order any person keeping such nuisances to remove the same within 24 hours, and a failure by such person to comply with such order, without good cause, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 12-5) 
Sec. 11-6. - Carcasses. 
    Whenever any carcass shall be found, the city shall order the owner thereof or of the premises whereon it is found to remove it within six hours. Failure to comply with such order, without good cause, shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 12-6) 
Sec. 11-7. - Rubbish, trash, stagnant water, underbrush, hazardous growth. 
    It is hereby found and declared to be expedient and necessary to the preservation of the public health, comfort, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city that all land within the city be required henceforth to be kept clean, sanitary and free from all weeds, brush, trash, filth and other obnoxious growth. The allowing of debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, papers or stagnant water to accumulate on any lot, tract or parcel of land, improved or unimproved, in the city to the extent and in the manner that it constitutes or may reasonably become a menace to life, property, the public health and welfare; creates a fire hazard; or provides a nest and/or breeding ground for insects, rodents, snakes and other types of pests and vermin shall be unlawful and is hereby prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1957, § 12-7) 
Cross reference- Weeds and weed control, § 11-31 et seq. 
Sec. 11-8. - Nuisances affecting health and morals. 
    Any nuisance within the city affecting or likely to affect the health or morals of the community not specifically mentioned or described may be abated and the maintaining of such nuisance may be punished as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 12-8) 
Sec. 11-9. - Abatement. 
    The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to order any nuisance within the city to be abated, and if any person shall fail to abate any nuisance when ordered to do so within the time prescribed by the city manager or if the owner or occupant of the premises where the nuisance is located cannot be found within the city, then the city manager may order the chief of police to abate the nuisance, in which case the chief shall proceed to abate the nuisance and shall have the authority to enter upon the property where the nuisance is located and to do whatever is reasonably necessary in abating the nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the chief or with any person acting under the direction of the chief in the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Code 1957, § 12-9) 
Sec. 11-10. - Shrubbery and other visual obstructions at intersections. 
(a)  Distance from intersection. On any corner or intersection, no wall, fence or other obstruction, including a sign or structure, shall be erected and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be permitted or maintained within 25 feet of the intersection of two streets at a height of more than three feet above the road grade in residential districts within the city. A wire fence with a mesh size of no less than two inches may be erected to a height of five feet on a lot at the intersection of two streets, provided no hedge, bushes, vines or any other type of visual obstruction shall be placed or maintained in front of or behind a fence within 25 feet of the intersection at a height of more than three feet above the road grade. 
(b)  Side and rear lot lines. On all side and rear lot lines, in all residential areas, solid walls, hedges and fences shall be limited to a height of five feet, except as on the corners as designated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Fencing. All mesh fencing of two inches or larger shall have all horizontal strands at an even height in order to prevent obstruction to sight. No barbed wire shall be permitted as fencing anywhere within the city except that it may be permitted on the top of a fence five feet or higher in commercial districts, provided it is installed in the usual manner at an angle with the barbed wire leaning in toward the property. 
(d)  Easements. All easements shall be left free and clear without fences, hedges or walls, except where special exception has been granted. Such special exception may be granted by the city council only when the property owner has first agreed in writing to remove such obstruction upon the request of the city council and at the property owner's expense. 
(Code 1957, § 12-10) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; subdivisions, ch. 30. 
Secs. 11-11-11-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS AND WEED CONTROL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Rubbish, trash, stagnant water, underbrush, hazardous growth, § 11-7. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-31. - Dense growth of certain height prohibited. 
    The dense growth of trees, vines, underbrush, weeds, wild growth and grass in excess of 18 inches in height is prohibited in the city. The width and overhang of trees shall be trimmed to prevent intrusion of space along sidewalks, streets and public ways. 
(Code 1957, § 12-26) 
Sec. 11-32. - Hazardous growth. 
    When the growth of trees or bushes or any other vegetation or the fruits thereof and particularly coconuts, coconut palms and other palms which by reason of height, proximity to neighboring structures, physical condition, disease such as but not limited to lethal yellowing of palms, or other peculiar characteristics, might in time of hurricane winds prevalent in this region cause injury to life or damage to property within the immediate area surrounding such region or cause the spread of disease, the existence of any such debris, vegetation or other matter is prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1957, § 12-27) 
Sec. 11-33. - Inspection; notice; failure to comply. 
(a)  If the city code inspector or a duly authorized city employee finds that any lot, tract, or parcel of land in the city is in violation of any sections of the Code of Ordinances, he shall direct a notice to the owner of record of such property by certified mail with a return receipt requested at his last known mailing address as shown by the records of the county that the property is in violation of such sections, and that the property needs to be cleaned or the hazardous growth removed, whichever is applicable within the specific time period. The notice shall state the estimated cost of such clearing or removal work and that there will be added to such cost $75.00 for administrative and accounting costs, plus costs incurred for advertising, if the owners do not clean the land or remove hazardous growth. 
(b)  If there is an occupied dwelling on the property, a copy of the notice shall be served by an appropriate official of the city, including but not limited to a police officer, upon the occupant of the property or upon any agent of the owner thereof. The mailing of such notice shall be sufficient proof thereof, and the delivery of notice to an occupied dwelling shall be equivalent to mailing. If the mailing address of the owner is not known and the property is unoccupied, and the owner has no agent in the city or the notice directed by certified mail is returned undelivered, such notice shall be posted upon the property as notice to the owner, a copy posted at an appropriate location at the city hall and notice published at least once not less than ten days before cleaning, in a newspaper circulated in the city, calling attention to the owner of such violation and including a description of the property. 
(c)  If the owner or occupant of any land so notified shall fail to comply with the order of the official within the period so prescribed, then the official shall proceed to have such land cleaned and cleared or hazardous growth removed at the price quoted, and the city shall cause such bill to be paid. He shall report his action to the city council signifying the amount paid for such work and shall add thereto $75.00 for administrative and accounting costs and any other costs incurred. 
(Code 1957, § 12-28) 
Sec. 11-34. - Lien against benefited land; notice. 
(a)  Upon completion of the work, the cost of such clearing, plus the administration and accounting expenses plus any other costs incurred, shall be assessed against the owners of the property benefited by such cleaning and clearing, and such total amount shall be a lien against such parcel of land so benefited, and shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum. 
(b)  The city clerk shall send a notice to such owners by certified mail, with a return receipt requested, stating that because of their failure to comply with the building inspector's order, the city has caused the land to be cleared. The notice shall show the total amount assessed against the property and state that the amount has been assessed against them and is a lien against the property so benefited and that such sum shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum until paid. The city tax collector shall issue statements showing the amounts of such liens at the same time the tax statements for ad valorem taxes thereafter are submitted to the owners of lots, tracts or parcels of land subject to such liens. 
(Code 1957, § 12-29) 
Sec. 11-35. - Protest; aggrieved persons. 
    Any aggrieved party who wishes to protest the amount or justice of any assessment under this section shall have the right to file a complaint or protest within 15 days of the day the assessment was made known to him. The complaint or protest shall be filed with the city clerk in writing. The city council shall sit in a special meeting to hear and determine any complaints or protests of any aggrieved party. Upon the hearing of the complaints, the city council shall make such adjustments as it deems just and proper. 
(Code 1957, § 12-30) 
Secs. 11-36-11-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISEASED VEGETATION AND TREES 

Sec. 11-51. - Prohibited. 
(a)  The retention and maintenance on private property of diseased vegetation and/or trees, and particularly palm trees infected or killed by the lethal yellow disease, are hereby found, declared and deemed to be a public nuisance detrimental to the health, convenience, comfort and safety of the public, and the creation of such a nuisance is hereby declared to be unlawful, and the failure or refusal of the owner or party in possession of the private property to remove such dead vegetation and/or trees is declared to be unlawful. 
(b)  The code enforcement division of the city is hereby authorized and empowered to affix or cause to have affixed to such dead vegetation and/or trees a notice to the owner or party in possession of the private property to remove such dead vegetation and/or trees within 20 days. A letter of explanation shall be left at the property in question if there is an occupied dwelling on the property. A legal notice shall be sent by certified mail to the owner of the property in question notifying the owner that the diseased vegetation and/or trees shall be removed within 20 days. 
(c)  If diseased vegetation and/or trees are removed by other than the owner or party in possession of the private property, such work shall be done by a tree contractor. 
(Code 1957, § 12-31) 
Sec. 11-52. - Inspection; notice to abate. 
    The city manager or his designated representative shall, as often as may be necessary, inspect lands within the city. If the city manager or his designated representative shall determine that such nuisance exists on any lands within the city, he shall forthwith notify the person designated as the owner of the property on the public records of the county of such nuisance and direct such person to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time from the date of such written notice. Such written notice shall be considered effective upon personal service as provided for in Florida Statutes or upon execution of a return receipt indicating that such notice by mail has been accepted at such person's address or by posting a copy of such notice on the property determined to be such a nuisance and by publishing the notice one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 12-32) 
Sec. 11-53. - Form of notice to abate. 
    The notice to abate shall be in substantially the following form: 
Notice to Abate Nuisance 
_____
Date To: _____ Address: _____ Property:  _____
Lot, Block, 
Subdivision or Plat  
You as the owner of the above-described property are hereby notified that it has been determined by the City of Riviera Beach City Manager that the following condition constituting a nuisance, exists on such property: 
(describe nuisance) 
Unless within _____ days you abate such nuisance, or file your appeal to the City Council in the manner provided in Ordinance No. 1050, the City will abate the nuisance and thereafter the cost of such work shall be an assessment against such property. 
City Manager or 
Designated Representative  
(Code 1957, § 12-33) 
Sec. 11-54. - Right of appeal; notice and hearing. 
    Within 20 days from the notice provided for in section 11-52, the owner of the property described in such notice may appeal from the decision of the city manager by filing in the office of the city manager a notice of appeal to the city council. The city manager shall place the appeal on the agenda for hearing at a regular or special city council meeting and notify the owner by mail of the date, time and place of such hearing. At such hearing the owner may introduce any relevant evidence to show why the determination that a nuisance exists should be reversed or modified. The city manager or his designated representative may introduce relevant evidence he may have in support of his conclusion. The city council shall, as soon after such hearing as possible, render its decision in the form of a resolution reversing or modifying the findings of the city manager or affirming his findings and directing that each nuisance be abated and provided the cost of such abatement may be assessed as a lien against the property in the manner provided for in this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12-34) 
Sec. 11-55. - Abatement by city. 
    If within the specified time the owner has not abated the nuisance or filed an appeal to the city council in the manner provided in this section, the city manager or his designated representative shall cause the nuisance to be abated by the city's employees, agents or contractors, who shall be authorized to enter upon the property and take such action as is reasonably required to effect abatement. The city manager shall report the cost of abatement to the city council and the city council shall by resolution provide that the cost of abatement is a lien against the property on which the nuisance is abated of equal dignity with taxes for the year in which such expenditure was incurred. The city manager or designated representative shall have the power to enforce this section. The city manager or his designated representative may enter any premises, private or public, for the purpose of making inspection, upon presentation of proper credentials in connection therewith. 
(Code 1957, § 12-35) 
Sec. 11-56. - When lien due; penalty for delinquency; manner of collection upon nonpayment. 
(a)  The cost of abatement shall be paid within the taxable year in which such expenditure was incurred, and shall remain a lien coequal with the lien of all state, county, district and municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and claims, until paid, and shall bear interest at the rate not to exceed eight percent per annum from the date of abatement. If not paid within the taxable year in which such expenditure was incurred, there shall be added a penalty at the rate of one percent per month until paid. Upon failure of the property owner to pay such assessment when due, the city council shall cause to be brought the necessary legal proceedings to enforce payment thereof with all accrued interest and penalties together with all legal costs incurred, including a reasonable lawyer's fee to be assessed as part of the costs. 
(b)  The city shall have the right of foreclosure upon default of payment of such assessment when due and service of process against unknown or nonresidential defendants may be had by publication, as now provided by law in other chancery suits. The foreclosure proceedings shall be prosecuted to a sale and conveyance of the property involved in said proceedings as now provided by law in suits to foreclose mortgages or in any other alternative remedy provided by law. 
(Code 1957, § 12-36) 
Secs. 11-57-11-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED, WRECKED, ABANDONED PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 11-71-11-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 19; seizure and impounding of certain vehicles in beach areas, § 19-39; impounding vehicles generally, § 19-146 et seq. 

Sec. 11-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned property means all tangible personal property which does not have an identifiable owner and which has been disposed of on public property in a wrecked, inoperative or partially dismantled condition or which has no apparent intrinsic value to the rightful owner. 
    Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between boundary lines of every publicly dedicated right-of-way within the city limits. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(Code 1957, § 12-66) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-92. - Abandonment of vehicles prohibited. 
    No person shall abandon, store, park or lease or permit parking or storing of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle as defined in section 11-91 within the city. No person shall leave any such vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned. 
(Code 1957, § 12-67) 
Sec. 11-93. - Leaving of wrecked, nonoperating vehicles on street prohibited. 
    No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 12-68) 
Sec. 11-94. - Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles. 
    No person in charge or control of any real property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than ten days. No person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the city for longer time than ten days. This section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(Code 1957, § 12-69) 
Sec. 11-95. - Nuisances; duty of owner. 
    The accumulation and storage of such vehicle as defined in sections 11-92 through 11-94 on public or private property shall constitute a nuisance, detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. It shall be the duty of the owner of such vehicle and the private property owner or lessee or other person in possession of private property upon which such vehicle is located to remove it from the city or to have it housed in an enclosed building where it shall not be visible from the street. 
(Code 1957, § 12-70) 
Sec. 11-96. - Code inspector's duty. 
    The code inspector shall give written notice to the registered owner of the vehicle which is in violation of sections as described in this article, or to give such notice to the owner, lessee or person in possession of the private land whereon the vehicle is situated if the identity of the registered owner is not readily ascertained, advising such person that the vehicle violates this division and demanding that the motor vehicle be removed from the city within ten days or that within ten days it shall be housed in an enclosed building where it will not be visible from the street. Such notice may be given by personal service or by certified mail. 
(Code 1957, § 12-71) 
Sec. 11-97. - Junked motor vehicles of no market value. 
    Junked motor vehicles having no market value other than for salvage or parts or as scrap metal abandoned on any city street, public park, square or public place or ground in an inoperable condition are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and code enforcement officers are hereby authorized to summarily abate such nuisances by removing junked motor vehicles to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Code 1957, § 12-72) 
Sec. 11-98. - Pretaking hearing. 
    Before any property shall be taken, disposed of through sale, auction, gift, destruction or any other method of disposition and pursuant to any supplemental regulations in F.S. ch. 705, any person claiming an interest in the property shall be notified and given the right to a pretaking hearing before the code enforcement board on a date not to be sooner than five days after the dates prescribed in F.S. § 705.103, which prescribes 30 days' notice as to boats and ten days as to other property. The notice of date, time and location of the pretaking hearing shall be incorporated and be a part of the notice requirements referenced in or as otherwise provided by law or hereinafter amended. 
(Code 1957, § 12-73) 
Cross reference- Code enforcement board, § 2-331 et seq. 
Sec. 11-99. - Penalty for violation of division. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided by section 1-11 of this Code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(b)  Any person failing to comply within ten days of notice shall be given notice of the right to a pretaking hearing before the code enforcement board. Any person with an interest in the property that has been so notified will be presumed to have abandoned such property after expiration of the time period specified on the pretaking notice. The property will be removed by the city or authorized agent to a place of storage to be held for 30 days at the expense of the owner. The property may be reclaimed within 30 days of removal with proof of title and payment of towing and storage costs. The property must be removed from the city or brought into compliance with this division. After 30 days, the property will be destroyed or disposed of. 
(Code 1957, § 12-74) 
Secs. 11-100-11-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 11-116. - Wrecked, derelict and other abandoned property. 
(a)  When any wrecked, derelict or abandoned personal property other than a motor vehicle as defined in section 11-91 shall be found upon any street, avenue, alley or other public way or upon any public park, square or other public place or grounds within the corporate limits, it shall be the duty of the chief of police or any police officer to take possession of such property. It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee forthwith to notify the owner of the property if the owner is known. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly abandon or discard any refrigerator, icebox, home freezer or other airtight unit from which the doors have not been removed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain on his premises, where children may have access thereto, any refrigerator, icebox, home freezer or other such device which has been abandoned or which is not in use without having removed the door therefrom. This section will not apply to any commercial dealer who has fenced and locked his premises. 
(Code 1957, § 12-86) 
Sec. 11-117. - Notice of sale. 
    When any wrecked, derelict or abandoned property is seized under the provisions of section 11-116, if the owner of the property fails to repossess the property within three days after being notified or if the owner is unknown, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to report the seizure of the property to the city manager and the city manager shall order the chief of police in writing to sell the property at public outcry, after giving a reasonable notice of the time and place of such sale. A notice describing the property, the time and place of sale and the name of the owner, if known, posted at the city hall at least ten days before the date of sale shall be and constitute reasonable notice of sale. 
(Code 1957, § 12-87) 
Sec. 11-118. - Pretaking hearing. 
    Before any property shall be disposed of through sale, auction, gift, destruction or any other method of disposition as provided for in section 11-117 and the supplemental regulations adopted thereto or F.S. § 705.16, any person claiming an interest in the property shall be notified and given the right to a pretaking hearing before the code enforcement board on a date not to be sooner than five days after the dates prescribed in F.S. § 705.16(4)(a), which prescribes 30 days' notice as to boats and ten days as to other property. The notice of date, time and location of pretaking hearing shall be incorporated and be a part of the notice requirements in section 11-117, or as otherwise provided by law or hereinafter amended. 
(Code 1957, § 12-88) 
Sec. 11-119. - Sale, disposition of proceeds. 
(a)  The sale shall be made by the chief of police or any officer under his direction at the time and place described in the notice and shall be to the highest bidder for cash. The chief of police shall deliver the property to the highest bidder, and shall deliver a bill of sale to the purchaser if requested. The purchaser shall pay the cost of preparing the bill of sale in addition to the purchase of the property. 
(b)  The chief of police shall deduct from the proceeds of the sale the actual necessary expense incurred by him in caring for the property and three percent of the proceeds of the sale for caring for the property and making the sale, which shall be paid into the treasury of the city. The net proceeds of the sale after making the deductions as aforesaid shall be paid over to the director of finance for the benefit of the city. The net proceeds after deductions shall be paid to the owner or any person entitled thereto, if claim shall be made to the city with satisfactory proof of ownership within one year and a day from the date of the sale. 
(Code 1957, § 12-89) 
Secs. 11-120-11-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SHOPPING CARTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4031, § 1, adopted Sept. 4, 2013, amended the Code by adding provisions numbered as §§ 11-141-11-144. In order to avoid conflicts in section numbering the editor has numbered the provisions added by Ord. No. 4031 as herein set out. 

Sec. 11-131. - Findings and declaration. 
    The city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
(a)  The accumulation of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, on public property is found to create a condition tending to reduce property values; to promote blight and deterioration; to be aesthetically detrimental to the community; and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the city. 
(b)  Responsibility for minimizing or eliminating this condition rests with individuals who use shopping carts and the businesses which provide shopping carts for their patrons. Therefore, effective signage and identification on shopping carts shall be mandated, and the presence of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, on public property is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 9-4-13) 
Sec. 11-132. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or unless otherwise noted: 
    Shopping cart means a basket mounted on wheels or a similar device which is generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. 
    Shopping cart owner or owner means any person or entity that owns a shopping cart(s) and/or furnishes a shopping cart(s) for use. 
(Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 9-4-13) 
Sec. 11-133. - Administration and enforcement. 
    Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the city's code enforcement division of the police department. However, in enforcing the provisions of this article, any employee of the city may remove, or cause the removal of a shopping cart, or parts thereof, from public property. 
(Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 9-4-13) 
Sec. 11-134. - Shopping cart identification. 
(a)  Every shopping cart owner shall affix an identification sign on the shopping cart providing the name, address and phone number of the owner. If a shopping cart is only marked with a Florida Department of State registered name or mark, the shopping cart owner shall provide the city annually with the name, address and telephone number of the owner for such registered name or mark. 
(b)  Any shopping cart owner desiring an exemption from the identification sign requirements of subsection (a), of this section, shall file a petition for exemption with the Code Enforcement Administrator or his or her designee. 
(1)  Upon such filing, the code enforcement administrator or designee shall issue the shopping cart owner an exemption from the requirements of subsection (a) if: 
a.  Physical barriers exist to prevent the removal of the shopping cart(s) from the establishment or the parking lot where utilized, which conform to all applicable building code requirements; 
b.  Alarm mechanisms or other security devices (such as wheel locking mechanisms to be used in conjunction with an electronic barrier, or protruding arms or similar devices prohibiting the cart from being removed from the interior of the establishment) are attached to the shopping cart(s) to prevent its removal from the establishment or the parking lot where utilized; 
c.  A system has been established, which may be mechanical in nature, requiring a deposit (in an amount which would not deter the use of the cart but would encourage the return of the cart) to use the shopping cart(s); or 
d.  Similar methods have been adopted that would prevent the removal of its shopping cart(s) from the establishment or its parking lot where utilized. 
(2)  Any exemption granted under subsection (a) shall expire if the grounds for the exemption cease to be maintained or used. 
(Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 9-4-13) 
Sec. 11-135. - Removal, storage and disposal of shopping carts found on public property. 
(a)  The city may remove and place into storage all shopping carts found on public property. 
(b)  After the city has removed identifiable shopping carts from public property, the code enforcement administrator or his or her designee shall promptly provide written notice by regular mail to the shopping cart owner at the address designated on the shopping cart's identification sign. If the cart has no identification sign but the owner can otherwise be readily determined by other distinguishing characteristics or notice to the city, the code enforcement administrator or designee shall mail the notice to the determined shopping cart owner. In addition to the notice sent by mail, the code enforcement administrator or designee shall post a copy of the notice at the police department. The notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing and posting by the code enforcement administrator or designee, and receipt of the notice by the shopping cart owner is not required. 
(1)  The shopping cart owner shall have 20 calendar days from the date of the notice to retrieve the shopping cart. 
(2)  If the shopping cart is not retrieved by its owner within said 20 days, title to the shopping cart shall vest in city and may be disposed of in any manner (including discarded) as determined by the code enforcement administrator or designee. 
(c)  Procedures for handling unidentifiable shopping carts found on public property. Any unidentifiable shopping carts found on public property, where the owner of the shopping cart cannot be readily determined, shall be handled as abandoned property pursuant to this code. Notwithstanding any provision or subsections to the contrary, no retrieval, storage or similar fee may be charged to the shopping cart owner except to the extent permitted by Florida Law. 
(Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 9-4-13) 
Secs. 11-136-11-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Loud and unnecessary noise declared offensive, § 12-24; parks and recreation, ch. 13; excessive operating noise from watercraft, § 13-58; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 19; vehicles for hire, ch. 21; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 31. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acoustical terminology. All acoustical terminology and all definitions thereof shall be those contained in ASA S1.1-1960, as amended, American Standard Acoustical Terminology of the American National Standards Institute. 
    Ambient noise means the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from many sources, near and far. For the purposes of this Code, ambient noise level is that level which is exceeded only 50 percent of the time during an observation period of not less than seven minutes, excluding random or intermittent noises and the alleged offensive noise at the location and the time of day at which a comparison with all alleged offensive noise is to be made. The evaluation of the ambient noise level may be done in accordance with American National Standard S1.13-1971, as amended, or may be done manually as follows: 
(1)  Observe a sound level meter at either five-second or ten-second intervals and record the A-weighted level indicated by the meter needle with the meter on fast response. 
(2)  Repeat the observation and measurements over a period of not less than seven minutes and of a sufficient time period so as to make at least 50 readings. 
(3)  Calculate the A-weighted sound pressure level that is exceeded 50 percent of the observation period. This level shall also be referred to as the L50. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments, public service corporations operated by private corporations, and the state department of transportation as are designated or authorized by the department or the chief of police of an incorporated city or any sheriff of any of the various counties. 
    A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dBA. 
    Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition, for or on public or private right-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
    Decibel (dBA) means a unit for measuring the intensity of a sound, the mathematical formula for which is expressed as the volume of a sound which is equal to ten times the logarithm of the ratio of the intensity of the sound to the intensity of a specified standard sound; abbreviated dBA. 
    Discrete tone (pure tone) means a pure tone or a single frequency sound. This is expressed technically as a sound wave whose instantaneous sound pressure varies essentially as a single sinusoidal function of time. 
    Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a natural disaster or public calamity; work required to protect persons or property from imminent danger caused by hurricanes, tornados, floods or other natural disasters or public calamity; or work by private or public utilities when installing or restoring utility service. 
    Fixed source means a machine or device capable of creating a noise level at the property line upon which it is located, including but not limited to industrial and commercial process machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, air conditioning apparatus, refrigeration machines or pool heaters. 
    Fluctuating noise means a noise in which the loudness varies with time. This is expressed technically as a noise whose sound pressure level varies significantly and exceeds the ambient noise level. 
    Impulsive noise means a very short duration noise. It is a noise characterized by brief exertions of sound pressure which significantly exceed the ambient sound pressure. 
    Intermittent noise means an interrupted noise which reoccurs at either regular or irregular intervals, excluding an impulsive noise. The sound pressure level of an intermittent noise will equal the ambient environment level two or more times during the period of observation. 
    Motor-driven cycle means any motorcycle, and any motor scooter with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, including every bicycle with a motor attached. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    Motorboat means any boat or vessel propelled or powered by machinery, whether or not such machinery is the principal source of propulsion, including but not limited to boats, barges, amphibious craft, water-ski-towing devices and hovercraft. 
    Motorcycle means any motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Noise means any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings. (Also see Unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. ) 
    Noise-sensitive zone means quiet zones as designated by the city council. Noise-sensitive activities include but are not limited to operations of schools, libraries open to the public, churches, hospitals and nursing homes. 
    Nonsteady noise means the same as a fluctuating noise. 
    Period of observation means the time interval during which acoustical data and facts are obtained. 
    Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
    Property line means an imaginary line along the surface, and its vertical plane extension, which separates the real property owned, rented or leased by one person from that owned, rented or leased by another person, excluding intrabuilding real property divisions. 
    Sound means a temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical quantity in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant points. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels. The output meter reads sound pressure level when properly calibrated, and the instrument is of type 2 or better, as specified in the American National Standards Institute Publication S1.4-1971, or its successor publications. 
    Sound pressure level means the sound pressure level, in decibels, of a sound is 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to the reference sound pressure. The reference is 0.0002 ubar. The sound pressure level may be evaluated using flat, A, B or C scales as defined by the American National Standards Institute specifications or its successor bodies, except that only the A-weighting and fast dynamic response need be provided and shall be called the sound level. 
    Steady noise means a nonfluctuating noise or a noise whose level remains essentially constant during the period of observation. 
    Unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise means any sound or noise conflicting with the criteria, standards or levels set forth in this article for permissible noise. In the absence of specific maximum noise levels, a noise level which exceeds the ambient sound level by five dBA or more, when measured at the nearest property line or, in the case of multifamily residential buildings, when measured anywhere in one dwelling unit or from common space in the same building, shall be deemed an unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. 
    Zoning district means any of the several designated categories in the zoning chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 12-106) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-142. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to prevent, prohibit and provide for the abatement of unnecessary noise which may injure the health or welfare or degrade the quality of life of the citizens and residents of the city and adjoining neighbors of the surrounding municipalities. This article shall apply to the control of all sound originating within the limits of this jurisdiction. 
(b)  This article shall constitute a uniform law applicable throughout the incorporated area of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 12-107) 
Sec. 11-143. - Exemptions from article. 
    The following are exempt from the operation of this article, except the operating motor vehicles under subsection 11-172(d), which specifically exempts certain vehicles: 
(1)  All public parks, schools, playgrounds and recreation areas specifically designated for such activity in performance of that activity. 
(2)  All equipment tests required by law. 
(3)  All procedures or processes required by law. 
(4)  All accidental soundings of equipment or mechanical failure or equipment making noise prohibited in this article. 
(5)  Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(6)  Noises resulting from emergency work as defined in section 11-141. 
(7)  Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the city manager. 
(8)  Noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a permit has been approved pursuant to the special events regulations contained in article IV of ch. 10 of the Code. 
(Code 1957, § 12-108; Ord. No. 2635, § 1, 6-15-94) 
Sec. 11-144. - Periods of observation. 
    All periods of observation made in this article shall be determined with regard to the character of the noise being measured and the particular instrument used to make the measurement and shall be made in accordance with the standards contained in ANSI S1.13-197, as amended, of the American National Standards Institute. 
(Code 1957, § 12-109) 
Sec. 11-145. - Measurement of noise. 
(a)  The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a decibel or a sound level meter operating on the A-weighting scale of any standard design and quality meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Association. The instruments shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper presentation of the noise source. The microphone during measurement shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required. Traffic, aircraft and other transportation noise sources and other background noises shall not be considered in taking measurements except where such background noise interferes with the primary noise being measured. 
(b)  The slow meter response of the sound level meter shall be used in order to best determine that the average sound has not exceeded the standards set forth in section 11-171. 
(c)  The measurement shall be made at the property line of the property on which such noise is generated or perceived, as appropriate, five feet aboveground. 
(d)  In the case of an elevated or directional sound or noise source, compliance with the noise limits is to be maintained at any elevation at the boundary. 
(Code 1957, § 12-110) 
Sec. 11-146. - Sound truck advertising prohibited, exception; permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to play, use or operate for advertising purposes or for any other purpose on or upon the public streets, alleys or thoroughfares of the city any device known as a sound truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier or radio or phonograph equipped with a loudspeaker or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud noises and is attached to or upon any vehicle operated or standing upon any street, alley or thoroughfare of the city. 
(b)  Any person may use vehicle-mounted sound equipment on the streets, alleys and thoroughfares of the city between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. for any lawful purpose, except for the purpose of commercial advertising. 
(c)  Before any person shall use vehicle-mounted sound equipment on the streets, alleys and thoroughfares of the city, such person shall file with the city council an application for a permit to operate such device. Such application shall state the purpose for which such equipment is to be used, and the date, time and place it is proposed to be operated. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate vehicle-mounted sound equipment on the streets, alley or thoroughfares of the city without first procuring approval of the city council and a permit from the city clerk. 
(e)  If the city council shall approve such application, it shall authorize the city clerk to issue a permit for the operation of such device. The city council shall have the right to regulate and control the volume at which such device may be operated and the hours during which it may be used. 
(Code 1957, § 12-111) 
Sec. 11-147. - Enforcement authority. 
(a)  Police department. The provisions of this article involving noise control occurring on the highways, streets, roads, sidewalks or pedestrian ways, or other public areas, including but not limited to parks and public recreation areas, public buildings and other public property and any complaints of noise on private property except stationary mechanical noise sources within the city shall be investigated and enforced by the police department with assistance from the department when necessary. 
(b)  Building department. The provisions of this article involving stationary mechanical noise source control and complaints, and any authority and responsibility specifically designated to the building department or building official shall be investigated and enforced by the building department of the city. The building department shall assist the police department when requested to do so. 
(Code 1957, § 12-112) 
Sec. 11-148. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  Operating motor vehicle noise. The procedure for enforcing operating motor vehicle noise standards shall be as established in F.S. ch. 316 and applicable rules and regulations of the state department of pollution control with the cooperation of the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles. 
(b)  All other noises. In all other cases, the procedure for enforcing the provisions of this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  The police officer or designated persons in the building department shall investigate and determine if the level is in excess of that stated in section 11-171 or other sections of this article, where applicable. 
(2)  If the noise level is found to be in violation of this article, the police officer or designated person in the building department shall give a warning to the person or persons responsible for the unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. 
(3)  If the unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise is not abated within a reasonable time after warning, a notice of violation by a police officer or designated person in the building department shall be issued or the person in possession or control of the cause of the unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise may be arrested by the police department and charged with violating this article. A reasonable time is such length of time as may fairly, properly and reasonably be allowed or required having regard to the nature of the offending, excessive or unnecessary noise and the attending circumstances. 
(Code 1957, § 12-113) 
Sec. 11-149. - Application for special construction permit. 
(a)  Application for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in this article on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the city manager or his duly authorized representative. Any permit granted by the city manager hereunder shall contain all conditions upon which such permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective. The city manager, or his duly authorized representative, may grant the relief as applied for if he finds: 
(1)  That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activity or operation to comply with this article; or 
(2)  The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary duration, and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with other subsections of this section; and 
(3)  The city manager may prescribe any conditions or requirements he deems necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood. 
(b)  Upon any affirmative finding of the considerations, the city manager or his designee is authorized to issue the permit requested and any extensions thereof, as may be required. During such periods or emergency activities for construction work and during the normal construction hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., the noise levels generated by construction activities shall not exceed 90 dBA for more than ten percent of the time when measured at a distance of 50 feet from the construction site; provided, however, that pile driving on Sundays and holidays shall be excluded from the provisions of this section. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager or his designated representative may appeal the decision to the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 12-114) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 
Sec. 11-150. - Voluntary compliance. 
    The city will permit whenever possible those persons creating excessive and unusually loud noise to conform to the standards as provided in this article through voluntary compliance within a reasonable time (see subsection 11-151(a)). 
(Code 1957, § 12-115) 
Sec. 11-151. - Variances. 
(a)  Granted by city manager. The city manager is authorized to grant a variance for extension of time for compliance with any provision of this article, subject to limitation as to area, noise levels, time limits and other terms and conditions as the city manager determines are appropriate to protect public health, safety and welfare from the noise emanating therefrom. This section shall in no way affect the duty to obtain any permit or license required by law for such activities. Such variance shall not exceed 45 days' extension of time from the day on which it was granted. 
(b)  Granted by city council. The city council shall hold public hearings to consider all applications for variances. Any person seeking a variance pursuant to this section shall file an application with the city manager. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the variance is sought into compliance with this article would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community or on other persons. Notice of an application for a variance shall be published according to the city procedures for public hearings. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the variance may file a statement with the city manager containing any information to support his claim. In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the city council shall balance the hardship on the applicant, the community and other persons, of not granting the variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare affected and any other adverse impact on property affected and any other adverse impacts of granting the variance. Applicants for variances and persons contesting variances may be required to submit any information the city manager may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the city clerk shall keep on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the variance. 
(c)  Conditions. Variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. The variance shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the variance shall terminate the variance and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this article for which the variance was granted. 
(d)  Duration. A variation will not exceed 365 days from the date on which it was granted. Application for extension of time limits specified in variances or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial variance under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1957, § 12-116) 
Sec. 11-152. - Penalty for violation of article; abatement of violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the provisions of the uniform maximum penalty in section 1-11. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be prosecuted in the same manner as other violations of the city's code or traffic infractions, where applicable; provided, however, that in the event of violation of sections 11-173 and 11-174, a written notice of intent to prosecute will be given to the alleged violator not less than five calendar days prior to the issuance of a complaint. No complaint shall be issued if the cause of the violation is removed, the condition abated or fully corrected within such five-day period. If the alleged violator cannot be located in order to serve the notice of intent to prosecute, the notice as required herein shall be deemed to be given upon mailing such notice by registered or certified mail to the alleged violator at his last known address or at the place where the violation occurred, in which event the five-day period shall commence at the date of the day following the mailing of such notice. 
(c)  As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provisions of this article and which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1957, § 12-117) 
Secs. 11-153-11-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOUND LEVELS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 31. 

Sec. 11-171. - Measurement standards for control of noise from other than operating motor vehicles. 
(a)  The noise from any activity or from any permissible use of property within meaning of the applicable zoning district classifications of the city shall be deemed to be excessive, unnecessary, offensive and unusually loud if the total noise level as measured on the A-scale due to both ambient noise and the alleged source of the unnecessary, offensive or excessive noise exceeds the noise levels which are prescribed in this division, the measurement of which is based upon decibels, i.e., 0.0002 microbar and day conditions referring to the time between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. and night conditions referring to the time between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All such measurements as well as the method employed shall be consistent with the regulations of the American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies and shall represent the A-weighted sound pressure level which is exceeded 50 percent during the observation period as described in section 11-144. 
(b)  At no point on the boundary of or within a residential area zoned RS-5, RS-6, RS-8, RD-15, RM-15, RMH-15, RMS-20, RMH-20, R-PUD and MH, according to the zoning code and official zoning map of the city, as a result of any noise source outside of the property in question may the following sound pressure levels be exceeded: 
(1)  Fixed mechanical equipment, day and night, 55 dBA. 
(2)  All others: 
a.  Day, 50 dBA. 
b.  Night, 45 dBA. 
(c)  At no point on the boundary of or within the area zoned CN, CM, CG, OP, IL, CF, RD, C-PUD according to the zoning code and official zoning map of the city may the following sound pressure levels be exceeded as a result of any noise source outside the property in question: 
(1)  Fixed mechanical equipment, day and night, 65 dBA. 
(2)  All others: 
a.  Day, 60 dBA. 
b.  Night, 55 dBA. 
(d)  At no point on the boundary of or within a property zoned IG, I-PUD, U according to the zoning code and official zoning map of the city, may the following sound pressure levels be exceeded as a result of any noise within the boundary of another property: 
(1)  Fixed mechanical equipment, day and night, 65 dBA. 
(2)  All others: 
a.  Day, 65 dBA. 
b.  Night, 60 dBA. 
All yards and terminals associated with railroads shall be considered as I-G industrial areas for the purposes of noise control. 
(e)  At no time within any sleeping or living room in any dwelling unit, within all residential zones, may the following sound pressure levels be exceeded as a result of any sound source located either outside of the property on which the dwelling is located, or in the case of multiple dwelling structures, in any other dwelling unit: 
(1)  Fixed mechanical equipment, day and night, 55 dBA. 
(2)  All others: 
a.  Day, 50 dBA. 
b.  Night, 45 dBA. 
(f)  For any source of sound at the boundary of the property from which the sound emanates, except as provided in subsection 11-174(16), the maximum sound level resulting from repetitious intermittent noise shall not exceed the sound pressure level limits in subsections (b) through (e) of this section by any one reading: 
(1)  Ten dBA from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. in a residential district. 
(2)  Five dBA from 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. in a residential district. 
(3)  Ten dBA at all times in a commercial, manufacturing, industrial or agricultural land use area. 
(g)  For any source of sound which emits a discrete tone, the sound pressure level limits set in subsections (b) through (e) of this section shall be reduced by five dBA. 
(h)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools, including mechanical powered saws, sanders, drills, grinders, lawn or garden tools or similar tools between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of the same day provided any motor associated with these tools is properly maintained and its exhaust properly muffled. If the noise occurs in a commercial area and enters a residential area between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday or at any time on Sunday or holidays, it shall constitute violation of this article if the sound level specified in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, exceeds in receiving residential area or property. 
(Code 1957, § 12-125) 
Sec. 11-172. - Operating motor vehicle noise. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings assigned to them in this subsection, except where the context requires otherwise: 
    dBA means the composite abbreviation for A-weighted sound level, and the unit of sound level, the decibel. 
    Department means the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles. 
    Gross combination weight rating or GCWR means the value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a combination vehicle. 
    Gross vehicle weight rating or GVWR means the value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle. 
    Sound level means the A-weighted sound pressure level measured with fast response using an instrument complying with the specification for sound level meters of the American National Standards Institute, Inc., or its successor bodies, except that only A-weighting fast dynamic response need be provided. 
(b)  Operating motor vehicle noise limits. No person shall operate or be permitted to operate a vehicle at any time or under any condition of roadway, load, acceleration or deceleration in such a manner as to generate a sound level in excess of the following limit at a distance of 50 feet from the center of the lane of travel under measurement procedures established under subsection (c) of this section: 
(1)  For motorcycles other than motor-driven cycles: 
Sound Level Limit Date of Manufacture 35 mph or less Over 35 mph Before January 1, 1979 82 dBA 86 dBA On or after January 1, 1979 78 dBA 82 dBA  
(2)  For any motor vehicle with a GVWR over 10,000 pounds and for any multipurpose passenger vehicle, which is defined as a motor vehicle with motive power designed to carry ten persons or less, which is constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road operations, or for any motor vehicle with a GVWR or GCWR of 10,000 pounds or more: 
Sound Level Limit Date of Manufacture 35 mph or less Over 35 mph On or after January 1, 1975 86 dBA 90 dBA  
(3)  For motor-driven cycles and any other motor vehicle not included in subsections (b)(1) or (2) of this section: 
Date of Manufacture Sound Level 
Limit From January 1, 1973, to December 31, 1974 84 dBA From January 1, 1975, to December 31, 1984 80 dBA On or after January 1, 1985 75 dBA  
(4)  For motor-driven cycles and any other motor vehicle not included in subsections (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section: 
Sound Level Limit Date of Manufacture 35 mph or less Over 35 mph Before January 1, 1979 76 dBA 82 dBA On or after January 1, 1979 72 dBA 79 dBA  
(c)  Measurement procedures. The measurement procedures for determining compliance with this section shall be established by regulation of the state department of environmental regulation as provided in F.S. § 403.415. Such regulations shall include the section of measurement sites and measurement procedures and shall take into consideration accepted scientific and professional methods for the measurement of vehicular sound levels. The measurement procedures may include adjustment factors to be applied to the noise limit for measurement distances of other than 50 feet from the center of the lane of travel. 
(d)  Exempt vehicles. The following are exempt from the operation of this article: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles operating as specified in section 11-174(1)a. 
(2)  Any motor vehicles engaged in a professional or amateur, sanctioned, competitive sports event for which admission or entry fee is charged or practice trials for such event. 
(3)  Any motor vehicles engaged in a manufacturer's engineering design or equipment test. 
(4)  Construction or agricultural equipment either on the job site or traveling on highways. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any motor vehicle which is not required to be licensed under the provisions of F.S. ch. 320. 
(e)  Applicability. This section applies to the total noise from a vehicle and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other provisions of this article relating to motor vehicle mufflers for noise control. 
(f)  Noise abatement equipment modifications. 
(1)  No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle or any other noise abatement device of a motor vehicle operated or to be operated upon the highways of the city in a manner that the noise emitted by the motor vehicle is above that emitted by the vehicle as originally manufactured. 
(2)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the highway with an exhaust system or noise abatement device so modified. 
(Code 1957, § 12-126) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 19; vehicles for hire, ch. 21. 
Sec. 11-173. - Noise disturbances prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of other persons within the boundaries of the city or adjoining neighbors of the surrounding municipalities as prohibited in this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12-127) 
Sec. 11-174. - Specific prohibitions. 
    The following acts and the causing or permitting thereof are declared to be in violation of this article: 
(1)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound: 
a.  Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of section 11-171 or subsection (13) of this section, except for activities for which a variance has been issued by the city council. 
b.  In such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth for public space in subsection 11-171(c) measured at a distance of at least 50 feet (15 meters) from such device operating on a public right-of-way or public space. 
(2)  Loudspeakers. Using or operating for any purpose any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system or similar device between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property line, or at any time violates the provisions of section 11-171 or subsection (13) of this section, except for any noncommercial public speaking, public assembly or other activity for which a variance has been issued by the city council. 
(3)  Street sales. Offering for sale, selling anything or advertising by shouting or outcry within any residential or commercial area or noise-sensitive zone of the city except by variance issued by the city council. 
(4)  Animals. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird which frequently or for continued duration howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which create a noise disturbance in violation of the provisions of section 11-171 across a real property line or within a noise sensitive zone. 
(5)  Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of section 11-171 or subsection (13) of this section. 
(6)  Construction. Operating or causing the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration or demolition work or related construction activity between the hours of 6:00 p.m. or 8:00 a.m. the following day on weekdays, or at any time on Sundays or holidays, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a real property line or at any time violates the provisions of section 11-171 or subsection (13) of this section except for emergency work of the public service utilities or by variance issued by the city council. This subsection shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools as specified in subsection (14) of this section. 
(7)  Vehicle, motorboat or aircraft repairs and testing. 
a.  Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing any motor vehicle, motorboat or aircraft in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of section 11-171 or subsection (13) of this section. 
b.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit, restrict, penalize, enjoin or in any manner regulate the movement of aircraft which are in all respects conducted in accordance with or pursuant to applicable federal laws or regulations. 
(8)  Explosives, firearms and similar devices. Using or firing explosives, firearms or similar devices such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a real property line, or within a noise-sensitive zone, public space or public right-of-way, without first obtaining a variance issued by the city council. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit, restrict or regulate in any manner the use or firing of explosive firearms or similar devices when the action is performed by, at the direction of or under the supervision of the city manager or his designee. 
(9)  Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of powered model vehicles: 
a.  Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of section 11-171 or subsection (13) of this section. 
b.  In such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth for public space land use in section 11-171 measured at a distance not less than 100 feet (30 meters) from any point on the path of a vehicle operating on public space or public right-of-way. 
(10)  Stationary nonemergency signal devices. 
a.  Sounding or permitting the sounding of any electronically amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place, for more than ten seconds in any hourly period. 
b.  Houses of religious worship shall be exempt from the operation of this provision. 
c.  Sound sources covered by this provision and not exempted under subsection (10)b of this section shall be exempted by a variance issued by the city council. 
(11)  Emergency signaling devices. 
a.  The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device except for emergency purposes or for testing, as provided in subsection (11)b of this section. 
b.  Testing: 
1.  Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Any such testing shall only use the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed 60 seconds. 
2.  Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the function of the signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. The time limit specified in subsection (11)b.1 shall not apply to such complete system testing. 
c.  Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is automatically terminated within 15 minutes of activation. 
(12)  Motorboats. Operating or permitting the operation of any motorboat in any lake, river, stream or other waterway in such manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of section 11-171 or subsection (13) of this section. 
(13)  Noise sensitive zones. 
a.  Creating or causing the creation of any sound within any noise sensitive zone, so as to exceed the residential land use levels set forth in section 11-171 when measured at a distance of at least 25 feet (7.5 meters) from the sound source, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the presence of the zone; or 
b.  Creating or causing the creation of any sound within or adjacent to any noise sensitive zone containing a hospital, nursing home, school, court or other designated area, so as to interfere with the functions of such activity or annoy the participants in the activity, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the presence of the zone. 
(14)  Domestic power tools. 
a.  Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar tool between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on weekdays so as to create a noise disturbance across a real property line as delineated by the provisions of section 11-171. 
b.  Operation of any mechanically powered lawn or garden tool by other than the resident of the premises on Sundays as in subsection (14)c of this section. 
c.  Operation of any mechanically powered lawn or garden tool on Sundays prior to 11:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m. 
d.  Any motor, machinery, pumps, etc., shall be properly muffled and maintained in good working order so as not to create between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on weekdays and between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays a noise disturbance as delineated by the provisions of subsection 11-171(b). 
(15)  Multifamily dwellings. 
a.  Operating or permitting the operation within a multifamily dwelling of any source of sound, in such a manner as to exceed 50 dBA from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. or 45 dBA from 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. when measured within an adjacent intrabuilding dwelling. These noise limits shall not be exceeded more than 50 percent of any measurement period, which shall not be less than ten minutes. 
b.  The maximum permissible sound level as a result of operating any sound source within a multifamily dwelling, when measured in an adjacent intrabuilding dwelling between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day shall be 45 dBA. 
(16)  Air conditioning or air handling equipment. Operating or permitting the operation of any air conditioning or air handling equipment in such a manner as to exceed any of the following sound levels for more than 50 percent of any measurement period at least ten minutes in duration and when measured as specified in the Code of Recommended Practices: 
Measurement Location dBA a. Any point on neighboring property line 60 b. Center of neighboring patio 55 c. Outside the neighboring living area 55 d. Window nearest the equipment location 55  
All existing air conditioning equipment and the replacement of same at the sound level not exceeding the original equipment installation are hereby excluded from the provisions of this article. 
(17)  Enclosed places of public entertainment. 
a.  It shall be unlawful to use or operate any amplitude modulation equipment or device in any place of public entertainment, including but not limited to restaurants, bars, cafes, discotheques or dancehalls in any building or structure not completely enclosed. Public entertainment facilities shall be permitted to conduct outdoor entertainment activities such as live performances, live bands and the playing of recorded music and dancing as an ancillary activity of their normal operations, between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays, between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays, and between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. on holidays, provided that any noises generated by such activities do not exceed 60 dBA. 
b.  It shall be unlawful to sustain in any enclosed place of public entertainment including but not limited to restaurants, bars, cafes, discotheques or dancehalls any amplitude equal to or in excess of 95 dBA sustained for more than 30 seconds. Sound levels in places of public entertainment shall be a contained by acoustical and architectural treatments so as not to create a noise disturbance across a real property line as delineated by the provisions of section 11-171. 
(18)  General prohibitions. Any noise source that is not otherwise regulated or prohibited elsewhere in this article which raises the existing ambient noise level by five dBA shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12-128; Ord. No. 2635, § 2(12-128), 6-15-94; Ord. No. 2678, § 1, 7-5-95) 
Secs. 11-175-11-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3046, § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 2008, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. V, §§ 11-181-11-190, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3026, § 1, adopted Aug. 15, 2007. 

Sec. 11-181. - Creation; applicability; jurisdiction. 
    Pursuant to F.S. Ch. 166 and section 893.138, as amended from time to time, the City Council of the City of Riviera Beach creates the City of Riviera Beach Public Nuisance Abatement Process and designates a special magistrate to hear public nuisance abatement cases. The special magistrate shall have authority to hold hearings and assess fines against violators and issue orders having the force of law in accordance with the terms and conditions herein set and under F.S. Ch 166 and section 893.138. The jurisdiction of the public nuisance abatement special magistrate shall not be exclusive. Any alleged violations of this Code may be pursued by appropriate remedy in court at the option of the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(Ord. No. 3046, § 1, 9-3-08) 
Sec. 11-182. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to establish the public nuisance abatement process and designate a special magistrate of the city to promote, protect, and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by providing an equitable, expeditious and effective method to abate public nuisances. 
(b)  This article is not intended to restrict the right of any person to proceed under F.S. 60.05 for an injunction against any public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 3046, § 1, 9-3-08) 
Sec. 11-183. - Certain conditions, activities, and actions are declared public nuisances. 
    The City Council of Riviera Beach hereby declares that: 
(1)  Any place or premises that has been used on more than two occasions within a six-month period, as a site of unlawful sale, manufacture, cultivation, or delivery of controlled substances is a public nuisance. 
(2)  A place or building used by a criminal street gang for the purpose of conducting a pattern of criminal street gang activity is a place of public nuisance. 
(3)  Any place, structure, building, premises or location that has been used on more than two occasions within a six-month period as a site for violation of F.S. 796.07, relating to prostitution, assignation or lewdness as defined in F.S. 796.07, is a place of public nuisance. 
(4)  Any place, premises or location that has been used on two or more occasions within a six-month period as a site for prostitution is a place of nuisance. 
(5)  Any building, premises or structure which has been used on more than two occasions within a six-month period as a site to traffic or deal in stolen property, as defined in F.S. 812.019, is a place of public nuisance. 
(6)  Any place, premises or location that has been used on one occasion as the site of the unlawful possession of a controlled substance, where such possession constitutes a felony and that has been previously used on more than one occasion as the site of the unlawful sale, delivery, manufacture, or cultivation of any controlled substance is a place of public nuisance. 
(7)  Any building, premises or structure which has been used on more than two occasions within a six-month period, as a site to traffic in stolen property is a place of public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 3046, § 1, 9-3-08) 
Sec. 11-184. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substance shall include those substances defined in F.S. Ch. 893 and also includes any substances sold in lieu of a controlled substance in violation of F.S. 817.563 or any imitation controlled substance defined in F.S. 817.564. 
    Council shall mean the Riviera Beach City Council. 
    Criminal street gang means a formal or informal ongoing organization, association, or group that has as one of its primary activities the commission of criminal or delinquent acts, and that consists of three or more persons who have a common name or common identifying signs, colors, or symbols and have two or more members who, individually or collectively, engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal street gang activity. 
    Criminal street gang member is a person who is a member of a criminal street gang as defined above and who meets two or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Admits to criminal street gang membership. 
(2)  Is identified as a criminal street gang member by a parent or guardian. 
(3)  Is identified as a criminal street gang member by a documented reliable informant. 
(4)  Resides in or frequents a particular criminal street gang's area and adopts their style of dress, their use of hand signs, or their tattoos, and association with known criminal street gang members. 
(5)  Is identified as a criminal street gang member by an informant of previously untested reliability and such identification is corroborated by independent information. 
(6)  Has been arrested more than once in the company of identified criminal street gang members for offenses which are consistent with usual criminal street gang activity. 
(7)  Is identified as a criminal street gang member by physical evidence such as photographs or other documentation. 
(8)  Has been stopped in the company of known criminal street gang members four or more times. 
    Operator shall mean tenant, lessee, occupant, or person having control or possession of the place, structure, premises, vessel, conveyance or location which is the subject of a complaint filed with the police department or code enforcement division. 
    Owner shall mean the owner of the place, structure, premises, conveyance or location which is the subject of a complaint filed with the police department or code enforcement division. 
    Party shall mean a complainant, owner, or operator. 
    Pattern of criminal street gang activity means the commission or attempted commission of, or solicitation or conspiracy to commit, two or more felony or three or more misdemeanor offenses, or one felony and two misdemeanor offenses, or the comparable number of delinquent acts or violation of law which would be felonies or misdemeanors if committed by an adult on separate occasions within a three-year period. 
    Public nuisance shall mean any place, premises, location, building or structure upon which or within which the conditions, activities or actions described in section 11-183 occur. 
    Secretary shall mean the person appointed to perform the clerical and administrative duties and such duties as provided herein necessary to carry out the activities of the special magistrate. 
    Special magistrate or magistrate shall mean the person hired by the City of Riviera Beach who has been authorized to hear public nuisance abatement cases. 
(Ord. No. 3046, § 1, 9-3-08) 
Sec. 11-185. - Jurisdiction. 
    The public nuisance abatement special magistrate shall have jurisdiction throughout the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3046, § 1, 9-3-08) 
Sec. 11-186. - Organization. 
(a)  The special magistrate shall hear public nuisance abatement cases for the city. 
(b)  Clerical and secretarial duties are hereby assigned to the city clerk's office. The city manager will also assign administrative assistance as may be reasonably required by the special magistrate for proper performance of the special magistrate's duties to the police department, code enforcement division. 
(Ord. No. 3046, § 1, 9-3-08) 
Sec. 11-187. - Initiation of procedures. 
(a)  Any employee, officer, or resident of the city may file a complaint with the police department or code enforcement division, with regard to any public nuisances described in section 11-183. Each complainant must provide a written copy of his/her complaint to the police department or code enforcement division. The code enforcement division shall notify the special magistrate of the complaint and a schedule a hearing. The police general counsel or other code enforcement division designee, shall prosecute violators of the ordinance. 
(b)  The code enforcement division shall give written notice of every hearing to the respondent(s), owner(s), and operator(s) at the last known address at least five days prior to the scheduled hearing. Notice shall include the following: 
(1)  The time, date, place and nature of the hearing; 
(2)  A reference to the city's public nuisance abatement ordinance; 
(3)  A short and plain statement summarizing the incidents which form the basis of the complaint; 
(4)  A statement that "failure to attend may result in an order being issued adverse to your interests"; 
(5)  A statement that all parties may be represented by counsel; 
(6)  A statement that all parties shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in support of their position, submit rebuttal evidence, and conduct cross examination; and 
(7)  A conspicuous statement reflecting the requirements of F.S. Ch. 286 that a person deciding to appeal any decision of the special magistrate will need to ensure that a verbatim record of the proceedings is made. 
(8)  All notices required by this part shall be provided to the owner(s), operator(s), or occupant(s) by: 
a.  Certified mail, return receipt requested, provided if such notice is sent under this paragraph to the owner of the property in question at the address listed in the tax collector's office for tax notices, and at any other address provided to the city by such owner and is returned as unclaimed or refused, notice may be provided by posting as described in subsection (9) and by first class mail directed to the addresses furnished to the city with a properly executed proof of mailing or affidavit confirming the first class mailing; 
b.  Hand delivery by a law enforcement officer, code inspector, or other person designated by the city; 
c.  Leaving the notice at the owner's, operator's, or occupant's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above 15 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice; or 
d.  In the case of commercial premises, leaving the notice with the manager or other person in charge. 
(9)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (8), at the option of the code enforcement division, notice may also be served by posting, as follows: 
a.  Notice may be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing, or prior to the expiration of any deadline contained in the notice, in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be at city hall. 
b.  Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice and the date and places of its posting. 
c.  Notice by posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (8). 
(10)  Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (8), together with proof of posting as provided in subsection (9), shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this part have been met, without regard to whether or not the owner, operator, or occupant actually received such notice. 
(Ord. No. 3046, § 1, 9-3-08) 
Sec. 11-188. - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)  The special magistrate shall adopt rules, as necessary, for the conduct of the hearings. All hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public and minutes shall be kept. All testimony shall be taken under oath and shall be recorded. 
(b)  The special magistrate shall proceed to hear complaints on the agenda for the day scheduled for the public hearings. Before the special magistrate may hear a complaint, the special magistrate must make a finding that the notice requirements as set forth in section 11-187 have been satisfied. In no case shall the public nuisance abatement special magistrate proceed to hear any complaint unless the notice requirements set forth in section 11-187 have been met. 
(c)  Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. The special magistrate may consider any evidence, including evidence of the general reputation of the place or premises. All evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a state court. 
(d)  Each party shall have the following rights: 
(1)  To call and examine witnesses. 
(2)  To introduce documentary evidence, exhibits, or physical evidence. 
(3)  To cross examine opposing witnesses on any relevant matter. 
(4)  To impeach any witness. 
(5)  To submit rebuttal evidence. 
(6)  To be represented by counsel. 
(e)  The owner of the place or premises in question may introduce evidence as to any remedial measures taken to ameliorate the conditions which led to the public nuisance complaint. 
(f)  All findings of the special magistrate shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible in a civil action. The burden of proof shall be on the complaining party. 
(g)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the special magistrate shall issue findings of fact and conclusions of law with respect to the issues before it. 
(h)  If the special magistrate finds that a public nuisance does exist on a place or premises, the special magistrate may declare the place or premises in question a public nuisance. Upon such declaration, the special magistrate may enter an order immediately prohibiting: 
(1)  The maintaining of the nuisance; 
(2)  The operating or maintaining of the place or premises including the closure of the place or any part thereof; or 
(3)  The conduct, operation, or maintenance of any business or activity on the premises which is conducive to such nuisance. 
(i)  The special magistrate may also find other measures for public nuisances which may be appropriate to the nuisance, including, but not limited to, continuing jurisdiction over the place or premises for a period of one year, imposition of fines not to exceed $250.00 per day for an initial violation and fines not to exceed $500.00 per day for recurring public nuisances; payment of reasonable costs, including reasonable attorney's fees associated with investigations of and hearings on public nuisances; the recording of orders on public nuisances that may become liens against the real property that is the subject of the order, and payment of reasonable costs and attorney fees incurred in any action to enforce an order of foreclosure based upon same. 
(j)  An order entered under this section shall expire after one year or at such earlier time as is stated in the order. 
(Ord. No. 3046, § 1, 9-3-08) 
Sec. 11-189. - Enforcement 
(a)  The special magistrate, upon notification that a nuisance has not been abated or, upon finding that a recurring public nuisance exists, may order the owner or operator to pay a fine in an amount specified in this section for each day the nuisance continues past the date set by the special magistrate for abatement, or, in the case of a recurring nuisance, for each day the recurring nuisance continues past the date of notice to the owner or operator of such recurring nuisance. If a finding of a recurring nuisance has been made as provided herein, a hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order imposing the fine. 
(b)  A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $50.00 per day for a first violation and shall not exceed $500.00 per day for a repeat violation. The total fines imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $15,000.00. 
(c)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine or other penalties may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the nuisance exists. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order shall be enforceable in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of the state, including execution and levy against the personal property of the owner or operator, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant to this part shall continue to accrue until the owner or operator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. A lien arising from a fine pursuant to this section runs in favor of the city and the city may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this section. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the special magistrate may authorize the foreclosure of the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this part may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under Section 4, Article X of the State Constitution. 
(d)  If the special magistrate should find that the nuisance is based upon a stolen property nuisance against a property owner operating an establishment where multiple tenants, on one site, conduct their own retail business, the property owner shall not be subject to a lien against this or the property or the prohibition of operation provision if the property owner evicts the business declared to be a nuisance within 90 days after notification by registered mail to the property owner of a second stolen property conviction of the tenant. 
(e)  In addition to the foregoing, the special magistrate may authorize the city to file a complaint under F.S. 60.05 seeking a permanent injunction against any place, property or premises found to be a public nuisance. The special magistrate may further authorize the city to institute enforcement proceedings under F.S. 120.69 and seek any other appropriate relief as may be provided or permitted. However, this subsection does not subject the city or the special magistrate to any other provisions of F.S. Ch. 120. 
(Ord. No. 3046, § 1, 9-3-08) 
Sec. 11-190. - Appeal. 
    An aggrieved party, including the local governing body, may appeal a final administrative order of the special magistrate to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo, but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the special magistrate. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 3046, § 1, 9-3-08) 
Secs. 11-191-11-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGISTRATION OF FORECLOSED AND MORTGAGED REAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 11-201. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this article to establish a process to limit and reduce the deterioration of property located within the City of Riviera Beach, which property is in foreclosure, or where ownership has been transferred to lender or mortgagee by any legal method or where property is deemed vacant or abandoned. It is further intended to establish a registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of inadequate maintenance of abandoned and/or vacated properties subject to a mortgage or properties subject to mortgages that are in default. The registration process will require mortgagees to provide the city with the most up to date accurate data and information for contacting a responsible party to bring the property into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Sec. 11-202. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where the context will permit and no definitions are provided herein, the definitions provided in the Florida Building Code or the City of Riviera Beach Code of Ordinances shall apply. 
    "Abandoned" means any real property that is vacant and/or is under a public notice of default, notice of mortgagee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale and/or properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title is retained by the mortgagee including, any properties transferred under a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure sale, a short sale or any other legal means to the mortgagee. 
    "Accessible" means a property, structure, or building that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access by trespassers, criminals, or other unauthorized persons. 
    "Default" means that the mortgagee files a foreclosure action or public notice of default on the mortgage. A mortgage shall be considered in default at such time as the mortgagee declares said mortgage to be in default either in writing, by recording a lis pendens, or by its actions, or commences foreclosure proceedings. 
    "Enforcement officer" means any law enforcement officer, building inspector, building official, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by the City Riviera Beach. 
    "Evidence of vacancy" means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: overgrown and/or dead vegetation; electricity, water or other utilities turned off; stagnant swimming pool; statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents; accumulation of abandoned personal property; and/or readily accessible residence, structures and buildings on the property. 
    "Foreclosure" means the judicial process by which a property, placed as security for a mortgage loan, after a judicial process, is to be sold at an auction to satisfy a debt upon which the borrower has defaulted. 
    "Mortgage" means a lien on property conveyed by its owner to a mortgagee as security for an underlying debt or other obligation owed the mortgagee. The term includes all conveyances, conditioned or defensible obligations, bills of sale or other written instruments that convey or sell property for the purpose, or with the intention of, securing the payment of money 
    "Mortgagee" means the creditor, including, but not limited to, service companies, lenders in a mortgage agreement, and any agent, servant, or employee of the of the mortgagee, or any successor in interest and/or assignee of the mortgagee's rights, interests, or obligations under the mortgage agreement. For the purpose of this article, real estate brokers and agents, solely marketing and/or selling real property on behalf of a mortgagee, shall not be considered an agent, servant, or employee of the mortgagee. 
    "Nuisance" means any condition, including, but not limited to, an abandoned, unsafe, accessible residence, building, structure, or real property with code violations that constitute a menace to life, property, public health, or the public welfare, or create a fire hazard; any conditions which may be injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the public; or any conditions that constitute and attractive nuisance or otherwise endanger the public's safety while in the vicinity thereof. 
    "Owner" means any person, persons, or entity having legal or equitable title, or any real or contingent interests in any real property; being shown to be the property owner in the records of the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser's Office; being identified on the abandoned/vacant real property registration form created pursuant to this article; or being a mortgagee in possession of real property. Any such person, persons, or entity shall have joint and several obligations for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
    "Property management company" means a local property manager, property maintenance company, or similar person or entity responsible for the maintenance and security of abandoned real property. 
    "Vacant" means any real property, including any building or structure thereon that is not lawfully occupied or inhabited by human beings as evidenced by the conditions set forth in the definition of "evidence of vacancy" above. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Sec. 11-203. - Public nuisance. 
    All abandoned and vacant real property, which is unmaintained or unsecured, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the abatement of which pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Riviera Beach. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Sec. 11-204. - Applicability. 
    This article applies to abandoned or real property, whether occupied or vacant, within the City of Riviera Beach. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Sec. 11-205. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Failure of the mortgagee to properly register or to modify the registration from time to time to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this article is a violation of this article and shall be subject to enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the city. 
(b)  Pursuant to any judicial finding and determination, including any administrative proceeding that a property is in violation of this article, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance and may place a lien on the property for the cost of the work performed, including an administrative fee, to benefit the property and to bring it into compliance. 
(c)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly inspect and secure a property subject to this article and other requirements of this code, and post and maintain the signage as required in this article, is a violation of this article and shall be subject to enforcement by any means available to the city. Pursuant to a finding and determination, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this article, and recover costs and expenses in support thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Sec. 11-206. - Inspection and registration of real property by mortgagee holding mortgages in default. 
(a)  Within 14 days of the date any mortgagee declares its mortgage to be in default, the mortgagee shall register the real property with the city's community development department, or its designee, or the city's authorized representative. At the time of registration, a local property manager shall be designated to inspect, maintain and secure the real property subject to the mortgage in default. A registration is required for each property. 
(b)  Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the City of Riviera Beach shall perform an inspection of the property within five days of the registration pursuant to subsection (a) above. 
(c)  Property inspected pursuant to subsection (b) above that is occupied but remains in default, shall be inspected quarterly by the mortgagee or mortgagee's designee. 
(d)  Property which is found to be vacant, or which shows evidence of vacancy shall be inspected at least every 30 days by the mortgagee or mortgagee's designee. 
(e)  Registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a minimum the name of the mortgagee, the mailing address or the mortgagee, the e-mail address and telephone number of the mortgagee, the name of the local property manager and said person's address, e-mail address, and telephone number. The local property manager shall be responsible for inspecting, securing and maintaining the property. The property manager named in the registration shall be located within Palm Beach County and available to be contacted by the city, Monday through Friday between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., holidays and lunch hours excepted. 
(f)  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as well as any properties transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(g)  Properties subject to this section shall remain under the registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance standards of this article as long as they remain vacant or subject to having been declared by a mortgagee to be in default. 
(h)  Any person or other legal entity that has registered a property under this article must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Sec. 11-207. - Annual registration fee. 
    A nonrefundable annual registration fee in the amount of $200.00 per property shall accompany registration. The registration shall be renewed 12 months from the initial registration date annually. The renewal of the registration with its accompanying fee, shall be the responsibility of the mortgagee and a failure to do so in a timely manner shall subject the mortgagee to code enforcement action pursuant to the City of Riviera Beach Code of Ordinances. The annual registration fee may subsequently be amended from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Sec. 11-208. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this article shall be kept in conformance with all code requirements, including, but not limited to, being kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state, or local law, discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed materials, or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
(b)  The properties shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. 
(c)  Front, side, and rear yard landscaping of properties subject to this article shall be maintained in accordance with the city's code, and in accordance with the following standards at all times. 
(1)  Landscaping shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground cover, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for installation. 
(2)  Landscaping shall not show evidence of gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material unless xeriscape plan incorporating same have been approved by the city. 
(3)  Landscaping maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering irrigation, cutting, and mowing of required landscaped and removal of all trimmings. 
(d)  Pools and spas shall be maintained so that the water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris, and free of mosquito breeding or vermin infestation. Pools and spas shall comply with the enclosure requirements of the City's Code and the Florida Building Code, as they may be amended from time to time. 
(e)  In the event that the National Weather Service, National Hurricane Center, or other appropriate weather agency declares a hurricane warning for any portion of Riviera Beach, all materials, furnishings, and equipment at the property shall be secured, stored, or removed so as to not create a safety hazard due to hurricane force winds. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Sec. 11-209. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this article shall be maintained in a secure manner so as to not be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates, and any other openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken windows shall be secured by replacement, reglazing, or boarding of the windows so as to meet all applicable laws, codes and regulations. 
(c)  If the owner of the property is a corporation, partnership, and/or out-of-area mortgagee, a local property management company shall be contracted by the owner to perform monthly inspections to verify compliance and the requirements of this article, and any other applicable laws. 
(d)  Properties subject to the provisions of this article shall be posted with the name, address, and 24-hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posted sign shall be no less than 18 inches by 24 inches, and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of 45 feet. The posting shall contain, along with the name, address, and 24-hour contact phone number, the language "THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY" and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS" with the applicable contact information. All information thereupon shall be clear, legible, and updated as required. 
    The posted sign shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street; secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street; or, if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visual from the street to the front of the property. Exterior posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant materials. 
(e)  The local property management company shall inspect the property as required herein to ensure that the property is in compliance with this article and shall keep a log of the inspection results. Upon request of the city, the local property management company shall provide a copy of the inspection log to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Sec. 11-210. - Responsibility for compliance. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the owner to maintain the owner's property in accordance with the provisions of this article. A mortgagee of any mortgage agreement which exists on abandoned real property that is in violation of this article shall be a responsible party for compliance with this article upon the filing of a lis pendens and/or action, the purpose of which is to foreclose upon the mortgage or similar instrument that secures debt upon the residential real property. The mortgagee's responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this article shall only be effective during periods of time that the property shall be vacant and in foreclosure. The responsibility of the mortgagee shall remain until such time as the subject property is sold or transferred to a new owner, or the foreclosure action described herein is dismissed. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Sec. 11-211. - Additional authority. 
(a)  If an appropriate enforcement officer has reason to believe that a property subject to the provisions of this article is posing a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the enforcement officer may bring the violation before the code enforcement special magistrate, or a court of competent jurisdiction as soon as possible to address the conditions of the property. 
(b)  If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then the code enforcement special magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction may direct the city to abate the violation and charge the mortgagee with the cost of abatement. 
(c)  If the mortgagee does not reimburse the city for the cost of abatement within 30 days of the city sending the mortgagee the invoice, then the city may lien the property with the cost of abatement, along with any and all administrative fees allowed by law to recover the administrative personnel services. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Sec. 11-212. - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The city manager, or designee, is authorized and empowered to adopt rules and regulations as may be reasonable necessary and available to carry out the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Sec. 11-213. - Provisions supplemental. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to injunction, abatement or as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 7-17-13; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 9-16-15) 
Chapter 12 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Police, ch. 16; weapons control, § 16-81 et seq.; security and fire warning systems, ch. 17; burglar alarms, § 17-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Fines and forfeitures in county court payable to municipality, F.S. § 34.191; punishment for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083; for the list of state law misdemeanors, see Index to Florida Statutes-Crimes. 

Article I. - In General 

Sec. 12-1. - Misdemeanors, penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commit, within the city limits, any acts which are or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor, and the commission of such act or acts is hereby forbidden. 
(b)  Punishment, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-11 shall constitute the maximum penalty which may be imposed upon any person who shall be adjudged to have violated any section of this chapter. This section shall not conflict with a provision for penalties imposed for any offense under the laws of the state, and to the extent of any conflict, the state penalty shall control. 
(c)  In any case where an accused has been found to have committed any municipal offense within this chapter, with the exception of section 12-22 and section 12-23, there shall be assessed in addition to any fine levied a penalty in the amount of $25.00 per case which shall be nonsuspendable, which shall be paid into the police department's crime prevention fund. The fact that this penalty is imposed on each case shall not in any way reduce the obligation of the accused to pay the fine prescribed by the court, but the total fine per charge inclusive of the crime prevention fund fine shall not exceed $500.00. 
(Code 1957, § 13-1) 
Case Law annotation- A municipality may enact an ordinance which creates an offense against municipal law for the same act that constitutes an offense against state law. Jaramillo v. City of Homestead, 322 So.2d 496 (Fla. 1975). 
Similarly, a municipality, by ordinance, may adopt state misdemeanor statutes by specific reference or by the general reference contained in the ordinance. Id. 
Such an adoption by general reference as contained in the ordinance permits subsequent amendments, revisions and repeals of the laws by the state legislature to apply to the municipal ordinances. Id. 
Sec. 12-2. - Destruction of property-Possessed by city. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, destroy, damage or deface any building, vehicle or any other tangible property belonging to, used by or in the possession or custody of the city or any of its officers or employees. 
(Code 1957, § 13-2) 
Sec. 12-3. - Same-Plants, trees, other vegetation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut down, injure or destroy any tree, plant, shrub, vine or flower not his own, or to injuriously sever from the land of another any product thereof, or anything attached thereto. 
(Code 1957, § 13-3) 
Sec. 12-4. - Same-Public and private establishments. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface, mar or injure any dwelling, house, school, church or other building, or any fence, wall or appurtenances of such, or other property belonging to or connected thereto. 
(Code 1957, § 13-4) 
Sec. 12-5. - Disorderly conduct. 
    A person shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct if that person: 
(a)  Commits such acts as are of a nature to corrupt the public morals; 
(b)  Commits or engages in such acts that outrage the sense of public decency; 
(c)  Commits an assault of any kind upon another person; 
(d)  Commits a battery upon the person of another; 
(e)  Engages in such acts or behavior that affects the peace and quiet of persons who may witness them; or 
(f)  Engages in brawling or fighting. 
(Code 1957, § 13-5) 
Sec. 12-6. - Controlled substances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to be under the influence of any substance controlled under F.S. ch. 893 in a public place or upon the grounds of a public place, in or upon any public conveyance, in or upon the grounds of any business establishment, vacant or abandoned property. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia as defined under F.S. ch. 893, to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to sell or deliver, possess with intent to sell or manufacture with intent to sell drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section. 
(Code 1957, § 13-6) 
Sec. 12-7. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic beverage on any public street, in any public park, in or upon any public conveyance, vacant or abandoned property, the parking lot of any business establishment, or in any public place, unless the location of such consumption is licensed for sale of alcoholic beverages in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1957, § 13-7) 
Cross reference- Drinking intoxicating beverages on streets, public ways or places, § 3-10. 
Sec. 12-8. - Sale of fireworks and explosives. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or explode fireworks as defined by F.S. § 791.01, within the city, except as permitted by F.S. §§ 791.01, 791.04, and 791.07. The sale of fireworks will be permitted under the supplemental regulations, section 31-566, Riviera Beach Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1957, § 13-8; Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 6-5-02) 
Sec. 12-9. - Discharging firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized officer in the line of duty to discharge a gun, pistol or other firearm within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 13-9) 
Cross reference- Weapons control, § 16-81 et seq. 
Sec. 12-10. - Gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to play or engage in any game of cards, keno, roulette, faro or other game of chance, at any place, by any device whatsoever, for money or other thing of value whereby any player can acquire more than the cost paid by any player to engage in any such game of chance. 
(Code 1957, § 13-10) 
Sec. 12-11. - Larceny and retail theft. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carry away any merchandise, money or negotiable documents; to alter or remove a label or price tag; transfer merchandise from one container to another; or remove the property of another with the intent to deprive the owner thereof of possession, use, benefit or full retail value. 
(Code 1957, § 13-11) 
Sec. 12-12. - Obtaining food or lodging with intent to defraud. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain food, lodging or other accommodations having any value at any food service establishment, or at any lodging, with intent not to pay the full price thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 13-12) 
Sec. 12-13. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety or persons or property in the vicinity. Any such person who, when questioned by a police officer, fails to give a legitimate reason for his presence and conduct sufficient to dispel any alarm or immediate concern shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of illegally using, possessing, transferring or selling any controlled substance as that term is defined in F.S. § 893.02. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such a purpose is manifested are: 
(1)  The person is a known illegal user, possessor or seller of controlled substances, or the person is at a location frequented by persons who illegally use, possess, transfer or sell controlled substances; and 
(2)  The person repeatedly beckons to, stops, attempts to stop or engage in conversation with passersby, whether such passersby are on foot or in a motor vehicle, for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to illegally possess, transfer or buy any controlled substance; or 
(3)  The person repeatedly passes to or receives from passersby, whether such passersby are on foot or in a motor vehicle, money, objects or written material for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to illegally possess, transfer or buy any controlled substance. 
In order for there to be a violation of this subsection, the person's affirmative language or conduct must be such as to demonstrate by its express or implied content or appearance a specific intent to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to illegally possess, transfer or buy a controlled substance. No arrests shall be made for a violation of this subsection unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain his conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this subsection if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. For the purpose of this section, a "known illegal user, possessor or seller of controlled substances" is a person who, within one year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted of illegally manufacturing, using, possessing, selling, purchasing or delivering any controlled substance. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for in section 12-1. 
(Code 1957, § 13-13) 
Sec. 12-14. - Trespassing. 
(a)  In structure or conveyance. It shall be unlawful for any person without being authorized, licensed or invited to enter or remain in any structure or conveyance; or having been authorized, licensed or invited is ordered by the owner or lessee of the premises or by a person authorized by the owner or lessee to leave, but to refuse to leave. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of committing the violation of trespass in a structure or conveyance. 
(b)  On property other than structure or conveyance. It shall be unlawful for any person, without being authorized, licensed or invited, to enter upon or remain on any property other than a structure or conveyance as to which notice against entering or remaining is given, either by actual communication to the offender, or by posting or fencing. Such person shall be guilty of committing the offense of trespass on property other than a structure or conveyance. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13-14, 13-15) 
Sec. 12-15. - Resisting officer. 
(a)  With violence. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and wilfully resist, obstruct or oppose any sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer or other person legally authorized in the execution of legal process or in the lawful execution of any legal duty by offering or doing violence to the person of such officer, or such legally authorized person. 
(b)  Without violence. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or oppose any sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer or other legally authorized person, in the execution of legal process or in the lawful execution of any legal duty, without offering or doing violence to the person of such officer, or such legally authorized person. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13-16, 13-17) 
Sec. 12-16. - Prostitution; soliciting, frequenting disorderly houses for such purpose. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare or public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested: That such person is a known prostitute or panderer who repeatedly stops or attempts to stop, or repeatedly engages male or female passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any other bodily gesture. The violator's conduct must be such as to demonstrate in the presence of the arresting officer a specific intent to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to commit an act of prostitution. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this section unless the arresting officer first affords such persons an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. As used in this section: 
(1)  Public place includes public streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots and buildings open to the general public, including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
(2)  Known prostitute or panderer means a person who within one year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted of the offense of prostitution. 
(Code 1957, § 13-18) 
Sec. 12-17. - Obstruction of public passage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct, barricade, interfere with, impede, hinder, stifle, retard, restrain, block or otherwise prevent the normal, free, convenient and lawful use of any public passageway. Public passageway, as contemplated in this section, is defined as all public streets, sidewalks, highways, bridges, alleys, parks, roads or other passageways, or the entrances, corridors or passageways of any public buildings, or public rights-of-way and public places. 
(Code 1957, § 13-19) 
Sec. 12-18. - Carrying on business or trade on streets and sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual, in or upon any part of any public street or sidewalk in the city, to personally conduct any trade or business without a permit from the city to do so at that time and location. 
(Code 1957, § 13-20) 
Sec. 12-19. - Skateboarding. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to skateboard on any public sidewalk, areas of pedestrian traffic, or within the following zoning districts: CG, CM, IL, IG, U, OP and CN (commercial districts only). 
(Code 1957, § 13-21) 
Sec. 12-20. - Surfboards, apple or skip boards. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall for the purpose of this section have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apple, skip, skid or skiff board means any instrument made of any material used as a means for riding or skidding a person along the shallow water, or water's edge, at a beach or park. 
    Beach means the Riviera Beach Municipal Beach and Phil Foster Park on both sides of the Blue Heron Causeway. 
    Peace officer includes all regular or auxiliary, special or temporary police officers, and also any lifeguard at any beach. 
    Surfboard means any instrument made of any material used by any person as a means for riding waves in the Atlantic Ocean or Lake Worth; air mattresses are excepted. 
    User means the person in whose possession the skiff board or surfboard may be at the time of its use. 
(b)  Apple, skid boards, etc., prohibited in certain areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to use at any time any apple or skid board on any part of the Riviera Beach Municipal Beach and/or Phil Foster Park, or to ride or skid along in the water's edge thereof, by the use of such apple or skid board. 
(c)  Surfboards prohibited in certain areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, at any time, a surfboard on any part of the Riviera Beach Municipal Beach and/or Phil Foster Park, or to use same in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean, or in the waters of Lake Worth, at such beach or Phil Foster Park. 
(Code 1957, § 13-22) 
Cross reference- Water sports, § 13-26 et seq. 
Sec. 12-21. - Landing aircraft, parachuting or skydiving in city limits. 
(a)  Aircraft defined. The term "aircraft" as used in this section means any airplane, gas bag, flying machine, balloon, helicopter, glider, any contrivance known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation of or flight in the air, except a parachute or other contrivance used exclusively as safety equipment. 
(b)  Prohibited; exception. Except in case of emergency, police or other governmental agencies, no person shall land any aircraft, nor parachute or skydive, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 13-23) 
Sec. 12-22. - Peddling foodstuffs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cruise in a motor vehicle or by pushcart or on foot or otherwise to solicit, attempt to solicit, sell or attempt to sell any merchandise or foodstuff in, upon, or within 150 feet of the grounds of any public park, public recreation area, public beach or educational institution (other than a school for adults only). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to attempt to engage in any such activity within 500 feet of any public or private school or school zone between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m. and each day any such school or school zone is open for instruction and the school has any pupils from the ages of preschool to and including twelfth grade. 
(c)  These occupations require an occupational license. 
(d)  No outside speaker or amplified sound shall be permitted. 
(Code 1957, § 13-24) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; parks and recreation, ch. 13. 
Sec. 12-23. - Disturbing city council or other city meetings or workshops. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any workshop or meeting of the city council or any other workshop or meeting of any other board, commission or committee of city officers, employees, or citizens conducting any business on city property. Such disturbance consists of obscene or profane language spoken aloud, or any physical violence or any threat of physical violence, or other repeated loud or boisterous behavior, which the presiding officer, or a majority of the council, board, commission or committee, determines is intended as an illegal disruption. If such illegal disruption is found to exist by the chair or a majority of the board, the chair, or a majority of the body, may order such conduct to cease immediately. Failure to comply with such order to the violator or to all persons present will be a violation of this section. Each and every person who fails to strictly heed such warning immediately may be ejected from the meeting place for the duration of the meeting or for such lesser time as the presiding officer or a majority of the body may specify. Any decision of the presiding officer may be appealed to the deliberative body as any other decision of the chair under the rules of procedure that apply to the particular meeting. 
(Code 1957, § 13-25) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 12-24. - Loud and unnecessary noises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated, any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device used to produce or reproduce sound that can be heard from the distances prescribed in this section or violates the parameters set forth in this section. 
(1)  Violations will occur if the noise source is located within an automobile, in or upon a public street, highway, building, sidewalk, park, thoroughfare or other public area, or is located in or upon a public access area, or is located in or upon a parking lot, etc., or on any private property, and the sound can be heard at a distance of 50 feet from its source or from the property line, whichever is less, or if the noise source is in a building or other structure and the sound can be heard at a distance of 100 feet away from the building or structure or the boundaries of the property surrounding such building or structure, whichever is less. 
(2)  It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section if the sound can be heard outside the limits described in subsection (1), or creates a noise disturbance within noise sensitive zones or if said sound violates any vibration and/or decibel levels set forth in section 11-141 et seq., except as provided for under section 11-143. 
(3)  Where the noise source is located in a building or other structure, the owner, occupant, resident, manager or other person in charge of the premises shall, if present, be presumed to have permitted the noise in the absence of evidence to the contrary. 
(4)  No person shall operate or be permitted to operate a vehicle at any time or under any condition within the city limit, in such a manner as to generate a sound level in excess of the limits specified in section 11-172. The readings must be measured at a distance of 50 feet from the centerlines of the lane of travel under the measurement procedures established under subsection 11-172(c). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to play, use or operate any radio or other device capable of producing or reproducing sound in a manner or at a level that disturbs the peace and quiet of persons living within any residentially zoned area of the city at any time. 
(Code 1957, § 13-26) 
Cross reference- Noise, § 11-141 et seq. 
Sec. 12-25. - Panhandling. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Aggressive panhandling or solicitation means: 
a.  Approaching or speaking to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to believe that the person is being threatened with either imminent bodily injury or the commission of a criminal act upon the person or another person or upon property in the person's immediate possession; 
b.  Continuing to request money or something else of value after the person solicited has given a negative response to the initial request; 
c.  Blocking, either individually or as part of a group of persons, the passage of a solicited person; 
d.  Touching a solicited person without explicit permission; or 
e.  Engaging in conduct that would reasonably be construed as intended to intimidate, compel or force a solicited person to accede to demands. 
(2)  Panhandling means: 
a.  Any solicitation, or begging, made in person requesting an immediate donation of money or other thing of value for oneself or another person; or 
b.  Seeking donations where the person solicited receives an item of little or no monetary value in exchange for a donation, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the transaction is in substance a donation. 
c.  Panhandling does not mean the act of passively standing or sitting, performing music, or singing with a sign or other indication that a donation is being sought, but without any vocal request other than a response to an inquiry by another person. 
(b)  Prohibited acts regarding panhandling and aggressive panhandling. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to engage in the act of panhandling when either the solicitation or the person being solicited is located in, on, or at any of the following locations: 
a.  Bus stop or any public transportation facility; 
b.  Public transportation vehicle; 
c.  Parking lot, parking garage, or parking pay station owned or operated by the city; 
d.  Area within 15 feet, in any direction, of an automatic teller machine; 
e.  Area within 15 feet, in any direction, of the entrance or exit of a commercial or governmental building; 
f.  Private property, unless the person panhandling has permission from the owner of such property. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to engage in the act of Aggressive Panhandling in any location in the city. 
(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 12-17-14) 
Sec. 12-26. - Prohibition of conversion therapy on minors. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to protect the physical and psychological well-being of minors, including but not limited to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and/or questioning youth, from exposure to the serious harms and risks caused by conversion therapy or reparative therapy by licensed providers, including but not limited to licensed therapists. These provisions are exercises of police power of the city for the public safety, health, and welfare; and its provisions shall be liberally construed to accomplish that purpose. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Conversion therapy or reparative therapy means, interchangeably, any counseling, practice or treatment performed with the goal of changing an individual's sexual orientation or gender identity, including, but not limited to, efforts to change behaviors, gender identity, or gender expression, or to eliminate or reduce sexual or romantic attractions or feelings toward individuals of the same gender or sex. Conversion therapy does not include counseling that provides support and assistance to a person undergoing gender transition or counseling that provides acceptance, support, and understanding of a person or facilitates a person's coping, social support, and development, including sexual orientation-neutral interventions to prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices, as long as such counseling does not seek to change sexual orientation or gender identity. 
    Minor means any person less than 18 years of age. 
    Provider means any person who is licensed by the State of Florida to provide professional counseling, or who performs counseling as part of his or her professional training under Chapters 456, 458, 459, 490 or 491 of the Florida Statutes, as such chapters may be amended, including but not limited to, medical practitioners, osteopathic practitioners, psychologists, psychotherapists, social workers, marriage and family therapists, and licensed counselors. A Provider does not include members of the clergy who are acting in their roles as clergy or pastoral counselors and providing religious counseling to congregants, as long as they do not hold themselves out as operating pursuant to any of the aforementioned Florida Statutes licenses. 
(c)  Conversion therapy prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any provider to practice conversion therapy efforts on any individual who is a minor regardless of whether the person receives monetary compensation in exchange for such services. 
(d)  Enforcement and civil penalties. 
(1)  Enforcement of this section may be done pursuant to Chapter 2 entitled "Administration", Article VI entitled "Code Enforcement of the City's Code of Ordinance. 
(2)  The violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each repeated violation. Each day any violation of this chapter occurs shall constitute a separate offense. These penalties shall not preclude any other remedies available at law or in equity, including, injunctive relief in the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 5-3-17) 
Secs. 12-27-12-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRUG CONTROL AND VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2895, § 1, adopted July 3, 2001, enacted provisions pertaining to drug control and vehicle impoundment, designated as §§ 12A-1-12A-6. Such sections have been redesignated by the editor as §§ 12-51-12-56 for purposes of classification. 
Cross reference- Impounding vehicles, §§ 19-146-19-152. 

Sec. 12-51. - Impoundment of motor vehicles; controlled substances and prostitution. 
(a)  A motor vehicle shall be subject to seizure and impoundment whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle: 
(1)  Contains any controlled substance or cannabis as defined in F.S. ch. 893; or 
(2)  Was used in the purchase, attempt to purchase, sale, or attempt to sell such controlled substance or cannabis, as defined in F.S. ch. 893; or 
(3)  Was used to facilitate the commission of an act of prostitution, assignation, or lewdness as defined in and pursuant to F.S. § 796.07. 
(b)  Upon seizing the motor vehicle, the police officer shall: 
(1)  Provide for the towing of the vehicle to a city owned or city controlled facility, or to a facility controlled by the city's towing agent; and 
(2)  Notify in writing the person determined to be the owner of the vehicle, or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the seizure, of the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle as well as of the right to request a preliminary hearing pursuant to section 12-52. 
(c)  The notices to be given pursuant to this section shall be provided by hand delivery at the time of the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle, except if the vehicle owner is not available to receive such notice, or except if neither the vehicle owner nor the person in control of the vehicle at the time of the seizure is available to receive such notice, then in such circumstances, notice shall be provided to the vehicle owner by certified mail return receipt requested within 48 hours of the time of impoundment excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. 
(d)  This section shall not apply and the vehicle shall not be seized or impounded if: 
(1)  The possession, use or sale of the controlled substance and/or cannabis is authorized by Chapter 893 or Chapter 499 of the Florida Statutes; or 
(2)  The vehicle was stolen at the time that it was subject to seizure and impoundment; or 
(3)  The vehicle was operating as a common carrier at the time it was subject to seizure and impoundment; or 
(4)  A law enforcement agency has expressed its intent in writing to institute forfeiture proceedings on the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 1, 7-3-01) 
Sec. 12-52. - Hearings; administrative penalty 
(a)  If the owner of the motor vehicle, or the owner's agent or authorized representative has made a written request for a preliminary hearing then: 
(1)  The city shall hold such preliminary hearing within 48 hours of receipt of the written request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, before a special master or alternate special master of the city. At the preliminary hearing, the city shall have the burden to establish that there is probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle is subject to impoundment and continued seizure under section 12-51. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the preliminary hearing. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient standing alone to support a finding. 
(2)  If, after the preliminary hearing, the special master or alternate special master determines that there is probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle is subject to impoundment and seizure the special master or alternate special master shall order he continued impoundment of the vehicle unless the vehicle owner or the owner's agent or authorized representative pays the city an administrative civil penalty of $500.00, plus the towing and storage costs, or posts with the city a bond in the form of a money order or a certified check in the amount of $500.00, plus the accumulated costs of towing and storing the vehicle. If, after the preliminary hearing, there is a finding of no probable cause, the vehicle shall be released forthwith to the owner or the owner's agent or authorized representative, without the imposition of penalties or fees. 
(b)  Within ten days of the date that the motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to section 12-51 and whether or not a preliminary hearing is requested, the city shall notify any person entitled to notice as defined in F.S. ch. 932, the "Florida Contraband Forfeiture Act", by certified mail return receipt requested, of the date, time, and location of the final hearing to be conducted pursuant to this subsection. The final hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless waived by all persons entitled to notice or continued by order of the special master or alternate special master, no later than 45 days after the date that the vehicle was seized and impounded. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the final hearing. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient standing alone to support a finding. The city shall have the burden to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used as set forth in subsections 12-51(a)(1), 12-51(a)(2), or 12-51(a)(3). If, after the final hearing, a finding is made that the vehicle is subject to continued seizure and impoundment pursuant to section 12-51, and that none of the exceptions set forth in section 12-51(d) apply, then the special master or alternate special master shall enter an order finding the owner of the vehicle civilly liable to the city for an administrative penalty of $500.00, plus towing and storage costs. If, after the final hearing, a finding is made that the city did not meet its burden of proof as set forth in this section or that one of the exceptions of section 12-51(d) apply, the vehicle shall be returned to the owner along with any bond posted. 
(c)  (1) 
A motor vehicle shall not be subject to continued seizure and impoundment under this article unless the city establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the owner either knew, or should have known after a reasonable inquiry, that the motor vehicle was being employed or was likely to be employed in criminal activity. 
(2)  A bona fide lienholder's interest that has been perfected in the manner prescribed by law prior to the seizure may not be seized unless the city establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the lienholder had actual knowledge, at the time the lien was made, that the motor vehicle was being employed or was likely to be employed in criminal activity. If a lienholder's interest is not subject to seizure under the requirements of this section, such interest shall be preserved by the special master or alternate special master by ordering the leinholder's interest to be paid as provided in F.S. § 932.7055. 
(3)  A motor vehicle titled or registered between husband and wife jointly by the use of the conjunctives "and," "and/or," or "or," in the manner prescribed by law prior to the seizure, may not be seized under this article unless the city establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the coowner either knew or had reason to know, after reasonable inquiry, that such motor vehicle was employed or was likely to be employed in criminal activity. 
(4)  A vehicle that is rented or leased from a company engaged in the business of renting or leasing vehicles, which vehicle was rented or leased in the manner prescribed by law prior to the seizure, may not be seized and impounded under this article, and no fine, penalty, or administrative charge, other than reasonable and customary charges for towing and storage, shall be imposed by the city on the company which rented or leased the vehicle, unless the city establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the renter or lessor had actual knowledge, at the time the vehicle was rented or leased, that the vehicle was being employed or was likely to be employed in criminal activity. When a vehicle that is rented or leased from a company engaged in the business of renting or leasing vehicles is seized and impounded under this article, upon learning the address or phone number of the company the city shall, as soon as practicable, inform the company that the vehicle has been seized and is available for the company to take possession upon payment of the reasonable and customary charges for towing and storage. 
(5)  Any interest in, title to, or right to a motor vehicle titled or registered jointly by the use of the conjunctives "and," "and/or," or "or" held by a co-owner, other than a motor vehicle held jointly between husband and wife, may not be seized and impounded unless the city establishes by a preponderance of the evidence the co-owner either knew, or had reason to know, after reasonable inquiry, that the vehicle was employed or was likely to be employed in criminal activity. When the interests of each culpable co-owner are seized, any remaining co-owners shall be afforded the opportunity to the seized interest in, title to, or right to the vehicle from the city. If any remaining co-owner does not purchase such interest, the city may hold the property in co-ownership, sell its interest in the property, liquidate its interest in the property, or dispose of its interest in the property in any other reasonable manner. 
(6)  It is an affirmative defense to a seizure and impoundment proceeding that the nexus between the vehicle sought to be seized and the commission of any underlying violation was incidental or entirely accidental. The value of the vehicle sought to be seized in proportion to any other factors must not be considered in any determination as to this affirmative defense. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 1, 7-3-01) 
Sec. 12-53. - Administrative penalty. 
    If an administrative penalty is imposed pursuant to section 12-52, such penalty shall constitute a debt due and owing to the city. The vehicle owner's obligation to pay such debt to the city shall be independent of the city's return or release of the vehicle. If a cash bond has been posted pursuant to section 12-52, the bond shall be applied towards payment of the penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 1, 7-3-01) 
Sec. - 12-54. 
Return of vehicle. 
    Except as provided otherwise in section 12-52, an impounded vehicle shall be returned to its owner, or to the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle, upon the payment to the city of the administrative penalty, plus any towing and storage fees accumulated, unless the vehicle has been sold, or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 1, 7-3-01) 
Sec. 12-55. - Appeal. 
    The owner of the motor vehicle that has been the subject of a seizure and impoundment pursuant to sections 12-51 and 12-52 may appeal the rulings and decisions of the special master or the alternate special master to the Circuit Court of the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit of Palm Beach County within 30 days of the date of the order being appealed. The city may charge a reasonable fee for preparation of the record for purposes of making the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 1, 7-3-01) 
Sec. 12-56. - Unclaimed vehicles. 
    Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within 60 days from the date of the order of the special master or alternate special master subjecting the owner of the motor vehicle to an administrative civil penalty of $500.00 pursuant to section 12-51, becomes unclaimed evidence pursuant to F.S. § 705.101(6). Such unclaimed vehicle shall then be disposed of by the city pursuant to F.S. § 705.105. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 1, 7-3-01) 
Secs. 12-57-12-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEXUAL OFFENDER RESIDENCY PROHIBITION 

Sec. 12-81. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence, and sexual offenders who prey upon children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to serve and to protect the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 3009, § 2(1), 6-21-06) 
Sec. 12-82. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except, where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
    Temporary residence means a place where the person abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 3009, § 2(2), 6-21-06) 
Sec. 12-83. - Prohibited location of residence; measurement of distance; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of F.S. § 794.011, 800.04, 827.071 or 847.0145, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, in which the victim of the offense was less than 16 years of age, to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,500 feet of any school, public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground or other place where children regularly congregate. 
(b)  Measurement of distance. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outer property line of a school, designated public school bus stop, day care facility, park, playground or other place where children regularly congregate. 
(c)  Penalties. A person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second or subsequent conviction of a violation of this section, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the county jail not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(d)  Exceptions. A person residing within 2,500 feet of any school, designated public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground or other place where children regularly congregate does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established the permanent residence prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 3009 . 
(2)  The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person is a minor. 
(4)  The school, designated public school bus stop, day care center, park or playground was opened after the person established permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 3009, § 2(3), 6-21-06) 
Sec. 12-84. - Rental of real property to certain sexual offenders and sexual predators. 
(a)  It is unlawful to rent or lease any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with or without the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this Code, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within 2,500 feet of any school, designated public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground or other place where children regularly congregate. 
(b)  A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this section, and shall subject the property owner to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided for in this Code of Ordinances and/or F.S. ch. 162, including the provisions that allow the city to seek relief as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 3009, § 2(4), 6-21-06) 
Secs. 12-85-12-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - YOUTH PROTECTION ORDINANCE 

Sec. 12-111. - Findings/purposes. 
    The City Council of the City of Riviera Beach finds as follows: 
(1)  Reducing juvenile crime and victimization, while promoting juvenile safety and well-being, is a matter of compelling governmental interest. 
(2)  The general inability of children to make critical decisions in an informed, mature manner also exposes them to influences which lead to their committing crimes. Children perceive even less risk of apprehension if they commit crimes at night. This is compounded because children often see no real risk of being or in being punished for a crime. 
(3)  Juvenile crime brings adverse consequences to the youth of the city in the form of decreased school performance, increased school dropout rates, criminal records, and diminished opportunity at worthwhile future employment. 
(4)  The city has an interest in the protection of minors from adults and from each other on the street during nighttime hours and is obligated to act in a positive manner for the safety and welfare of the juveniles of the city. 
(5)  A narrowly tailored ordinance that imposes reasonable time, place and manner restrictions upon minors in an effort to reduce juvenile crime and victimization, without unduly limiting the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly secured to all citizens by the United States and Florida Constitutions, is in the best interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Riviera Beach. 
(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 10-3-07) 
Sec. 12-112. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, certain words and phrases are defined as indicated herein. Words in the present tense include the future, the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular; the words "shall", "will" and "must" are mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. 
    Chief of police means and includes the city's chief of police and any sworn law enforcement office under the direction of the chief of police. 
    Direct route means the shortest path of travel through a public place to reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the way. 
    Emergency means, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Holding location means child protection center, to which a minor taken into custody for a violation of this article, will be delivered to await pick up by a parent or juvenile authorities. 
    Minor means any person under 18 years of age, who is not married and has not been adjudicated an adult. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of any association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural or adoptive parent of another person; 
(2)  A court-appointed guardian of another person; or 
(3)  At least 21 years of age and authorized by a parent or court-appointed guardian to have the care and custody of another person. 
    Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, playground, park, plaza, building, any property owned by or controlled by the City of Riviera Beach, or other place used by or open to the public. 
    Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay unnecessarily; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
    Restricted hours means: 
(1)  The hours between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday. 
(2)  The hours between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Friday and Saturday. 
(3)  The hours between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on legal holidays. 
    Semi-public place means any privately-owned or privately-operated real property (including any structure thereon) to which the general public is invited or has a legal right of access and right to resort for business, recreation, entertainment or other lawful purpose, including, but not limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, theater, shopping center, bowling alley, parking lot, alley, or road. "Semi-public place" shall also mean any vacant lot, or any vacant or abandoned building. 
    Swale means the low tract of land in front of or between houses often used for drainage. 
(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 10-3-07) 
Sec. 12-113. - Violation by minor. 
    It is a violation of this article for any minor to remain, linger, stay, congregate, move about, wander, or stroll in any public or semi-public place in the city, either on foot or in or upon any vehicle, during restricted hours. 
(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 10-3-07) 
Sec. 12-114. - Parental responsibility in regard to restricted hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor to knowingly permit or by insufficient control allow the minor to remain in any public or semi-public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during the restricted hours. 
(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 10-3-07) 
Sec. 12-115. - Exceptions. 
    It shall not be a violation of this article for a minor to be in any public or semi-public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during the restricted hours if the minor is: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent/guardian or other person at least 21 years of age, having the care and control of the minor with the parent or guardian's permission; 
(2)  On an errand or to a relative's home at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian with permission, without any detour and by using a direct route; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in a lawful employment activity, without any detour and by using a direct route; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the swale or sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police officer about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, recreational or academic activity supervised by adults at least 21 years of age, which organization takes responsibility for the minor as an invitee, or going to or returning home from any such activity without any detour and by using the most direct route; 
(8)  Attending or returning home directly from specific activity at a public or semi-public place which is open to the general public and supervised by adults; provided further, that the child has permission from his or her parent or legal guardian authorizing the child to attend or engage in that specific activity; and provided further that the chief of police may verify such authorization through contact with the parent or legal guardian or otherwise; 
(9)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution (or those similar rights protected by Article 1, Section 3, 4, and 5 of the Florida Constitution), such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; 
(10)  Married or had been married or emancipated in accordance with Florida Statutes; 
(11)  Homeless, or uses a public place as their usual place of abode; 
(12)  When the city council, pursuant to an application by a sponsor of an event not provided for in these exceptions, authorizes minors to be in a public place during restricted hours. An application by a sponsor of said event shall be completed by the sponsor and filed with the office of the chief of police not later than 21 days prior to the event and in sufficient time for the council to consider the application at a regularly or specially scheduled meeting prior to the event. The application shall include provisions for the protection of any minors participating in the event and shall be approved by the chief of police prior to submission to the city council for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 10-3-07) 
Sec. 12-116. - Responsibility of parents. 
    It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian, or other person at least 21 years of age having legal care and control of a minor to permit, or by inefficient control, to allow such minor to be or remain, linger, stay, congregate, move about, wander or stroll in any public or semi-public place during restricted hours, or, through willful inaction, fail to assure that the minor makes timely payment of any civil penalty provided by this article. It shall constitute a defense: 
(1)  If the parent, guardian or other person informed the police department that the minor was missing or had left or remained away from the minor's residence during restricted hours, over the objection of the parent, guardian, or other person; or 
(2)  If the parent, guardian or other person did not know of the minor's presence in a public or semi-public place during restricted hours, if said parent, guardian or other person, through the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, should not have known of the minor's unlawful act. 
(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 10-3-07) 
Sec. 12-117. - Responsibility of operators. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any business to knowingly permit a minor to remain, linger, stay, congregate, move about, wander or stroll upon the premises of the business during restricted hours. Operators are encouraged, but not required, to post in or about their business premises a notice in substantially the following form: "IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR ANY PERSON WHO IS LESS THAN EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE TO REMAIN ON THESE PREMISES BETWEEN 11:00 P.M. AND 6:00 A.M., UNLESS SPECIFICALLY ALLOWED BY LAW". It shall constitute a defense if the operator notified the police department that the minor was present on the premises of the business during restricted hours and the minor refused to leave the premises after being requested by the operator to leave. It shall also constitute a defense if the operator has posted a notice in the form set forth above, has notified the minor that the minor is not permitted on the premises during the restricted hours and has provided reasonable notice. 
(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 10-3-07) 
Sec. 12-118. - Enforcement procedures as to minors. 
    Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a law enforcement officer, upon finding a suspected minor in violation of this article shall: 
(1)  Have the suspected minor identify himself/herself by name, age and address; make every reasonable effort to verify the information provided by the minor, through written documentation, contact with the parent or otherwise; 
(2)  Ascertain the minor's reason for being in the public or semi-public place during restricted hours; 
(3)  If the minor is found to be in violation of the article, the minor shall be either immediately sent home and/or taken to a parent or to the holding location. The officer may file the appropriate papers to request that a petition be filed in court in accordance with F.S. ch. 984, Children/Family in Need of Services (CINS/FINS). 
(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 10-3-07) 
Sec. 12-119. - Penalties. 
(a)  A minor who violates this article for the first time, may receive a written warning by the police officer. 
(b)  A minor who violates the article for the second time and who had received a written warning will be afforded the opportunity to participate in community service, as approved by the city. If he/she chooses not to participate, does not qualify for the program, or fails to successfully complete the program, the minor shall be assessed a civil fine of $50.00 and court costs. The clerk of the court shall have the authority to collect said fines and costs. 
(c)  A minor who violates the article for the third time, is guilty of a civil infraction, and shall be assessed a civil fine of $100.00 and court costs. The clerk of the court shall have the authority to collect said fines and costs. 
(d)  A minor who violates the article for the fourth (or more) time, will receive a referral for CINS/FINS from law enforcement, in accordance with F.S. ch. 984. 
(e)  When the chief of police reasonably believes that any state law concerning child care has been violated the chief of police shall notify the state department of children and families. 
(f)  Any parent or operator who violates any section of this article shall receive a written warning for his or her first violation. Any parent or operator who violates any section of this article, after having received a prior written warning, is guilty of a civil infraction and shall be assessed a civil fine of $100.00 for each violation along with court costs. The clerk of the court shall have authority to collect said fines. 
(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 10-3-07) 
Secs. 20-120-20-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RED LIGHT ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM 

Sec. 12-141. - Intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to specifically authorize the enforcement of red light signal directive violations through the use of traffic infraction detectors, as permitted by general law within the city's jurisdictional limits. 
(Ord. No. 3098, § 2, 7-20-11; Ord. No. 4045, § 2, 6-4-14) 
Sec. 12-142. - Use of traffic infraction detectors. 
    Upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, the city is authorized to enforce compliance with red light signal directives pursuant to general law through the use of traffic infraction detectors under the State of Florida Uniform Traffic Code. Said enforcement shall be identified as the red light enforcement program. This article does not prohibit the city from enforcing compliance with red light signal directives by any other lawful means. 
(Ord. No. 3098, § 2, 7-20-11; Ord. No. 4045, § 2, 6-4-14) 
Sec. 12-143. - Implementation of red light enforcement program and designation of local hearing officer. 
    In accordance with the provisions of the Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Program under Chapter 316, Florida Statutes (the "Act"), the city authorizes the implementation of a red light enforcement program. The city manager and the chief of police are authorized to take all steps necessary to operate the red light enforcement program to comply with the requirements of general law including, but not limited to, selecting the locations of the traffic infraction detectors within the city. The city shall utilize its code enforcement special magistrate as its local hearing officer in accordance with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 3098, § 2, 7-20-11; Ord. No. 4045, § 2, 6-4-14) 
Chapter 13 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- City of Riviera Beach Recreation Board, § 2-91 et seq.; Riviera Beach Waterfront Advisory Board, § 2-101 et seq.; animals, ch. 4; health and sanitation, ch. 8; litter in parks, § 8-24; noise regulations, § 11-141 et seq.; peddling foodstuffs in parks, § 12-22; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 19; operation of vehicles on bathing beach areas, § 19-36 et seq.; community redevelopment, ch. 24; planning, ch. 27; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; subdivisions, ch. 30; zoning, ch. 31. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Beaches and certain other public property; rules of conduct. 
(a)  All persons using the public beaches and property of the city adjacent to the public beaches within the city shall comply with and abide by the following rules and regulations, to wit: 
(1)  No person shall dress or undress on the beach except in taking off or putting on dressing robes and shoes. 
(2)  No person shall dress or undress in any public place, including public toilets, on the city property adjacent to the beach except in taking off or putting on dressing robes and shoes. 
(3)  No person shall take any animal upon the public beaches. 
(4)  No person shall place or deposit on such beach or adjacent property owned by the city any loose paper or other trash or refuse, but shall deposit it in receptacles provided therefor. 
(5)  No motor vehicles shall be driven upon the beaches without previous written consent of the chief of police. 
(6)  No food vendors, ice cream vendors, peddlers or itinerant merchants shall carry on business on the beach property eastward of the east line of the street extending from the north boundary of the beach property southerly to the south boundary of the beach property, such street being the most easterly street on the municipal beach property. 
(7)  No metal detector shall be permitted upon the public beaches of the city except for the search of lost objects of value between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. upon approval of the city manager after written application is made by the person losing such object of value, stating therein the approximate date, time and location when and where the loss occurred and describing the object sought to be found and its value. 
(b)  The duly employed lifeguards on such beach may be designated law enforcement officers by their department head and be authorized to require persons using the beach and public property adjacent to such beach to obey reasonable commands designed to protect the public and public property in the use of such beaches and adjacent property as aforesaid, and the failure to obey any lawful command of the guards shall be a violation of this chapter. These lifeguards have no authority to arrest individuals. 
(Code 1957, §§ 16-4, 16-5) 
Cross reference- Operation of vehicles in bathing beach areas, § 19-36 et seq. 
Sec. 13-2. - Beaches and parks; regulation of use and hours of use; city manager to erect signs. 
(a)  The city manager is empowered and authorized to regulate the use of public beaches, parks and property adjacent to public beaches and parks within the city by creating or placing of signs regulating the use and hours of use. 
(b)  The existence of such signs at any place within the city shall be prima facie evidence that such signs were erected or placed with the authority of the city manager. 
(Code 1957, § 16-4.1) 
Sec. 13-3. - Animals prohibited on beaches. 
(a)  In order to promote the public health, safety, peace and general welfare, it is hereby declared that all necessary precautions be implemented to safeguard the public right to the enjoyment of the bathing beaches fronting the water of the Atlantic Ocean within the city limits by preventing exposure to cutaneous larva migrans, visceral larva migrans and other contagious diseases caused by animals and to protect the public right not to be exposed to hazards of unprovoked biting causing physical injury or otherwise being molested by animals roaming the bathing beaches within the city. 
(b)  There is hereby established an animal control line, running along the entire north to south boundary line of the city limits and east, 50 feet from the coastal construction setback line established under the provisions of F.S. § 161.052, by the department of natural resources which is deemed for the purposes of this enactment to be the reference point of the mean high water line to the water of the Atlantic Ocean. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian to permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, any animal to stray, run, be, go or in any other manner to be at large or while under control to be in or upon the beach area east of the animal control line, except for seeing eye dogs under control of their owners. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian to permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, any animal to stray, run, be, go or in any manner to be at large or while under control to be in or upon the beach area west of the animal control line without the express or implied consent of the owner of such beach area. 
(e)  The city manager is authorized and directed to post appropriate signs at the north, south and entrances to Singer Island giving notice to the public at large that animals are prohibited on the bathing beaches within the city, except for seeing eye dogs under control of their owners, and upon the posting of such signs this section shall be enforced. 
(Code 1957, § 16-5.1) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 4. 
Secs. 13-4-13-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SPORTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Riviera Beach Waterfront Advisory Board, § 2-101 et seq.; surfboards, apple or skip boards, § 12-20. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-26. - Fishing, swimming in certain areas. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to use a fish spear or gig from Riviera Beach Memorial Bridge for any purpose or to use a fish spear or gig in fishing within an area 150 feet from either side of such bridge. 
(b)  It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to fish or swim in the waters of Lake Worth within the area lying immediately east of the Florida Power and Light Company property within the city (meaning the property where the Florida Power and Light Company plant is located) for a distance measured at right angles from the shore of Lake Worth and extending easterly for a distance of 180 feet. 
(Code 1957, §§ 16-7, 16-8) 
Sec. 13-27. - Watercraft prohibited on certain beaches. 
(a)  Boats, vessels, and other watercraft are prohibited in properly marked regulatory zones on the beaches of the Atlantic Ocean in the city. 
(b)  The city police department shall have the primary responsibility in enforcing these regulatory zones. State law enforcement officials shall have secondary responsibility for enforcing these regulatory zones. 
(c)  Violation of this regulation will be deemed a noncriminal infraction under section 13-45 of the City of Riviera Beach Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2804, § 1, 3-3-99) 
Secs. 13-28-13-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IN VICINITY OF PHIL FOSTER MEMORIAL PARK 

Sec. 13-31. - Water skiing and aqua planing prohibited in designated area. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in either of the sports known as "water skiing" or "aqua planing" in the following described areas: 
(1)  That portion of the waters of Lake Worth bounded on the north by State Road No. 703; on the east by the shores of Singer Island; on the west by the east right-of-way line of the Intra-Coastal Waterway; and on the south by the corporate limits of the City of Riviera Beach, Florida, as the same extends from the shores of Singer Island to the Intra-Coastal Waterway. 
(2)  That portion of the waters of Lake Worth bounded on the south by State Road No. 703 and Phil Foster Memorial Park; on the east by the shores of Singer Island; on the west by a line parallel to and 1,000 feet west of the shores of Singer Island; and, on the north by a line parallel to and 1,000 feet north of that portion of State Road No. 703 which lies between the western shore of Singer Island and the eastern shore of the mainland. 
(3)  Within 75 feet of any dock, wharf or bridge. 
(b)  The prohibition contained in this section shall be deemed to include both the operator of the towing boat as well as the person actually engaged in water skiing or aqua planing. 
(Code 1957, § 16-10) 
Sec. 13-32. - Spear fishing prohibited in certain areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of spear fishing, which includes the taking of any marine life through the instrumentality of a spear, gig or other similar device operated by a person submerged or partially underwater within the areas designated in subsections 13-31(2) and 13-31(3) and within 150 feet of the southern shoreline of Phil Foster Memorial Park. 
(Code 1957, § 16-16) 
Sec. 13-33. - Swimming prohibited within specified distance of park. 
    It shall be unlawful to swim or bathe in that portion of the waters of Lake Worth lying within 500 feet of Phil Foster Memorial Park and being north of State Road No. 703 as the same is now laid out and in use between the west shore of Singer Island and the east shore of the mainland. 
(Code 1957, § 16-11) 
Sec. 13-34. - Watercraft prohibited within certain distance of park. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any boat, vessel or other watercraft within 200 feet of the shoreline of that portion of Phil Foster Memorial Park which lies south of State Road No. 703, as the same is now laid out and in use. 
(Code 1957, § 16-9) 
Sec. 13-35. - Operation of watercraft under bridge connecting park and Singer Island prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any boat or other water vessel through or under that certain bridge, on State Road No. 703, which lies between and connects the east shore of Phil Foster Memorial Park and the west shore of Singer Island. 
(Code 1957, § 16-12) 
Sec. 13-36. - Plunging into water from, swimming within designated distance of bridge prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to dive, jump or leap into the waters of Lake Worth from any bridge or its appurtenances. It shall likewise be unlawful to swim or bathe in the waters of Lake Worth within 50 feet of the bridge described in section 13-35. 
(Code 1957, § 16-13) 
Secs. 13-37-13-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IN VICINITY OF BICENTENNIAL PARK 

Sec. 13-41. - Designated swim areas. 
    The shores of Bicentennial Park are designated a swim area 75 feet north of Riviera Marina, 200 feet east of Bicentennial Park, 75 feet south of Old Slip Road and 400 feet west of the Intracoastal Waterway. The placement of uniform waterway regulatory markers for the restricted swim area are as follows: 
Buoy Latitude Longitude 1 26°46'24? 80°04'55? 2 26°46'25? 80°04'55? 3 26°46'26? 80°04'55?  
The buoy markers will have a diamond shape with a cross; explanatory reason of swim area will be indicated outside the cross diamond shape. 
(Ord. No. 2598, § 16.39, 9-15-93) 
Sec. 13-42. - Placement and maintenance of markers. 
    The placing and upkeep of all regulatory markers in the waters of the city shall be the responsibility of the parks and recreation department director. 
(Ord. No. 2598, § 16.40, 9-15-93) 
Sec. 13-43. - Mooring to, damaging or operating vessel within markers or buoys. 
(a)  No person shall moor or fasten a vessel to a lawfully placed aid to navigation markers or buoy, regulatory markers or area boundary marker or buoy. 
(b)  No person shall willfully damage, alter or move a lawfully placed aid to navigation marker or buoy, regulatory marker or buoy or area boundary marker or buoy. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a vessel or to carry on any prohibited activity as defined in this Code of Ordinances or deemed a safety hazard or interference with navigation within the restricted water area, which has been clearly marked by buoys or some other distinguishing device, as bathing or otherwise restricted area. 
(Ord. No. 2598, § 16.41, 9-15-93) 
Sec. 13-44. - Unattended vessels in restricted areas. 
    Any vessel found unattended in the restricted area shall be removed or towed to an area or facility of storage by a law enforcement officer/code inspector until the owner can be notified. The owner is responsible for the towing and storage costs involved in removal of vessel. 
(Ord. No. 2598, § 16.42(2)(f), 9-15-93) 
Sec. 13-45. - Violation deemed noncriminal infraction. 
(a)  Any person cited for violation of any provision of this division shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal infraction, shall be cited for such infraction and shall be cited to appear before county court. The civil penalty for any such infraction is $35.00. 
(b)  Any person cited for an infraction under this section may: 
(1)  Post a bond which shall be equal to amount of civil penalty; or 
(2)  Sign and accept a citation indicating a promise to appear. 
Any person who willfully refuses to post a bond or accept and sign a summons is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(c)  Any person cited under this section may pay the penalty within ten days of date of the citation or forfeit bond by not appearing at designated time and location. Any person following this procedure is deemed to have admitted to infraction and to have waived right of hearing. 
(d)  Any person electing to appear before county court or who is required to appear shall be deemed to have waived the limitations of the civil penalty specified in subsection (a). The court, after a hearing, shall make a determination if an infraction has been committed. If the commission of an infraction has been proven, the court may impose a civil penalty of $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2598, § 16.42(1), (2)(a)-(e), 9-15-93) 
Secs. 13-46-13-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOATS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Riviera Beach Waterfront Advisory Board, § 2-101 et seq.; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Regulation of boats, F.S. ch. 327. 

Sec. 13-51. - Definitions. 
    Definitions as stated in F.S. § 327.02 are incorporated herein by reference. For the purposes of this article, "waters within the corporate or city limits of the city" shall mean any part of Lake Worth within the boundaries of the city as may exist now or hereafter. 
(Code 1957, § 13-27) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-52. - Compliance. 
    For the protection of property owners, the general public and owners and operators of any vessel or floating structure in the city, all floating structures of any type whatsoever operated, moored, docked or anchored at any place in the canals, rivers, bays or waters within the corporate limits of city and the owners, operators or occupants thereof shall be governed by and observe the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 13-28) 
Sec. 13-53. - Trespassing vessels and other floating structures. 
(a)  Any vessel or floating structure that is found to be trespassing as defined in subsection (b) of this section may be immediately removed and impounded by the city at the expense of the owner. 
(b)  Trespass occurs when: 
(1)  Any vessel or other floating structure is placed or parked in any tow away zone that is posted with a tow away zone sign. All grassed area at the marina are tow away zones. 
(2)  Any vessel or other floating structure placed, parked, moored or otherwise attached to any city property other than a posted tow away zone, and the owner or operator fails to remove same after warning. 
(3)  Any vessel or other floating structure is found to be obstructing the egress and/or ingress of vessels at the city's marina. 
(Code 1957, § 13-29) 
Sec. 13-54. - Anchoring and mooring of vessels. 
(a)  No person shall establish any floating mooring device or anchor or moor any vessel or floating structure in the waters of the city other than mooring at a dock or similar facility for more than 72 continuous or cumulative hours during a 30-day period. Any vessel that anchors or moors in excess of 72 hours is not to be considered as exercising a right of navigation. 
(b)  Public anchorages may be designated by the city manager or his authorized representative, in which areas floating mooring devices may be established by the city or by private parties at the option of the city. Establishment or use of such a device shall require a permit from the city, for which reasonable charges may be assessed. No such device shall be established or used prior to the issuance of such permit. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any vessel or floating structure owned and operated by the state or the United States government. 
(2)  Any vessel or floating structure operating within the Florida Intracoastal Waterway. 
(Code 1957, § 13-30) 
Sec. 13-55. - A menace to navigation prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, anchor or moor any vessel or floating structure in such a manner as to cause or be considered a menace or obstruction to navigation. 
(b)  Abandoned boats shall be disposed of pursuant to F.S. ch. 705. 
(Code 1957, § 13-31) 
Sec. 13-56. - Sunken boats. 
(a)  Public hazard and/or public nuisance; removal requirement. Sunken boats in any waters within the city are declared to be a public nuisance. If a boat sinks in a harbor, marina, channel or in any of the waters within the city limits, it shall be the duty of the owner thereof to immediately remove the same at their expense, and on their failure to do so the city manager or designee shall remove such at the expense of the owner. If for whatever reason the owner or owners are not known, notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
(b)  Collection of costs of removal. If it becomes necessary for the director to remove a sunken boat, the city may, at its option, attach a lien to the salvage or enter suit against the owner to recover such costs, or both. 
(Code 1957, § 13-32) 
Sec. 13-57. - Health and sanitation rules of city; disorderly conduct, etc. 
    All persons on board a watercraft moored to land, docks, piers, wharves or anchored in the waterways of the city shall observe all health and sanitary regulations of the city and all ordinances of the city relating to the conduct of persons, including those prohibiting acts contrary to the health, morals, safety or public peace, and including ordinances prohibiting disorderly conduct or loud and boisterous noises which disturb the peace. 
(Code 1957, § 13-33) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 8. 
Sec. 13-58. - Excessive operating noise. 
    No operator shall cause or allow excessive noise in the operation of watercraft or in operating blowers, machinery, or motors of or on board a watercraft in violation of any noise control ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 13-34) 
Cross reference- Noise, § 11-141 et seq. 
Sec. 13-59. - Refuse disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or throw, or cause to be dumped or thrown, waste material, refuse, petroleum products or other debris into any waterways of the city. 
(b)  All watercraft moored or docked in the waterways within the city limits other than at the municipal docks shall provide garbage cans of sufficient capacity (not larger than 32 gallons, with tightfitting tops) to hold garbage or refuse to be collected by the city or its contractors. The city or its contractors shall have the authority to assess reasonable fees for the collection of such garbage or refuse. 
(c)  The city shall furnish and provide sufficient garbage containers near the municipal docks to service all watercraft moored at such docks, and the city shall make collections as established by ordinance. 
(d)  No one shall throw, drop or leave fish, garbage, trash, refuse, bait or other debris on docks, walls, parkways, parks or other premises within the city except in proper receptacles provided for same. 
(Code 1957, § 13-35) 
Cross reference- Solid waste management, ch. 17.5. 
Sec. 13-60. - Equipment for excrement, waste, refuse. 
    No person shall use or maintain living quarters on any motor boat, yacht, houseboat, floating home or any other type of watercraft on any of the waters within the city limits unless the same shall be equipped with a holding tank and/or chlorinator-macerator or other equipment sufficient for the purpose of containing all excrement, waste and refuse from such craft, and the same shall be disposed of in accordance with the rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter established by resolution of the city council for the disposal of same, but in no event shall any part thereof be released into any of the waters within in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 13-36) 
Cross reference- Waste from houseboats, § 8-2. 
Sec. 13-61. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager or designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If any watercraft is impounded as the result of a violation of any provisions of this article and the watercraft is unclaimed, the city shall dispose of the property in accordance with F.S. §§ 705.102, 705.103, 705.104, 328.15 and 328.17. 
(Code 1957, § 13-37) 
Sec. 13-62. - Penalty for violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 13-38) 
Secs. 13-63-13-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MARINA OPERATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Riviera Beach Waterfront Advisory Board, § 2-101 et seq. 

Sec. 13-76. - Dockage fees and miscellaneous charges. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the marina director to recommend to the city manager, the dockage fees for all municipal docks controlled by the city, and to furnish to the city council, by way of resolution, those fee recommendations with a list of prices so fixed, for the city council's approval. 
(b)  Miscellaneous and other charges. Miscellaneous charges for services or merchandise may be established from time to time by the city manager or designee, but final approval of such charges shall be the decision of the city manager. 
(c)  All applicable federal, state and local taxes shall be added to the dockage fees. 
(Code 1957, § 16-31; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 9-18-91; Ord. No. 2580, § 2, 2-17-93; Ord. No. 2685, §§ I, II, 10-4-95; Ord. No. 2686, §§ I, II, 10-4-95; Ord. No. 2879, § 1, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 2941, § 1, 4-2-03; Ord. No. 4030, § 1, 9-4-13) 
Sec. 13-77. - Deposits. 
(a)  A deposit equal to two months rental is due on all yearly and seasonal rentals prior to slip occupation. 
(b)  A 20 percent application deposit is required to activate all applications for slip rental. An application deposit is refundable if the accompanying application for slip rental is denied. In this case, the deposit will be automatically refunded. An application deposit is refundable if a slip is not available 60 days after initial application. In this case, a request for refund of deposit must be made in writing to the dockmaster. 
(Code 1957, § 16-34) 
Sec. 13-78. - Priority slip assignment to city residents. 
    Priority for slip assignment will be given to city residents and businesses. In order to accrue this benefit, applicant must produce one of the following at the time of application for slip rental: 
(1)  Validated homestead exemption certificate, in applicant's name, indicating ownership and residency within the city. 
(2)  Deed to property, in applicant's name, indicating ownership of property in the city. 
(3)  Lease in applicant's name indicating lease of property within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 16-35) 
Sec. 13-79. - Permanent live-aboards prohibited. 
    Individuals who establish domicile on their vessel will be approved for lease of no more than six continuous months. 
(Code 1957, § 16-36) 
Sec. 13-80. - Lease agreement. 
    The lease agreement form for the marina adopted by the city council is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1957, § 16-37) 
Sec. 13-81. - Rules and regulations. 
    The rules and regulations for the marina adopted by the city council are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1957, § 16-38) 
Sec. 13-82. - Authority of director to make rate changes. 
    The marina director shall be authorized to approve discretionary rate changes on a case-by-case basis for the sole purpose of generating increased revenues and to promote the use of marina facilities. Any rate adjustment must be with the approval of the city manager and must contain documentation supporting the justification for the request. 
(Ord. No. 2661, 4-5-95) 
Chapter 14 - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT PROGRAMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; mayor and city council, § 2-26 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; personnel, ch. 15; police, ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Actuarial soundness of retirement systems, F.S. § 112.60 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Participation in the Florida Retirement System. 
    All General employees and Firefighters of the City of Riviera Beach hired on or after June 1, 2015, and elected officials, as of March 1, 2015, shall participate in the Florida Retirement System as authorized by F.S. Ch. 121, except as excluded by law or by this chapter. General employees and Firefighters hired before June 1, 2015, shall on June 1, 2015, become compulsory participants in the Florida Retirement System, except for such General employees or Firefighters who, pursuant to section 14-2, elect by ballot provided by the Florida Retirement System, not to participate in the Florida Retirement System. The City's elected officials' positions shall be included in the Elected Officers' Class of the Florida Retirement System, effective as of March 1, 2015. Police Officers shall participate only in the City of Riviera Beach Police Officers' Pension Plan. 
(Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 8-19-15) 
Sec. 14-2. - Election of the Florida Retirement System. 
(a)  Prior to joining the Florida Retirement System, a referendum election of coverage in which General employees and Firefighters in the City having the right to participate in the Florida Retirement System shall be held on a date fixed by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(b)  Only those General employees and Firefighters who elected coverage under the Florida Retirement System by an affirmative vote in this referendum election shall be eligible for such participation as well as future General employees and Firefighters of the City who shall become automatically compulsory members of Florida Retirement System without the right of election. 
(c)  Once made, the choice by the General employee or Firefighter to participate in the Florida Retirement System shall be irrevocable. 
(Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 8-19-15) 
Sec. 14-3. - Agreement execution. 
(a)  The mayor, or in the mayor's absence, the chairperson of the city council, is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the administrator of the Florida Retirement System for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by it to the city's General employees, Firefighters, and elected officials. 
(b)  As provided herein, such agreements shall provide for the methods of administration of this retirement plan by the city that are found by the administrator of the Florida Retirement System to be necessary and proper and shall be effective for any employment covered by such agreements for employee services performed on and after the first day of March, 2015, for elected officials, and on and after the first day of June 2015 for General Employees and Firefighters. 
(Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 8-19-15) 
Sec. 14-4. - Employee and elected official withholding. 
    There shall be withheld from the periodic compensation of each General employee, Firefighter, and elected official sufficient funds to remit to the Florida Retirement System for Social Security contributions and retirement contributions as required by applicable state laws or regulations which shall be paid over by the city to the Florida Retirement System administrator designated by state law or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 8-19-15) 
Sec. 14-5. - Appropriation and pay from city funds. 
    There shall be appropriated and paid to the lawfully designated administrator of the Florida Retirement System in the manner provided by applicable state laws and regulations such amounts from available city general or special funds derived from ad valorem tax and non-ad valorem tax sources, and at such times as may be required to pay promptly the contributions and assessments of the city as a Florida Retirement System employer at the times and in the manner provided by state law and regulation. 
(Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 8-19-15) 
Sec. 14-6. - Records. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations, and shall adhere to all laws and regulations relating to the Florida Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 8-19-15) 
Sec. 14-7. - Benefits and overage conditions. 
    The city hereby adopts the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining to the Florida Retirement System for and on behalf of its elected officials, Firefighters, and the General employees of the city's departments and agencies to be covered under the agreements with Florida Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 8-19-15) 
Sec. 14-8. - Custodian of funds. 
    The city's director of finance and administrative services is hereby designated the custodian of all Florida Retirement System sums withheld from the compensation of General employees, Firefighters, and elected officials as authorized herein and of the appropriate funds from the employer's contributions. Also, the director of finance and administrative services is hereby designated the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining records for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4058, § 1, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 8-19-15) 
Secs. 14-9-14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL EMPLOYEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4097, §§ 1, adopted Dec. 6, 2017,amended and restated former Art. II, §§ 14-21-14-34, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1957, §§ 2-120.1-2-120.10, 2-121; Ord. No. 2603, § 1, 10-6-93; Ord. No. 2625, §§ 1, 2, 4-6-94; Ord. No. 2643, § 1, 12-7-94; Ord. No. 2649, § 1, 12-21-94; Ord. No. 2769, § 2,1-21-98; Ord. No. 2782, § 2, 5-19-99; Ord. No. 2903, § 1, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 2905, § 1, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 3022, § 1, 12-20-06; Ord. No. 3049, § 1, 9-17-08; Ord. No. 3054, § 1, 10-1-08; Ord. No. 3086, § 1, 2-2-11; Ord. No. 3093, §§ 2-4, 6-2-11; Ord. No. 4011, §1, 3-7-12; Ord. No. 4016, § 1, 8-15-12; Ord. No. 4060, §§ 2, 3, 6-8, 4-15-15. 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-161 et seq. 

Sec. 14-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulated contributions means the total of a member's contributions under the prior plan and amended plan. 
    Agreement means this written instrument setting forth the provisions of the system. 
    Amended plan effective date means November 1, 1972. 
    Amended plan or system means the City of Riviera Beach general employees' retirement system as contained in this article and all amendments thereto. 
    Anniversary date means October 1 of each year. 
    Average monthly earnings means one-twelfth of the arithmetic average of annual earnings for the highest two consecutive years of the last ten years preceding the actual retirement or termination date of a member. 
    Beneficiary means the person entitled to receive any benefits hereunder at the death of a member who has been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect at the time of death of the member, or if no person so designated is living at that time, the board shall have the authority to designate the beneficiary or beneficiaries as provided in this article. 
    Board means the board of trustees, which shall supervise, administer and manage the system provided in this article. 
    Continuous service means uninterrupted service by a member (expressed as years and completed months), from the date the member last entered employment as an employee until the date employment shall be terminated by death, retirement or discharge; provided, however, the continuous service of any member shall not be deemed to be interrupted by: 
(1)  Any authorized leave of absence, vacation, or period of suspension, provided that all members similarly situated in similar circumstances shall be treated alike pursuant to uniform nondiscriminatory rules. 
(2)  Any service, voluntary or involuntary, in the armed forces of the United States, provided the member is legally entitled to reemployment under the provisions of the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA), and any amendments thereto, or any law applicable to such reemployment, and provided further that such member shall apply for reemployment according to the law following release from the military. 
(3)  Further, a member may purchase up to five years, not to exceed 60 months of service, for service in the Armed Forces of the United States or United States Merchant Marines prior to employment with the city. Such prior service purchase shall be made by depositing with the pension fund the full actuarial costs of such years of service that would have occurred had the member been employed by the city for the number of years purchased. Such payment for said prior service may be made as a lump sum or in installments not to exceed the years of service purchased; however, the amount must be paid in full prior to retirement. Installment payments shall require interest at the actuarial rate of return for the years purchased, said interest to be determined by the fund actuary. Such purchase of prior service shall take effect upon vesting. If a member terminates service prior to vesting and receives a refund of employee contributions, the amount paid for such prior service shall also be refunded. 
Eligibility to purchase prior service shall also be subject to the following: 
a.  Prior service shall not be granted for service where the member is receiving or is entitled to receive a benefit from another governmental pension system. 
b.  Prior service under this section shall be only provided for service in the Armed Forces of the United States or the United States Merchant Marines. 
c.  Total prior service, for United States Armed Forces service, shall not exceed five years or 60 months. Actual service credit purchased shall be added to the years of service with the city. 
d.  Such payment may be by direct in-service transfer from a member's deferred compensation account (457 account) pursuant to Section 457(e) (17) of the Internal Revenue Code or any other qualified plan. Full payment of such purchased prior service must be completed prior to the member's actual retirement. 
(3)  Any period of disability as approved by the board. 
    Earnings mean basic wages, excluding non-regular overtime, and any other non-regular payments. Basic wages includes salary, up to 300 hours of regular overtime annually, longevity, bonuses, and payments for earned, accrued and unused vacation and sick leave accrued prior August 21, 2014, provided, no such payments made to an individual member shall be credited in excess of any limitations which may apply to the majority of members for credit for such payments. Basic wages shall not include non-salaried portions of severance pay, travel allowances, car allowances, or clothing allowances. 
    Employee means all regular, full-time employees of the city, except for public safety employees. 
    Fund means the trust fund established as part of the plan. 
    Insurance company means the insurance company which provided or provides insurance coverage required under the amended plan and prior plan. 
    Investment advisor means the person or entity which at any time serves as investment agent and investment advisor for the fund. 
    Member means an employee who fulfills the prescribed participation requirements. 
    Original effective date means November 1, 1965, the effective date of the prior plan. 
    Plan means the Riviera Beach General Employees Retirement System as established under this article. 
    Plan year means the period of one year commencing on any October 1 and ending September 30 in the succeeding calendar year. 
    Prior plan means the city employees' pension plan as it existed immediately preceding the adoption of this amended plan. 
    Spouse means the lawfully wedded wife or husband of a member. 
    Custodian means the entity chosen to serve as custodian of the fund established as part of the retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Sec. 14-22. - Eligibility. 
(a)  Conditions of eligibility. 
(1)  Eemployees who are members of the city's general employees' pension plan at the time of the adoption of this retirement system, shall be eligible to become members of this system. 
(2)  Any employee hired prior to the 1st day of June 2015 shall become a member upon employment and any employee hired on or after such date shall not be eligible to be a member of this plan. 
a.  Any employee must submit to an employment physical examination by the city's medical provider before such employee may be accepted as a member of the plan. 
(b)  Application. Each employee shall complete an application form established by the board, covering the following points, as well as such other points or items as may be prescribed by the board: 
(1)  Such employee's acceptance of the terms and conditions of the system; and 
(2)  Such employee's designation of a beneficiary or beneficiaries. 
(c)  Change in designation of beneficiary. A member may from time to time change the designated beneficiary by written notice to the board upon forms provided by the board. No change of beneficiary shall be effective until such written notice has been received by the board. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefit under the plan shall cease. However, after retirement, a member may only change the designated beneficiary two times. Thereafter, the member must pay for any administrative charges associated with the change. Notwithstanding the above, no change of joint annuitant as provided in the optional forms of benefits (section 14-26) herein may be made after such optional form of benefit commences. 
(d)  Application procedures. 
(1)  Any member seeking benefits pursuant to any provision of this article shall make a written request for such benefits upon an application form which shall be supplied by the board. Such form shall be filed with the plan administrator and will be considered a formal request to the board for pension benefits. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the request for pension, the plan administrator shall: 
a.  In those cases where the member has applied for any retirement benefits other than a disability pension, place the request for benefits on the agenda of the next scheduled meeting of the board, which shall not be more than 45 days after the receipt of the application. 
b.  In those cases where the member has applied for pension benefits pursuant to section 14-24(c)(1) (service-incurred disability) or section 14-24(c)(2), (nonservice-incurred disability) submit the completed application to the board for its review at its next scheduled meeting, which shall be not more than 45 days after receipt of the completed application. A completed application for disability pension shall include medical records from treating doctors stating that the member has been personally examined and found mentally or physically, disabled in the further performance of the member's work duties. All costs in completing the application, including medical fees, shall be paid by the member. Upon its review of the completed application, the board shall approve the application, deny the application specifically stating the reasons therefor or set up an appointment for the member with a doctor appointed and paid by the board. The board shall obtain any and all information, including but not limited to medical reports which the board deems necessary in order to assist the board in arriving at its decision. The member shall execute any and all documents necessary to assist the board in obtaining this information, including but not limited to medical release forms. Upon receipt of the report from the board-appointed medical provider and all requested information including medical reports, the board shall do one of the following: 
1.  Approve the application; 
2.  Deny the application specifically stating the reasons for denials; or 
3.  Give the member 30 days' notice of the meeting discussing the application by sending a letter to the member at the address listed on the application. 
(3)  The board shall consider the request for pension benefits at the meeting and shall receive all materials that are relevant to the application. At that meeting, the board shall do one of the following: 
a.  Grant the requested benefits. 
b.  Deny the benefits and inform the board attorney of the reasons for the denial. Within 30 days, the board's attorney shall then prepare a proposed order of denial specifically stating the reasons for the denial of such benefits. 
(4)  The proposed order shall be sent to the pension plan's administrator, who will send a copy of such proposed order by certified mail to the member at the address listed on the application. 
(e)  Review procedures. 
(1)  The member requesting benefits under this chapter may, within 60 days after being informed of the denial of the request for pension benefits, appeal the denial by filing a reply to the proposed order with the pension plan's administrator. If no appeal is filed within the time period, then the proposed order shall be final. 
(2)  If an appeal is filed, the board shall hold a hearing within 60 days of the receipt of the appeal. Written notice of the hearing shall be sent by certified mail to the member at the address listed on the application at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 
(3)  The procedures at the hearing shall be as follows: 
a.  All parties shall have an opportunity to respond, to present physical and testimonial evidence and argument on all issues involved, to conduct cross-examination, to submit rebuttal evidence and to be represented by counsel. Medical reports and depositions may be accepted in lieu of live testimony at the board's discretion. 
b.  All witnesses will be sworn by the pension plan's administrator. 
c.  The member or the member's representative and the board shall have an opportunity to question all witnesses. 
d.  Formal rules of evidence and formal rules of civil procedures shall not apply. The proceedings shall comply with the essential requirements of due process and law. 
e.  The record in a case governed by this subsection shall consist only of: 
i.  A tape recording of the hearing, to be recorded and maintained as part of the official files of the board by the pension plan's administrator. 
ii.  Evidence received and considered or proffered. 
iii.  All notices, pleadings, motions and intermediate rulings. 
iv.  Any decisions, opinions, proposed or recommended orders, or reports by the board. 
(4)  The board shall have the right to continue the hearing for good cause. 
(5)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Grant the pension benefits by overturning the proposed order by majority vote of the board members present. 
b.  Deny the benefits and approve the proposed order as a final order after making any necessary modifications the board feels necessary. 
(6)  Findings of fact by the board shall be based on competent, substantial evidence based on the record as a whole. 
(7)  Within 30 calendar days after rendering its order, the plan administrator shall send by certified mail, a copy of such order to the member. 
(8)  The member may seek review of the order of the administrative board by filing a petition for writ of certiorari in the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Sec. 14-23. - Retirement dates. 
(a)  Normal retirement date. 
(1)  A member wishing to retire may elect the earlier of age 65 or when the age, computed in terms of full months, and whose continuous service to the city, also computed in terms of full months, together equals or exceeds nine hundred (900) months (also known as the "Rule of 75"), or; 
(2)  Any member who completes ten or more years creditable service and attains age 55 years, or completes 15 or more years of creditable service and attains age 521/2, or completes 20 years of creditable service and attains age 50 years, and for such period has been a member of the pension fund is eligible for normal retirement benefits. 
(3)  Vesting of benefits upon normal retirement date. Any provision of this plan to the contrary notwithstanding, a member's accrued benefit shall become 100 percent vested upon the attainment of the normal retirement date. 
(b)  Early retirement date. A member may retire on the first day of any month following the attainment of both age fifty (50) and the completion of ten (10) years of continuous service, provided that such early retirement is approved by the board. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Sec. 14-24. - Retirement benefits. 
(a)  Normal retirement benefit. The monthly retirement benefit shall be an amount equal to three percent of the average monthly earnings as defined in section 14-21 for each year of service; provided, however, that no member shall be entitled to accrue a retirement benefit greater than 70 percent (70%) of average monthly earnings in any event. No benefit shall be payable for any period of time during which an eligible employee has failed to elect and apply for coverage under the plan. 
(b)  Early retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on the early retirement date may receive either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit as follows: 
(1)  A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence the first day of the month following the normal retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter during the member's lifetime. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement at the normal retirement date except that continuous service and average monthly earnings shall be determined as of the early retirement date; or 
(2)  An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on the early retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter during the member's lifetime. The maximum benefits payable, as determined in subsection (1) of this subsection, shall be reduced by one-fifteenth for each of the first five years, and one-thirtieth for each of the next five years by which the starting date of the benefit precedes actual service plus later age and reduced actuarially for each additional year thereafter. 
(c)  Disability. 
(1)  Service-incurred. Any member who receives a service-incurred injury, disease or disability as determined by the board, pursuant to subsection 14-22(d) or subsection 14-22(e) shall receive in equal monthly installments an amount equal to 66 2/3 percent of earnings in effect at the date of disability, less any amount equal to any social security disability benefit payable and less any workers' compensation payable and less any disability benefit payable under any other program funded by the city which provides disability or salary continuation by reason of accident or disability. In the event of recovery prior to the normal retirement date, credit for service during the period of disability shall be granted for purposes of subsequent retirement benefits. 
(2)  Nonservice-incurred. Any member who receives a nonservice-incurred injury, illness, disease or disability, as determined by the board in subsection 14-22(d) or subsection 14-22(e) shall receive in equal monthly installments an amount equal to a maximum of 45 percent of the member's earnings at such time, less an amount equal to any social security disability benefit payable and less any amount payable under any other program of salary continuation or disability benefits maintained by the city. Such benefit shall be payable until normal retirement age at which time such member shall be paid the greater of the disability benefit or an amount based upon the formula specified in subsection (a)(1) of this section and based upon the member's accrued service and salary to date of disability. The benefit shall commence after 60 workdays subsequent to the date of disability and shall be payable for life only and cease upon the death of such disabled member. 
(3)  Board review. The status of each service-incurred and nonservice-incurred disability shall be reviewed initially and periodically by the board and subject in all respects to uniform rules of administration and interpretation by the board. 
(d)  Preretirement death. 
(1)  Service-incurred. A death benefit shall be payable on behalf of any member who dies as a direct result of an occurrence arising in the performance of service, the determination of which shall be by the board. The benefit shall be payable as follows: 
a.  To the legally wedded spouse, [upon the member's] death, a benefit equal to 60 percent of the member's earnings. 
b.  Upon the death of the spouse, an allowance of up to ten percent of such member's earnings at time of death for each child of the deceased shall be paid in trust or as otherwise determined by the board to the eligible children, not to exceed a combined total of 40 percent of the member's final earnings; provided further, a child's benefit shall cease upon the earlier of such child marrying, dying or attaining 18 years of age. 
c.  The manner of handling and administering the pension to any child or children shall be determined by the board. No survivor pension shall be paid to any stepchild of a deceased member. 
(2)  Nonservice-incurred. If any member shall die prior to retirement from causes not attributable to active duty or services, as of the time of death, had met the eligibility requirements for early retirement in such event, the member's accrued retirement benefit, determined in the same manner as though such member had lived and elected early retirement, shall be payable for a period of ten years certain to the member's designated beneficiary. In the case of a member who dies on or after January 1, 2007, while performing "Qualified Military Service" under Title 38, United States Code, Chapter 43, Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act ("USERRA") within the meaning of Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code, any "additional benefits" (as defined by Section 401(a)(37) of the Internal Revenue Code) provided under the plan that are contingent upon a member's termination of employment due to death shall be determined as though the member had resumed employment immediately prior to his death. With respect to any such "additional benefits," for vesting purposes only, credit shall be given for the period of the member's absence from covered employment during "Qualified Military Service". 
(e)  Vesting. If a member terminates employment, either voluntarily or by lawful discharge, and is not at such time eligible for either a normal, early or disability retirement benefit under this system, the member shall be entitled to a percentage of the accrued benefit, payable at the first of the month following the member's normal or early retirement age according to the following schedule: 
Vesting Schedule 
(Accelerated Partial Vesting 
Beginning at 8 Years of Service) 
Completed 
Years of 
Continuous 
Service Annual Vested Increment in 
Accrued 
Retirement 
Benefit Cumulative 
Vested 
Interest 0-7  0   0  8 50  50  9 25  75 10 25 100  
A member-must live to normal or early retirement age in order to receive this vested benefit, and no vested benefits shall be payable to a member's beneficiaries following the member's death; provided further, a member must leave accumulated contributions in the fund in order to receive the vested benefit, unless in lieu of all benefits whatsoever under the plan, the member elects to receive a refund of accumulated contributions, provided the member's employment is terminated either voluntarily or by lawful discharge. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Sec. 14-25. - Contributions. 
(a)  Member contributions. Members of the retirement system shall make regular bi-weekly contributions to the trust fund immediately upon employment at a rate equal to six percent of their respective bi-weekly earnings. Eligible employees, as a condition of membership, shall agree in writing upon becoming a member to make the contributions specified herein. The contributions shall be deducted from the earnings before the same are paid to the employee. 
(b)  City contributions. So long as this system is in effect the city shall make an annual contribution to the trust fund in an account equal to the difference each year as between the total of aggregate member contributions for the year and the amount necessary for the year to maintain the system on a sound actuarial basis as shown by the most recent actuarial valuation and report for the system. The total cost for any one (1) year shall be defined as the total of normal cost for the year plus an additional amount sufficient for the year to permit systematic amortization of the accrued past service liability. 
(c)  Guaranteed refund of member contributions. All retirement, death and disability benefits payable under this system are in lieu of a refund of member contributions. In any event, however, each member shall be guaranteed the payment of benefits at least equal in total amount to the member's accumulated contributions plus such interest as may be determined by the board, but not less in any event than three percent (3%). In lieu of any other benefits hereunder, a member shall have the option on termination of employment, either voluntarily or by lawful discharge, of withdrawing all of the member's accumulated contributions plus interest thereon. 
(d)  Miscellaneous. All monies representing member and city contributions and all other sources whatsoever, and held by or in custody of the city, the board or any other entity, including insurance carriers or trustees, for purposes of funding pension benefits for members herein, shall be included in this fund, including any interest gathered by these monies, and shall be transferred into this fund. 
(e)  Forfeitures. To the extent that it is not required for the funding of any vested or retirement benefit, monies remaining in the fund which had previously been contributed in order to fund such benefits shall serve only to reduce current and future contributions under this plan. There shall be no reversion of any assets whatsoever to either the company or a signatory member company. 
(f)  Effective date; compliance with Internal Revenue Code. The effective date of the program is January 1 following receipt of a favorable determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service. At that time, the city shall pick up the member contributions required by subsection (a) of this section. The contributions so picked up shall be treated as employer contributions in determining tax treatment under the United States Internal Revenue Code. The city shall pick up the member contributions from funds established and available in the salaries account, which funds would have otherwise been designated as contributions and paid to the pension fund. Member contributions picked up by the city pursuant to this subsection shall be treated for purposes of making a refund of member's contributions, and for all other purposes of this and other laws, in the same manner and to the same extent as member contributions made prior to the effective date of this subsection. The intent of this subsection is to comply with section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Sec. 14-26. - Optional forms of retirement benefits. 
    Each member at time of actual retirement shall have the right at any time prior to actual retirement to elect to have such benefit payable under any one of the options set forth in this section in lieu of the retirement benefits otherwise provided herein, and to revoke any such elections and make a new election at any time prior to actual retirement. The value of optional benefits shall be actuarially equivalent to the value of benefits otherwise payable. The member shall make such an election by written request to the board and such an election shall be subject to the approval of the board. 
    Normal benefit-Straight life annuity. A retiring member may elect to receive payments as long as the member lives. If the member should die before receiving an amount equal to the member's own contributions to the plan, payments will continue to the beneficiary until the member's contributions with interest have been used up. 
Option 1. Ten years certain and life thereafter annuity. A retiring member may elect to receive a decreased retirement benefit with one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments guaranteed. If, after retiring, the member should die before such one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments are made, payments are then continued to the designated beneficiary until one hundred twenty (120) payments in all have been made, at which time benefits cease. After expiration of the certain period, should the retired member be then alive, payments shall be continued during the member's remaining lifetime. 
Option 2. Joint and last survivor annuity. A retiring member may elect to receive a decreased retirement benefit during the member's lifetime and have such decreased retirement benefit (or a designated fraction thereof) continued after death to and during the lifetime of the joint annuitant, provided that if the joint annuitant is someone other than the spouse, the monthly payments to the member must be at least equivalent to the amount the member would have received had the member elected a period certain and life thereafter option of the earlier of 20 years or age 85. The election of Option 3 shall be null and void if the joint annuitant dies before the member's retirement. Below are the various joint and last survivor annuities: 
One hundred percent joint and last survivor annuity: This option provides monthly payment to the member as long as the member lives. The joint annuitant, if living at the time of the member's death, will then receive the same monthly amount as long as the joint annuitant lives. 
Seventy-five percent joint and last survivor annuity: This option provides monthly payments to the member as long as the member lives. The joint annuitant, if living at the time of the member's death, will receive 75 percent of the member's monthly payment as long as the joint annuitant lives. 
Fifty percent joint and last survivor annuity: This option provides monthly payments to the member as long as the member lives. The joint annuitant, if living at the time of the member's death will receive 50 percent of the member's monthly payment as long as the joint annuitant lives. 
Option 3. Other . In lieu of the other optional forms enumerated in this section, retirement benefits may be paid in any form approved by the board so long as actuarial equivalence with the benefits otherwise payable is maintained. 
Option 4. Deferred retirement option program (DROP). In general, and subject to the provisions of this section, the board is authorized to establish and maintain a deferred retirement option program, hereinafter referred to as DROP. The DROP is a program under which an eligible member of the retirement system may elect to participate by deferring receipt of retirement benefits while continuing employment with the city. Upon entry into DROP a member's accrued vacation and sick leave balances not used in calculation of normal retirement benefits shall be carried forward and the DROP member shall accrue additional vacation and sick leave during participation in the DROP. However, any accrued vacation or sick leave balance at termination of the DROP period shall be forfeited. Upon termination of employment, the member shall begin to receive the previously determined normal retirement benefits. Participation in the DROP does not guarantee employment for the specified period of the DROP. 
(1)  Eligibility of member to participate in the DROP. All retirement system members are eligible to elect participation in the DROP on or after attaining their normal retirement date or age provided that election to participate is made within five years after the member reaches the earliest eligibility for normal retirement based on years of service, or age and years of service, except as provided for in subparagraphs (2)a. below. The member shall advise the city and the retirement system in writing at least 30 days in advance of the date on which the DROP shall begin. 
(2)  Participation in the DROP. 
a.  An eligible member may elect to participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed a maximum of 60 consecutive months nor beyond a total of 35 years of credited service with the city, whichever occurs first. 
b.  Upon deciding to participate in the DROP, the member shall submit on forms required by the retirement system: 
1.  A written election to participate in the DROP. 
2.  Selection of the DROP participation and termination dates, which satisfy the limitations stated in subsection (1) and subsection (2)a. Such termination date shall be in an irrevocable and binding letter of resignation with the city, establishing a deferred termination date. The member may terminate before the termination date within the limitations of subsection (2)a., with not less than 30 days advance written notice to the city from the new termination date. 
3.  A properly completed DROP application for service retirement as provided by the board. 
4.  A written election of form of pension payment, pursuant to section 14-26 of this article. 
5.  Any other information required by the retirement system's board. 
c.  The DROP member shall be retired under the retirement system for all purposes except that payment of benefits shall be deferred until separation from city employment. 
d.  A re-employed DROP member with renewed membership shall not be eligible for DROP participation. 
(3)  Benefits payable under the DROP. The DROP account shall earn interest at a rate set quarterly by the board. Such interest shall be equal to the system's net rate of investment return for the year, but in no event shall be less than zero percent, and shall be credited to each individual account balance on a quarterly basis. 
a.  Effective with the date of DROP participation, the member's initial normal monthly benefit, including the value of accrued unused leave credited service, and final average compensation, shall be fixed. The value of accrued unused leave, whether or not payment for such is actually received by the member, shall be included in the calculations to determine said normal monthly benefit, with appropriate contributions being made on entry into the DROP. However, actual payment for such accrued unused leave shall be made in no more than five equal installments, paid no less frequently than annually on the anniversary of the member's entry into the DROP, provided however, that the first installment shall be at least sufficient to cover the cost of the member's contribution to the member's pension, after all other deductions have been made. The city will, however, make a onetime payment at the entry into DROP to members who have no more than 12 days leave remaining. Interest on any unpaid portion of such accrued leave payment shall be calculated annually at simple interest at the rate earned by the city's largest investment fund (excluding pension investment funds). Termination from the DROP prior to the maximum DROP period shall result in a lump sum payment of any remaining balance of said accrued leave installments with interest calculated for each completed calendar quarter. 
Such retirement benefit shall accrue monthly to the member's individual DROP account. The board shall administer these individual DROP accounts. DROP accounts shall accrue interest at a rate set quarterly by the board. These DROP accounts shall be subject to administrative fees or charges as established by the board. 
b.  The effective date of retirement of a DROP member shall be the first day of the month selected by the member to begin participation in the DROP. All members are encouraged to attend a city-sponsored employee education program prior to entering the DROP. 
c.  Normal retirement benefits shall continue to accrue in the DROP until the established termination date of the DROP or until the member terminates employment or dies prior to such date. A separate accounting of each member's accrued benefits under the DROP shall be calculated and be available to members annually. 
d.  At the conclusion of the member's participation in the DROP, the board shall direct that the member's total accumulated DROP benefits be distributed, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  The board shall receive verification from the city that the member has terminated employment. 
2.  The terminated DROP member or if deceased, such member's named beneficiary, shall elect on forms provided by the board to receive payment of the DROP benefits in accordance with one (1) of the options listed below. For a member or beneficiary who fails to elect a method of payment within 60 days of termination of the DROP, the board shall direct that a lump sum be distributed as provided in subsection i. below. 
i.  Lump sum: All accrued DROP benefits, plus interest, less withholding taxes remitted to the Internal Revenue Service, shall be paid to the DROP member or surviving beneficiary. 
ii.  Direct rollover: All accrued DROP benefits, plus interest, shall be paid from the DROP directly to the custodian of an eligible retirement plan as defined in Section 402(c)(8)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse of a deceased member, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or an individual retirement annuity as described in Section 402(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
iii.  Partial lump sum: A portion of the accrued DROP benefits shall be paid to the DROP member or surviving beneficiary, less withholding taxes remitted to the Internal Revenue Service, and the remaining DROP benefits shall be transferred directly to the custodian of an eligible retirement plan as defined in Section 402(c)(8)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving beneficiary of a deceased member, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or an individual retirement annuity as described in Section 402(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. The proportions shall be specified by the DROP member or surviving beneficiary. 
3.  The form of payment selected by the DROP member or surviving beneficiary shall comply with the minimum distribution requirements of the Internal Revenue Code and payments shall begin no later than the date on which the member reaches age 70 years and six months. Regardless of the form of payout, a member's DROP account continues until the account balance is exhausted. 
4.  For a DROP member who fails to terminate city employment at the expiration of the 60-month maximum DROP participation period or the 35-year credited service maximum whichever occurs first unless authorized to do so pursuant to subparagraphs (2)a. the member shall be deemed not to be retired, the DROP election shall be null and void, and the member shall have no accumulated DROP benefits. Retirement system membership shall be reestablished retroactively to the date of the commencement of the DROP, and the member shall be required to pay to the retirement system the member contributions as if the member had continued service to the city, and the city contributions during the period the member participated in the DROP, plus an interest rate equal to the annual assumed investment return during each year the member participated in the DROP. 
e.  The accrued benefits of any DROP member, and any contributions accumulated under such program, shall not be subject to assignment, execution, attachment, or to any legal process whatsoever, except for income deduction orders as provided in F.S. § 61.1301, and federal income tax levies. 
f.  DROP member shall not be eligible for disability retirement benefits as provided in subsection 14-24(c), and the member spouse and children shall not be eligible for the survivor benefits as provided in subsection 14-24(d). 
(4)  Death benefits under the DROP. 
a.  Upon the death of a DROP member, the named beneficiary shall be entitled to apply for and receive the accrued benefits in the DROP as provided in this section. 
b.  The normal retirement benefit accrued to the DROP during the month of a member's death shall be the final monthly benefit credited for such DROP member. 
c.  Eligibility to participate in the DROP terminates upon death of the member. If the member dies on or after the effective date of enrollment in the DROP, but prior to the first monthly benefit being credited to the DROP, retirement system benefits shall be paid as though the DROP election had not been made. 
(5)  Contributions. Neither city nor member pension contributions, shall be made, due, or payable during a member's DROP participation, notwithstanding any other section of this article. 
(6)  Forfeiture of retirement benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP members from the scope of Section 8(d). Art. II of the State Constitution, and F.S. § 112.3173. DROP members who commit a specified felony offense while employed will be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits, pursuant to those provisions of law. Provided further that such retirement benefits in excess of the member's contributions may be suspended in the event a criminal prosecution is pending. 
(7)  Administration of program. The board shall make such rules as are necessary for the effective and efficient administration of this subsection and individual DROP accounts. The board shall not be required to advise members of the federal tax consequences of an election related to the DROP but may advise members to seek independent advice. 
(8)  415 Limitations. All benefit payments and accruals under the DROP shall be in accordance with Subsection 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code and all regulations thereunder, which subsections and regulations are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Sec. 14-27. - Administration. 
    The general administration and responsibility for the proper operation of the retirement system and for making effective the provisions of this article are hereby vested in an administration board consisting of seven persons, as follows: four members other than general employees to be appointed as provided in this section, and three general employee members to be elected as provided in this section. 
(1)  The term of office of each board member shall be for three years, except that the initial term following the effective date of this section of the members of each category shall be as set forth herein. 
a.  Each board member shall attain certification as a pension trustee within two years of appointment or election. 
b.  In the event an appointed member does not attain certification within said two-year period, the city council may remove said member. 
c.  In the event an elected member does not attain certification within said two years, the board shall vote to remove said elected member and if approved, shall request a new election and the member removed may not seek nomination at such subsequent election. 
(2)  Two of the appointed members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the city council. Two of the appointed members shall be appointed by the city council. All four appointed members shall be residents of the city and may not be employees if of the city. Notwithstanding the above, appointed members who are City of Riviera Beach retirees shall not be required to be residents of the city. Following the effective date of this section, each appointed position shall be appointed for a three-year term of office upon the respective expirations of the terms of office then in effect. 
(3)  The three elective members shall be members in the plan and elected by a vote of all members in the plan. The election shall be held in such time and place as designated by the human resources department. All members shall be notified of the election at least ten days in advance of the election, either in writing or by the posting of notices on departmental bulletin boards. The candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected and shall take office as soon thereafter as qualified. The election shall be held each year not more than 30 days prior to November 1. 
(4)  If a vacancy occurs, except as to subsection 14-27(10), the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the office was previously filled. 
(5)  Members shall serve without compensation, but they may be reimbursed for all necessary expenses which they may actually expend through services on the board, as provided for in a written policy approved by the board and a travel policy also approved by the board. 
(6)  Each board member shall, within ten days after appointment or election, take an oath of office before the city clerk of the city, that so far as it devolves upon the board member, the board member will diligently and honestly administer the affairs of the board, and that he board member will not knowingly violate or willingly permit to be violated any of the provisions of the law applicable to the retirement system. Such oath shall be subscribed to by the members making it and certified by the clerk and filed in that office. 
(7)  Each board member shall be entitled to one vote on the board. A majority vote of those present, where a quorum is in attendance, shall be necessary for a decision at any meeting of the board. A quorum shall consist of four board members. 
(8)  Subject to the limitations of this article, the board shall from time to time establish uniform rules and regulations for the administration of funds created by this article and for transactions of its business, including provisions for compulsory attendance of its members, which shall have the force of law. 
(9)  The board shall by majority vote of its members appoint a secretary, who may, but need not be, one of its members. It shall engage such actuarial and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the retirement system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the retirement system shall be paid at such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. All funds shall be disbursed only on authorization of the board. 
(10)  Any board member who neglects the duties of the office as determined by the board, may be removed by a two-thirds vote of the board. Any member of the board who fails to attend two out of three successive meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chairperson, or in the chairperson's absence the acting chairperson, shall automatically forfeit the appointment to serve on the board and the city council shall promptly fill such vacancy. 
(11)  The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include, but not necessarily be limited to the following: 
a.  Construing the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
b.  Determining all questions relating to eligibility and participation. 
c.  Determining and certifying amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder. 
d.  Having annual actuarial valuations of the system performed. 
e.  Establishing uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit applications and all matters required to administer the plan. 
f.  Distributing at regular intervals to employees information concerning the plan. 
g.  Receiving, processing and approving all applications for participation and benefits; notifying the city of approved benefit payments. 
h.  Attending pension schools, conventions, conferences, workshops and other pension sessions to obtain and maintain pension certification. Board members must first look to certification opportunities in the State of Florida. Other opportunities may be approved by a majority vote on a case by case basis. 
i.  Performing such duties as are specified in section 14-28. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Sec. 14-28. - Finances and fund management; establishment and operation of fund. 
(a)  All of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the system shall be deposited into the trust fund established as part of the system. 
(b)  The actual supervision of the fund and assets thereof shall be vested in the board. Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made only on authorization from the board. 
(c)  The custodian of the trust fund shall be designated by the board upon an affirmative vote of five members of the board. An agreement shall be executed between the board and the custodian under the terms of which the custodian shall be authorized to receive and hold in such fund all contributions and assets whatsoever payable and attributable to the retirement system. It shall be impossible under the terms of this system or any agreement hereunder for any part of the principal or income of the fund, except for such sums as may be expended in administration of the system, to be used for or diverted to purposes other than the exclusive benefit of employees, their beneficiaries and benefits provided hereunder. No disbursements shall be made by the custodian except upon written authorization from the board. 
(d)  A separate investment consultant shall have full authority to supervise, pass upon and approve the nature, amount and timing of investments of the fund of the retirement system, and the purchase, sale and disposition of such investments; the board shall accordingly hire and appoint such persons, firms or entities as it determines to be required or advisable so as to accomplish and have performed investment consulting duties hereunder. The board shall thus enter into appropriate agreements for the purpose of securing separate investment consulting services for the system and fund. 
(e)  All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the fund, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of employees on both an individual and aggregate account basis; 
(2)  Receipts and disbursement; 
(3)  Payments to retirees; 
(4)  Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the city; 
(5)  All interest, dividends and gains or losses whatsoever; and 
(6)  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(f)  The city finance department is authorized to and charged with the responsibility of collecting member contributions, maintaining records pertaining thereto, and promptly transmitting all funds so collected, as well as all other funds whatsoever designated for the plan, to the trust fund. The city's finance department shall also review copies of all annual reports on trust fund transactions. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Sec. 14-29. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Discharged members. Members entitled to a pension shall not forfeit benefits to which they are entitled under this system upon dismissal as a general employee, except as otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Recovery from disability. If a member who has been retired on a pension on account of permanent incapacity regains full health and is shown to be physically able to perform the duties as a general employee in the case of service connected disability or nonservice connected disability, the board shall request the city to allow the member to resume the position in the respective department and discontinue the pension in the event that the member is returned to employment; provided, however, that if such member shall have been retired for nonservice connected disability, and shall after resuming the position, pay into the fund an amount equal to the aggregate contributions plus interest at a rate to be determined by the board (computed upon the employee's annual earnings at the time of the disability retirement) the member would have been required to make hereunder, as determined by the board, during the period of the disability retirement had the employee not been retired, such member shall receive creditable service for the period of such disability retirement, as well as for the period of continuous service prior to the date of disability. 
(c)  Nonassignability. No pension provided for in this article shall be assignable or subject to garnishment for debt or for other legal process; except the recipient of any monthly benefit may authorize the board to withhold from the monthly benefit those funds necessary to pay the premium for dental, health or life insurance benefits being received through the city. 
(d)  Duration of pension. Pensions granted to retired members shall be paid to them for life and shall not be revoked nor in any way diminished except as provided in this division, and the contributions of the member to this fund shall cease upon retirement and acceptance of a pension. 
(e)  Incompetents. If any member or beneficiary is a minor or adjudged incapable of personally receiving and giving a valid receipt for any payment due under the plan, the board may, unless and until claims shall have been made by a duly appointed guardian or committee of such person, make such payment or any part thereof to such person's designated beneficiary or other person deemed by the board to have incurred expenses or assumed responsibility for the expenses of such person. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of any liability under the plan for such payment. 
(f)  The board and the city will furnish the actuary with all data required for necessary actuarial computations under the plan. 
(g)  No payment or any benefit, contribution, or other sum which would constitute a violation of any applicable wage control law shall be made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Sec. 14-30. - Amendment of plan. 
    The city council shall have the right at any time to modify, alter or amend the plan and trust established as part of the plan, in whole or in part; provided, however, that the duties, powers and liabilities of the trustee shall not be changed without its written consent; and provided, further, that the city shall not have the power to amend the plan in such manner as to cause or permit any portion of the fund held for members under the plan to be diverted to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of such members and their beneficiaries, or to reduce any benefits or amounts already vested according to the provisions of this plan; and provided, further, that no such amendment shall have the effect of reinvesting in the city any portion of the fund, except such amount as may, due to an erroneous actuarial computation, remain in the fund after the satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Sec. 14-31. - Termination of plan. 
(a)  The city council reserves the right to terminate the plan and trust and its contributions thereunder at any time, the termination to be effective on a date to be designated by the city. If the city terminates the plan, or if it is otherwise terminated or contributions to it are completely discontinued, the board shall continue to administer the fund as instructed by the board in accordance with the provisions hereof. In the event of termination of the plan as provided in this section, or complete discontinuance of contributions to the plan, the fund held on the effective date of such termination or discontinuance shall be administered for the sole benefit of the previous members, active and retired and beneficiaries then receiving benefits and any future beneficiaries entitled to receive benefits who are designated by any of such members. Subject to the provisions of this section, the fund shall be promptly allocated by the board in an equitable manner to provide benefits for the persons stated in this section in accordance with the provisions of the plan, and in the following order of priority: 
(1)  Members already retired under the normal retirement provisions of this plan and those eligible for normal retirement but not actually retired, and their beneficiaries, in proportion to and to the extent of the then actuarially determined present value of the benefits payable. If any funds remain, then 
(2)  Members already retired or eligible for retirement under the early retirement provisions of this plan and their beneficiaries in the same manner as in subsection (1) of this section. If any funds remain, then 
(3)  All other members and their beneficiaries in the same manner as in subsection (1) of this section but based upon continuous service and average monthly earnings as of the date of termination of the plan, and with any benefits vested given precedence. 
(b)  The allocation of the fund provided for in this section may, as decided by the board, be carried out through the purchase of insurance company contracts to provide the benefits determined in accordance with this section. The fund may be distributed in one sum to the persons entitled to such benefits in the proportion of the then-present value of such benefits, or the allocation may be carried out in such other equitable manner as the board may direct. 
(c)  Vesting of benefits upon termination of the plan. Any provision of this plan to the contrary notwithstanding, a member's accrued benefit shall become 100 percent vested upon termination of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Sec. 14-32. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-33. - Excess benefit plan. 
(a)  Establishment of plan. There is hereby created a separate, unfunded, nonqualified excess benefit plan containing the terms and provisions set forth in this subpart and intended to be a qualified governmental excess benefit arrangement as defined in Section 415(m)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  All definitions prescribed in this chapter are applicable to the plan created pursuant to this subpart unless a different definition is set forth in this subpart, or the context in which a term is used in this subpart indicates a different meaning than that prescribed elsewhere in the Code of Ordinances or the Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)  Board shall mean the Board of Trustees of the City of Riviera Beach General Employees' Pension Plan. 
(3)  Code shall mean the Internal Revenue Code as it may be amended by Congress from time to time. 
(4)  Excess benefit member shall mean any member whose retirement benefit is determined on the basis of all qualified plans maintained by the city without regard to the limitations set forth in the pension plan and comparable provisions of other qualified plans of the city, that exceed the maximum benefit under section 415 of the code. 
(5)  Excess benefit plan shall mean the unfunded, nonqualified plan created by the city to provide benefits to members who would be provided under the pension plan, but for the limitations imposed by section 415 of the code. 
(6)  Maximum benefit shall mean the retirement benefit a member is entitled to receive from the benefit plan set forth in the Code of Ordinances in any month after giving effect to any provision of a qualified plan designed to conform to section 415 of the code. 
(7)  Pension plan or plan shall mean the City of Riviera Beach General Employees' Pension Plan. 
(8)  Unrestricted benefit shall mean the monthly retirement benefit a member, or the beneficiary of a member, would have received under the terms of all qualified plans of the city, except for the restrictions contained in the pension plan and any similar provisions of any other qualified plans designed to conform to section 415 of the code. 
(c)  Benefit provided. 
(1)  An excess benefit member who is receiving benefits from the pension plan is entitled to a monthly benefit, including cost of living adjustments, under this excess benefit plan in an amount equal to the lesser of: 
(i)  The member's unrestricted benefit under the qualified defined benefit plan, less the maximum benefit permitted for qualified defined benefit plans for government employees under section 415 of the code; or 
(ii)  The amount which the member's monthly benefit from the pension plan has been reduced due to limitations imposed by the code. 
(2)  A retirement benefit payable under this excess benefit plan shall be paid in the form and at the time it would have been paid as a monthly pension under the pension plan, except for the limitations set forth in the pension plan and section 415 of the code. Each optional benefit form permitted under this excess benefit plan shall be the actuarial equivalent of each other permitted benefit form. 
(3)  This excess benefit plan shall be administered by the board. Except as provided to the contrary in this subsection, the rights, duties and responsibilities of the board shall be the same for this excess benefit plan as for any other qualified plan under its direction and administration. 
(4)  The actuary employed by the board is responsible for determining the amount of benefits that may not be provided under the pension plan solely by reason of the limitations set forth in this section and section 415 of the code and shall also determine the amount of contributions that will be made to the excess benefit plan rather than to the pension plan. 
(5)  The actuaries and legal advisors for the board shall also provide advice to the board for this excess benefit plan. 
(d)  Contributions. Contributions may not be accumulated under this excess benefit plan to pay future retirement benefits. Each payment of contributions by the employer that would otherwise have been made to the pension plan shall be reduced by the amount determined by the board as necessary to meet the requirements for retirement benefits under this excess benefit plan until the next payment of contributions is expected to be made to the pension plan by the city. The city shall then pay to this excess benefit plan, out of the contributions that would otherwise have been made to the pension plan, on an annual basis, concurrent with the contributions to the general employees' retirement plan, an amount necessary to satisfy the obligation to pay monthly retirement benefits under this excess benefit plan. The board shall satisfy the obligation of this excess benefit plan to pay retirement benefits out of city contributions so transferred. The city contributions otherwise required to the pension plan established under the pension plan and under other qualified plans shall be divided into those contributions required to pay retirement benefits pursuant to this section and those contributions paid into and accumulated to pay the maximum benefits required under the qualified plans. City contributions made to provide retirement benefits pursuant to this part shall not be commingled with monies of the pension plan or any other qualified plan, nor shall this excess benefit plan ever receive any transfer of assets from the pension plan. 
(e)  Any actuarial gains realized as a result of the limitation of benefits shall be a direct credit to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Sec. 14-34. - Internal Revenue Code compliance. 
(a)  Maximum amount of retirement income. 
(1)  The limitations of this subsection (a) shall apply in limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, except as otherwise provided herein, and are intended to comply with the requirements of the Pension Protection Act of 2006 and shall be construed in accordance with said Act and guidance issued thereunder. The provisions of this subsection (a) shall supersede any provision of the plan to the extent such provision is inconsistent with this subsection. 
The annual pension as defined in paragraph (2) below otherwise payable to a member at any time shall not exceed the dollar limitation for the member multiplied by a fraction whose value cannot exceed one, the numerator of which is the Member's number of years (or part thereof, but not less than one year) of service with the City and the denominator of which is ten (10). For this purpose, no more than one year of service may be credited for any plan year. If the benefit the member would otherwise accrue in a limitation year would produce an annual pension in excess of the dollar limitation, the benefit shall be limited (or the rate of accrual reduced) to a benefit that does not exceed the dollar limitation. 
(2)  "Annual pension" means the sum of all annual benefits, payable in the form of a straight life annuity. Benefits payable in any other form shall be adjusted to the larger of: 
a.  For limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007: 
1.  The straight life annuity (if any) payable to the member under the Plan commencing at the same Annuity Starting Date as the member's form of benefit; or 
2.  The actuarially equivalent straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date, computed using a 5.00% interest rate and the mortality basis prescribed in Code Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v). 
b.  For limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007: 
1.  The actuarially equivalent straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date, computed using the interest rate and mortality basis specified by the board of trustees for determining actuarial equivalence under the plan for the particular form of payment; or 
2.  The actuarially equivalent straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting Date, computed using a 5.00% interest rate and the mortality basis prescribed in Code Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v). 
No actuarial adjustment to the benefit shall be made for benefits that are not directly related to retirement benefits (such as a qualified disability benefit, preretirement incidental death benefits, and postretirement medical benefits); or the inclusion in the form of benefit of an automatic benefit increase feature, provided the form of benefit is not subject to §417(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and would otherwise satisfy the limitations of this Subsection (a), and the amount payable under the form of benefit in any Limitation Year shall not exceed the limits of this subsection (a) applicable at the annuity starting date, as increased in subsequent years pursuant to § 415(d) of the Code. For this purpose, an automatic benefit increase feature is included in a form of benefit if the form of benefit provides for automatic, periodic increases to the benefits paid in that form. 
(3)  "Dollar limitation" means, effective for the first limitation year beginning after January 1, 2001, $160,000.00, automatically adjusted under Code Section 415(d), effective January 1 of each year, as published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin, and payable in the form of a straight life annuity. The new limitation shall apply to limitation years ending with or within the calendar year of the date of the adjustment, but a member's benefits shall not reflect the adjusted limit prior to January 1 of that calendar year. The dollar limitation shall be further adjusted based on the age of the member when the benefit begins as follows: 
a.  For annuity starting dates in limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007: 
1.  If the annuity starting date for the member's benefit is after age 65: 
i.  If the plan does not have an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 65 and the age of benefit commencement: 
The dollar limitation at the member's annuity starting date is the annual amount of a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the member's annuity starting date that is the actuarial equivalent of the dollar limitation with actuarial equivalence computed using a 5.00% interest rate assumption and the mortality basis prescribed in Code Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) for that annuity starting date (and expressing the member's age based on completed calendar months as of the annuity starting date). 
ii.  If the plan does have an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 65 and the age of benefit commencement: 
The dollar limitation at the member's annuity starting date is the lesser of (aa) the dollar limitation multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at the member's annuity starting date to the annual amount of the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at age 65, both determined without applying the limitations of this subsection (a), and (bb) the limitation determined under subclause (3)a.1.i. of this subsection (a). For this purpose, the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at the member's annuity starting date is the annual amount of such annuity payable to the member, computed disregarding the member's accruals after age 65 but including actuarial adjustments even if those actuarial adjustments are used to offset accruals; and the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at age 65 is the annual amount of such annuity that would be payable under the plan to a hypothetical member who is age 65 and has the same accrued benefit as the member. 
2.  Except with respect to a member who is a "qualified member" as defined in Section 415(b)(2)(H) of the Code, for benefits (except survivor and disability benefits as defined in Section 415(b)(2)(I) of the Code), if the annuity starting date for the member's benefit is before age 62: 
i.  If the plan does not have an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 62 and the age of benefit commencement: 
The dollar limitation at the member's annuity starting date is the annual amount of a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the member's annuity starting date that is the actuarial equivalent of the dollar limitation with actuarial equivalence computed using a 5.00% interest rate assumption and the mortality basis prescribed in Code Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) for that annuity starting date (and expressing the member's age based on completed calendar months as of the annuity starting date). 
ii.  If the plan does have an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 62 and the age of benefit commencement: 
The dollar limitation at the member's annuity starting date is the lesser of (aa) the dollar limitation multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at the member's annuity starting date to the annual amount of the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at age 62, both determined without applying the limitations of this subsection (a), and (bb) the limitation determined under Subclause (3)a.2.i of this subsection (a). 
_____ 
b.  For annuity starting dates in limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007: 
Age as of Annuity 
Starting Date: Adjustment of Dollar Limitation: Over 65 The smaller of: (a) the actuarial equivalent of the limitation for age 65, computed using the interest rate and mortality basis specified by the board of trustees for determining actuarial equivalence under the plan, or (b) the actuarial equivalent of the limitation for age 65, computed using a 5.00% interest rate and the mortality basis prescribed in Code Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v). Any increase in the dollar limitation determined in accordance with this paragraph shall not reflect a mortality decrement between age 65 and the age at which benefits commence if benefits are not forfeited upon the death of the member. If any benefits are forfeited upon death, the full mortality decrement is taken into account. 62 to 65 No adjustment. Less than 62 The smaller of: (a) the actuarial equivalent of the limitation for age 62, computed using the interest rate and mortality basis specified by the board of trustees for determining actuarial equivalence under the plan, or (b) the actuarial equivalent of the limitation for age 62. computed using a 5.00% interest rate and the mortality basis prescribed in Code Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v). This adjustment shall not apply to any "qualified member" as defined in Section 415(b)(2)(H), nor to survivor and disability benefits as defined in Section 415(b)(2)(I) of the Code.  
_____ 
(4)  With respect to subclause (3)a.1.i., subclause (3)a.2.i. and subparagraph (3)b. above, no adjustment shall be made to the dollar limitation to reflect the probability of a member's death between the annuity starting date and age 62, or between age 65 and the annuity starting date, as applicable, if benefits are not forfeited upon the death of the member prior to the annuity starting date. To the extent benefits are forfeited upon death before the annuity starting date, such an adjustment shall be made. For this purpose, no forfeiture shall be treated as occurring upon the member's death if the plan does not charge members for providing a qualified preretirement survivor annuity, as defined in Code Section 417(c), upon the member's death. 
(5)  The term "limitation year" is the 12-month period which is used for application of the limitations under Code Section 415 and shall be the calendar year. 
(6)  The limitations set forth in this subsection (a) shall not apply if the annual pension does not exceed $10,000.00 provided the member has never participated in a defined contribution plan maintained by the city. 
(7)  Cost-of-living adjustments in the dollar limitation for benefits shall be limited to scheduled annual increases determined by the Secretary of the Treasury under Subsection 415(d) of the Code. 
(8)  In the case of a member who has fewer than ten years of participation in the plan, the dollar limitation set forth in paragraph (3) of this subsection (a) shall be multiplied by a fraction-(i) the numerator of which is the number of years (or part thereof) of participation in the Plan, and (ii) the denominator of which is ten. 
(9)  Any portion of a member's benefit that is attributable to mandatory member contributions (unless picked-up by the city) or rollover contributions, shall be taken into account in the manner prescribed in the regulations under Section 415 of the Code. 
(10)  Should any member participate in more than one defined benefit plan maintained by the city, in any case in which the member's benefits under all such defined benefit plans (determined as of the same age) would exceed the dollar limitation applicable at that age, the accrual of the member's benefit under this Plan shall be reduced so that the member's combined benefits will equal the dollar limitation. 
(11)  For a member who has or will have distributions commencing at more than one annuity starting date, the annual benefit shall be determined as of each such annuity starting date (and shall satisfy the limitations of this section as of each such date), actuarially adjusting for past and future distributions of benefits commencing at the other annuity starting dates. For this purpose, the determination of whether a new starting date has occurred shall be made without regard to § 1.401(a)-20, Q&A 10(d), and with regard to § 1.415(b)1(b)(1)(iii)(B) and (C) of the Income Tax Regulations. 
(12)  The determination of the annual pension under paragraph (a)(1) of this subsection (a) shall take into account (in the manner prescribed by the regulations under Section 415 of the Code) Social Security supplements described in § 411(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and benefits transferred from another defined benefit plan, other than transfers of distributable benefits pursuant § 1.411(d)-4, Q&A-3(c) of the Income Tax Regulations. 
(13)  The above limitations are intended to comply with the provisions of Section 415 of the Code, as amended, so that the maximum benefits provided by plans of the city shall be exactly equal to the maximum amounts allowed under Section 415 of the Code and regulations thereunder. If there is any discrepancy between the provisions of this subsection (a) and the provisions of Section 415 of the Code and regulations thereunder, such discrepancy shall be resolved in such a way as to give full effect to the provisions of Section 415 of the Code. The value of any benefits forfeited as a result of the application of this subsection (a) shall be used to decrease future employer contributions. 
(14)  For the purpose of applying the limitations set forth in Sections 401(a)(17) and 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, compensation shall include any elective deferral (as defined in Code Section 402(g)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code), and any amount which is contributed or deferred by the employer at the election of the member and which is not includible in the gross income of the member by reason of Section 125 or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2001, for the purposes of applying the limitations described in this Subsection (a), compensation paid or made available during such limitation years shall include elective amounts that are not includible in the gross income of the member by reason of Section 132(f)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code. For limitation years on or after July 1, 2007, compensation shall include payments that otherwise qualify as compensation and that are made by the later of: (a) 21/2 months after severance from employment with the employer, and (b) the end of the limitation year that includes the date of severance. 
(b)  Required beginning date. Notwithstanding any other provision of the plan, payment of a member's retirement benefits under the plan shall commence not later than the member's required beginning date, which is defined as the later of: 
-  April 1 of the calendar year that next follows the calendar year in which the member attains or will attain the age of 701/2 years; or 
-  April 1 of the calendar year that next follows the calendar year in which the member retires. 
(c)  Required minimum distributions. 
(1)  Required beginning date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date as defined in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Death of member before distributions begin. 
a.  If the member dies before distributions begin, the member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, no later than as follows: 
1.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age 701/2, if later. 
2.  If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the participant died. 
3.  If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
b.  The member's entire interest shall be distributed as follows: 
1.  Member survived by designated beneficiary. If the member dies before the date distribution of the interest begins and there is a designated beneficiary, the member's entire interest will be distributed, beginning no later than the time described in subparagraph (2)a. above, over the life of the designated beneficiary or over a period certain not exceeding: 
i.  Unless the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year of the member's death; or 
ii.  If the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. 
2.  No designated beneficiary. If the member dies before the date distributions begin and there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death, distribution of the member's entire interest will be completed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
c.  Death of surviving spouse before distributions to surviving spouse begin. In any case in which (i) the member dies before the date distribution of his or her interest begins, (ii) the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, and (iii) the surviving spouse dies before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, subparagraphs (2)a. and 2b., above shall apply as though the surviving spouse were the member. 
(3)  Requirements for annuity distributions that commence during member's lifetime. 
a.  Joint life annuities where the beneficiary is not the member's spouse. If the member's interest is being distributed in the form of a joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the member and a non-spousal beneficiary, annuity payments to be made on or after the member's required beginning date to the designated beneficiary after the member's death must not at any time exceed the applicable percentage of the annuity payment for such period that would have been payable to the member using the table set forth in Q&A-2 of section 1.401(a)(9)-6T of the Treasury regulations. If the form of distribution combines a joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the member and a non-spousal beneficiary and a period certain annuity, the requirement in the preceding sentence will apply to annuity payments to be made to the designated beneficiary after the expiration of the period certain. 
b.  Period certain annuities. Unless the member's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain for an annuity distribution commencing during the member's lifetime may not exceed the applicable distribution period for the member under the uniform lifetime table set forth in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations for the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. If the annuity starting date precedes the year in which the member reaches age 70, the applicable distribution period for the member is the distribution period for age 70 under the uniform lifetime table set forth in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations plus the excess of seventy (70) over the age of the member as of the member's birthday in the year that contains the annuity starting date. If the member's spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain may not exceed the longer of the member's applicable distribution period, as determined under this subparagraph (3)b., or the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the member and the member's spouse as determined under the joint and last survivor table set forth in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations, using the member's and spouse's attained ages as of the member's and spouse's birthdays in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. 
(4)  Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with subparagraphs (4)a., (4)b., and (4)c., below. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Code and the Treasury regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual account described in section 414(k) of the Code will be distributed in a manner satisfying the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Code and the Treasury regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
a.  General annuity requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
1.  The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one year; 
2.  The distribution period will be over a life (or lives) or over a period certain, not longer than the distribution period described in paragraphs (2) or (3) above, whichever is applicable, of this subsection (c); 
3.  Once payments have begun over a period certain, the period certain will not be changed even if the period certain is shorter than the maximum permitted; 
4.  Payments will either be non-increasing or increase only as follows: 
i.  By an annual percentage increase that does not exceed the annual percentage increase in a cost-of-living index that is based on prices of all items and issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics; 
ii.  To the extent of the reduction in the amount of the member's payments to provide for a survivor benefit upon death, but only if the beneficiary whose life was being used to determine the distribution period dies or is no longer the member's beneficiary pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order within the meaning of section 414(p) of the Code; 
iii.  To provide cash refunds of employee contributions upon the member's death; or 
iv.  To pay increased benefits that result from a plan amendment. 
b.  Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The amount that must be distributed on or before the member's required beginning date (or, if the member dies before distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under subparagraph (2)a.1. or (2)a.2, whichever is applicable) is the payment that is required for one (1) payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g., bi-monthly, monthly, semi-annually, or annually. All of the member's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's required beginning date. 
c.  Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues. 
(5)  For purposes of this subsection (c), distributions are considered to begin on the member's required beginning date. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member (or to the surviving spouse) before the member's required beginning date (or, if to the member's surviving spouse, before the date distributions are required to begin in accordance with subparagraph (2)a. above), the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. 
(6)  Definitions. 
a.  Designated beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the Plan and is the designated beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the Code and section 1.401(a)(9)-4, of the Treasury regulations. 
b.  Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection (c). 
c.  Life expectancy. Life expectancy as computed by use of the single life table in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations. 
(d)  Eligible rollover distributions. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the administrator, to have an portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distribute in a direct rollover. 
(2)  Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section: 
a.  Eligible rollover distribution. An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: 
1.  Any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; 
2.  Any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Section 401(a)(9) of the Code; 
3.  The portion of any distribution which is made upon hardship of the member; and 
4.  The portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income (determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities), provided that a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee contributions which are not includible in gross income. However, such portion may be transferred only to an individual retirement account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or (b) of the Code, or to a qualified defined contribution plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible. 
b.  Eligible retirement plan. An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Code, an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of the Code, an annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the Code, an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the Code, a qualified trust described in Section 401 (a) of the Code, an eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this Plan, or, with respect to distributions on or after January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA (subject to the limitations of Code Section 408A(c)(3)) that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. 
c.  Distributee. A distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the Employee's or former Employee's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined in Section 414(p) of the Code, are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse. Furthermore, effective January 1, 2007, a surviving designated beneficiary as defined in Section 401(a)(9)(E) of the Code who is not the surviving spouse and who elects a direct rollover to an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Code or an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of the Code shall be considered a distributee. 
d.  Direct rollover. A direct rollover is a payment by the Plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(e)  [Maximum amount of mandatory distribution.] Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, the maximum amount of any mandatory distribution, as defined in section 401(a)(31) of the Code, payable under the plan shall be $1,000.00. 
(f)  Compensation limitations under section 401(a)(17). In addition to other applicable limitations set forth in the plan, and notwithstanding any other provision of the plan to the contrary, the annual compensation of each member taken into account under the plan shall not exceed the EGTRRA annual compensation limit for limitation years beginning after December 31, 2001. The EGTRRA annual compensation limit is $200,000.00, as adjusted by the commissioner for increases in the cost of living in accordance with section 401(a)(17)(B) of the Code. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to any period, not exceeding 12 months, over which compensation is determined (determination period) beginning in such calendar year. If a determination period consists of fewer than 12 months, the EGTRRA annual compensation limit will be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the determination period, and the denominator of which is 12. 
Any reference in the plan to the limitation under section 401(a)(17) of the Code shall mean the EGTRRA annual compensation limit set forth in this provision. 
(Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 12-6-17) 
Secs. 14-35-14-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION PLAN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; fire chief, § 6-3; bureau of fire prevention, § 6-4; property insurance premium tax levied for the firefighters' municipal pension program, § 18-21. 
State Law reference- Municipal firefighter's pension fund, F.S. ch. 175. 

Sec. 14-46. - Created; administration. 
(a)  There is hereby created a special fund to be known as Riviera Beach Municipal Firefighters' Pension Trust Fund, for the municipal fire department. 
(b)  This article is to be administered pursuant to the provisions of F.S. ch. 175, as it may be amended from time to time, and all of the terms thereof are hereby incorporated into this article by reference and made a part hereof. 
(c)  The director of finance is hereby authorized to withdraw from the general fund of the city a sum equal to the net annual cost and the amount required to fund over a period of not longer than 40 years, and any actuarial deficiency shown by a triennial actuarial valuation. The first such actuarial evaluation shall be conducted for the calendar year ending December 31, 1986. 
(d)  The director of finance shall deliver to the city firefighters' pension trust fund a sum of money, each year, equal to the actuarial deficiency or deficiencies as described above. These payments shall be made at least quarterly throughout the plan year of the trust fund with the first payment due on or prior to March 31 of the year to which the actuarial evaluation applies. 
(e)  The director of finance is hereby authorized to withhold and shall withhold from the salary or compensation of any kind from each paid firefighter who is duly appointed and enrolled as a member of the city fire department a sum equal to eight percent of each firefighter's paid compensation. 
(Code 1957, §§ 14-1, 14-2; Ord. No. 2355, §§ 1, 2, 11-18-87; Ord. No. 2881, § 1, 12-20-00) 
Sec. 14-47. - Board of trustees; created, powers, duties. 
    There is hereby created a board of trustees of the city firefighters' pension trust fund. The board of trustees shall consist of five members, two of whom shall be legal residents of the city who shall be appointed by the city council, and two (2) of whom shall be full-time firefighters as defined in F.S. § 175.032(1), who shall be elected by a majority of the firefighters who are members of the plan. The fifth member shall be chosen by majority of the previous four members as provided for in this section, and such person's name shall be submitted to the city council. Upon receipt of the fifth person's name, the city council shall, as a ministerial duty, appoint such person to the board of trustees as its fifth member. The fifth) member shall have the same rights as each of the other four members appointed or elected as provided in this section and may succeed him or herself in office. 
Each new term subsequent to the effective date of Ord. No. 4030 [Sept. 4, 2013], the term of the fifth member shall be for a period of four years, subject to the limitations below. 
Each new term subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance, a city resident member shall serve as a trustee for four years, provided however, the seat in which the person sits, whose term shall end first, of the two city resident board members, shall have an initial term of two years. All successive terms thereafter for all city resident board members will be for four years unless the person is sooner replaced by the city council, at whose pleasure the resident member shall serve. Each city resident trustee may succeed him or herself in office. 
Each new term subsequent to the effective date of Ord. No. 4030 [Sept. 4, 2013], a full-time firefighter shall serve as a trustee for four years, provided however, the person whose term occupies seat 2, of the two full-time firefighter board members, shall have an initial term of two years. All successive terms thereafter for all full-time firefighter board members will be for four years unless the full-time firefighter sooner leaves the employment of the city as a firefighter, where upon a successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the original appointment. Each full-time firefighter trustee may succeed him or herself in office. 
The board of trustees shall be a legal entity which, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained in this section, shall have the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature and description. The trustees shall by a majority vote elect a chairman and a secretary. The secretary of the board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings or hearings of the board. The trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by law. The board of trustees may: 
(1)  Invest the assets of the firefighters' pension fund as authorized by F.S. ch. 175, including but not limited to real estate, which may be in the form of commingled ownership. The board of trustees may invest not more than five percent of its assets in the common stock or capital stock of any one issuing company, nor exceed five percent of the outstanding capital stock of that company, nor shall the aggregate of its investments in common stock at cost exceed 60 percent of the assets of the fund. 
(2)  Issue drafts upon the firefighters' pension trust fund pursuant to F.S. ch. 175; all such drafts shall be consecutively numbered, and be signed by the chairman and secretary and shall state upon their face the purposes for which the drafts are drawn. The board of trustees or other designee shall retain such drafts when paid as permanent vouchers for disbursements made, and no money shall otherwise be drawn from the fund. 
(3)  Finally decide all claims to relief under the board's rules and regulations and pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Convert into cash any securities of the fund. 
(5)  Keep a complete record of all receipts and disbursements and of the board's acts and proceedings. 
(Code 1957, § 14-3; Ord. No. 2355, § 3, 11-18-87; Ord. No. 2589, 9-15-93; Ord. No. 2881, § 1, 12-20-00; Ord. No. 4015, § 1, 8-15-12; Ord. No. 4030, § 1, 9-4-13) 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-41 et seq. 
Sec. 14-48. - Retirement monthly income. 
(a)  The amount of the monthly retirement income payable to a firefighter who retires on or after the firefighter's normal retirement date shall be an amount equal to the number of the firefighter's years of credited service multiplied by three percent of the firefighter's average final compensation. 
(b)  The final average compensation means the average monthly compensation of a firefighter during the highest two years of his last ten years of contributing service. 
(c)  Salary in excess of limitations set forth in Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be disregarded. 
(Code 1957, § 14-4; Ord. No. 2881, § 1, 12-20-00; Ord. No. 3030, § 1, 9-19-07) 
Sec. 14-49. - Disability retirement. 
    For disability retirement, all of the terms and conditions as set forth in F.S. § 175.191, which are made a part of this article, shall apply with the following exceptions: 
(1)  If a firefighter is totally disabled while in the line of duty, he shall become eligible for disability retirement. 
(2)  If a firefighter having ten or more years of credited service and having contributed to the fund for ten or more years is totally disabled from any cause whatsoever, he shall be eligible for disability retirement. 
(Code 1957, § 14-4.1; Ord. No. 2355, § 4, 11-18-87; Ord. No. 2881, § 1, 12-20-00) 
Sec. 14-50. - Retirement disability benefits. 
(a)  The amount of each monthly disability payment shall be computed in the same manner as for a normal retirement benefit, with the exception that if a firefighter became totally disabled while in the line of duty, the monthly disability retirement benefit shall not be less than 60 percent of the average monthly salary for the last year of credited service prior to the date of the firefighter becoming totally disabled; or if a firefighter became totally disabled from any cause whatsoever while not in the line of duty, the monthly disability retirement benefit shall not be less than 48 percent of the firefighter's average monthly salary for the last year of credited service prior to the date of the firefighter becoming totally disabled. 
(b)  A firefighter who retires with a disability retirement benefit may select an optional form of benefit. Retirees who began receiving retirement disability benefits prior to the effective date of Ord. No. 4053 may select an optional form of benefit, provided that: (1) the optional form of benefit must be selected within 90 days of the effective date of Ord. No. 4053, and, (2) there shall be no additional cost to the plan. The actuary shall recalculate the retiree's benefit assuming that the retiree is five years older than the chronological age, unless the retiree provides documentation satisfactory to the board that he or she is in good health and it is determined there will be no additional cost to the plan, in which case the actuary will recalculate the benefit in accordance with section 14-59 and without the additional five-year age assumption. 
(Code 1957, § 14-4.2; Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 12-3-14) 
Sec. 14-51. - Refund of contributions and direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions. 
(a)  If a firefighter leaves the service of the city as a firefighter prior to ten years of actual service, such firefighter shall be entitled to a refund of all his contributions paid to the Rivera Beach Municipal Firefighters' Pension Trust Fund with interest. The rate of interest shall be 5.5 percent per annum, simple interest. A refund of contributions shall be in lieu of any other benefits to which a member may otherwise be entitled. 
(b)  This article applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provisions for the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this article, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(1)  Eligible rollover distribution means any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: 
a.  Any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; 
b.  Any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and 
c.  The portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income. Any portion of any distribution which would be includible in gross income will be an eligible rollover distribution if the distribution is made to an individual retirement account described in section 408(a), to an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) or to a qualified defined contribution plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible. 
(2)  Eligible retirement plan means an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by an eligible employer described in section 457(e)(1)(A) of the Code and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Code, or a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. This definition shall apply in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse. 
(3)  Distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee' or former employee's surviving spouse are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse. 
(4)  Direct rollover means a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(d)  Rollovers or transfers into the plan. 
(1)  On or after January 1, 2002, the plan will accept, solely for the purpose of purchasing credited service as provided herein, permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans, member rollover cash contributions and/or direct cash rollovers of distributions made on or after January 1, 2002, as follows: 
a.  Transfers and direct rollovers or member rollover contributions from other Plans. The Plan will accept either a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a Member contribution of an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code, from an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Code or from an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state. The Plan will also accept legally permissible Member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans. 
b.  Member rollover contributions from IRAs. The plan will accept a member rollover contribution of the portion of a distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity described in section 408(a) or 408(b) of the Code that is eligible to be rolled over and would otherwise be includible in gross income. 
(Code 1957, § 14-4.3; Ord. No. 2355, § 5, 11-18-87; Ord. No. 2599, 9-15-93; Ord. No. 2881, § 1, 12-20-00; Ord. No. 3030, § 2, 9-19-07) 
Sec. 14-52. - Application of additional benefits. 
    The increased pension benefits as provided for by sections 14-48 through 14-51 and any and all additional benefits that may accrue in the future shall apply to all firefighters now receiving retirement income payments; to all firefighters who are now eligible to receive income payments; to all firefighters who may in the future be eligible to receive retirement income payments under this article. 
(Code 1957, § 14-4.4) 
Sec. 14-53. - Survivors' benefits. 
    Upon the death of a member, benefits shall be paid in accordance with this section. 
(1)  Death in line of duty. 
a.  For members having less than ten years of credited service. If a member dies from injuries received while discharging firefighting duties, leaving a spouse and/or a child or children, the following benefits shall be paid: 
1.  A refund of contributions in accordance with section 14-51 to the surviving spouse; 
2.  Thirty-three and one-third of the member's total compensation for the year immediately prior to the member's death to the surviving spouse until the spouse's death; and 
3.  Twenty-five percent of the member's total compensation for the year immediately prior to the member's death to a surviving child or children, divided equally, until the last or youngest child marries or attains the age of 18 (21 if enrolled as a full-time student at an accredited college or university) years, whichever first occurs. 
b.  For members having ten or more years of credited service. If a member dies from injuries received while discharging firefighting duties, leaving a spouse and/or a child or children, the following benefits shall be paid: 
1.  A refund of contributions in accordance with section 14-51 to the surviving spouse; 
2.  The greater of 33 1/3 percent of the member's total compensation for the year immediately prior to the member's death or the accrued retirement benefit to the surviving spouse until the spouse's death; and 
3.  Twenty-five percent of the member's total compensation for the year immediately prior to the member's death to a surviving child or children until the last or youngest child marries or attains the age of 18 (21 if enrolled as a full-time student at an accredited college or university) years, whichever first occurs. 
(2)  Death not in line of duty. 
a.  For members having less than ten years of credited service. If a member dies from injuries received not while discharging firefighting duties, the following benefits shall be paid: a refund of contributions in accordance with section 14-51 to the surviving spouse or named beneficiary. 
b.  For members having ten or more years of credited service. If a member dies from injuries received not while discharging firefighting duties, the following benefits shall be paid: the accrued retirement benefit to the member's surviving spouse until death or remarriage or other named beneficiary for ten years certain. 
(Code 1957, § 14-4.5; Ord. No. 2930, § 1, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 14-54. - Normal retirement date and amount. 
    The normal retirement age will be upon completion of twenty years of service regardless of age; or completion of ten or more years of creditable service and attaining age 55. The amount of the monthly retirement income benefit payable to a firefighter on a normal retirement will be three percent of the number of years of the firefighter's credited service times the amount of the firefighter's final monthly average compensation. 
(Code 1957, § 14-4.6; Ord. No. 2355, §§ 6, 7, 11-18-87; Ord. No. 2671, § 1, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 2881, § 1, 12-20-00) 
Sec. 14-55. - Effective date; compliance with Internal Revenue Code. 
    The effective date of the program is January 1 following receipt of a favorable determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service. At that time, the city shall pick up the member contributions required by subsection 14-46(e). The contributions so picked up shall be treated as employer contributions in determining tax treatment under the United States Internal Revenue Code. The city shall pick up the member contributions from funds established and available in the salaries account, which funds would have otherwise been designated as contributions and paid to the pension fund. Member contributions picked up by the city pursuant to this section shall be treated for purposes of making a refund of member's contributions, and for all other purposes of this and other laws, in the same manner and to the same extent as member contributions made prior to the effective date of this section. The intent of this subsection is to comply with section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 2602, § 1, 10-6-93) 
Sec. 14-56. - Maximum pension. 
(a)  Basic limitation. Subject to the adjustments hereinafter set forth, the maximum amount of annual retirement income payable with respect to a member under this plan shall not exceed $160,000.00. 
    For purposes of applying the above limitation, benefits payable in any form other than a straight life annuity with no ancillary benefits (or if the employee contributes to the plan or makes rollover contributions) shall be adjusted, as provided by Treasury Regulations, so that such benefits are the actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity. For purposes of this section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account: 
(1)  Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; 
(2)  Any other benefit not required under section 415(b)(2) of the Code and Regulations thereunder to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of section 415(b)(1) of the Code. 
(b)  Participation in other defined benefit plans. The limitation of this section with respect to any member who at any time has been a member in any other defined benefit plan (as defined in section 414(j) of the Code) maintained by the city shall apply as if the total benefits payable under all defined benefit plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one plan. 
(c)  Adjustments in limitations. 
(1)  In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before age 62, the $160,000.00 limitation prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the provisions of section 415(b) of the Code, so that such limitation (as so reduced) equals an annual benefit (beginning when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a $160,000.00 annual benefit beginning at age 62. 
(2)  In the event the member's benefit is based on at least 15 years of credited service, the adjustments provided for in subsection (a) above shall not apply. 
(3)  The reductions provided for in (1) above shall not be applicable to disability benefits or pre-retirement death benefits. 
(4)  In the event the member's retirement benefit becomes payable after age 65, for purposes of determining whether this benefit meets the limitation set forth in subsection (a) herein, such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the benefit beginning at age 65. This adjustment shall be made using an assumed interest rate of five percent and shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate. 
(d)  Less than ten years of service. The maximum retirement benefits payable under this section to any member who has completed less than ten years of credited service with the city shall be the amount determined under subsection 1 of this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of credited service and the denominator of which is ten. The reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be applicable to disability benefits or pre-retirement death benefits. 
(e)  Ten thousand dollar limit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the retirement benefit payable with respect to a member shall be deemed not to exceed the limitations set forth in this section if the benefits payable, with respect to such member under this plan and under all other qualified defined benefit pension plans to which the city contributes, do not exceed $10,000.00 for the applicable plan year and for any prior plan year and the city has not at any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan in which the member participated. 
(f)  Reduction of benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or contributions to all plans, where required, shall be accomplished by first reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be determined by the board and the plan administrator of such other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures for defined contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be established by the board and the plan administrator for such other plans provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority pursuant to the agreement of the board and the plan administrator of all other plans covering such member. 
(g)  Cost-of-living adjustments. The limitations as stated in subsections (a), (b), and (c) herein shall be adjusted to the time payment of a benefit begins in accordance with any cost-of-living adjustments prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to section 415(d) of the Code. 
(h)  Additional limitation on pension benefits. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary: 
(1)  The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to a retiree who becomes a member of the plan and who has not previously participated in such plan, on or after January 1, 1980, shall not exceed 100 percent of his average final compensation. However, nothing contained in this section shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension increases attributable to cost-of-living increases or adjustments. 
(2)  No member of the plan shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to social security benefits or federal benefits under Chapter 67, Title 10, U.S. Code. 
(Ord. No. 2645, § 1, 12-21-94; Ord. No. 3030, § 3, 9-19-07) 
Sec. 14-57. - Required distributions. 
(a)  Latest date of distribution. In no event may a member's retirement benefit be delayed beyond the later of the April 1 following the calendar year in which he attains age 701/2 or April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which he retires. 
(b)  Method of distribution. 
(1)  Other than lump sum (interest). When the distribution of the participant's entire interest is not made in a lump sum, the distribution will be made in one or more of the following ways: over the life of the participant; over the life of the participant and the designated beneficiary; over a period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the participant; or over a period certain not exceeding beyond the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the participant and a designated beneficiary. 
(2)  When participant dies before distribution. The method of distribution, if the participant dies before distributions commence, must satisfy the following requirements: 
a.  Any remaining portion of the participant's interest that is not payable to a beneficiary designated by the participant will be distributed within five years after the participant's death; and 
b.  Any portion of the participant's interest that is payable to a beneficiary designated by the participant will be distributed either within five years after the participant's death, or over the life of the beneficiary or over a period certain not exceeding beyond the life expectancy of the beneficiary, commencing not later than the end of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the participant died (or, if the designated beneficiary is the participant's surviving spouse, commencing not later than the end of the calendar year in which the participant would have attained age 701/2. 
(3)  When distribution commences before participant's death. If distribution has commenced before the participant's death, the remaining interest will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used as of the date of the participant's death. 
(c)  Compliance with Internal Revenue Code. The plan shall operate in accordance with the requirements of the regulations under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code, including the minimum distribution incidental benefit requirements of section 1.401(a)(9)-2 of the proposed regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2645, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 14-58. - Repeal or termination of fund. 
    In the event of the termination or partial termination of this plan, each affected participant's accrued pension benefit shall become nonforfeitable, i.e., 100 percent vested, to the extent funded. At such time, the fund shall be appropriated and distributed in accordance with F.S. ch. 175. 
(Ord. No. 2645, § 1, 12-21-94; Ord. No. 2930, § 1, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 14-59. - Actuarial equivalence. 
    Actuarial equivalence or actuarially equivalent means that any benefit payable under the terms of this plan in a form other than the normal form of benefit shall have the same actuarial present value on the date payment commences as the normal form of benefit. For purposes of establishing the actuarial present value of any form of payment, all future payments shall be discounted for interest and mortality by using seven percent interest and the 1983 Group Annuity Mortality Table for Males, with ages set ahead five years in the case of disability retirees. 
(Ord. No. 2645, § 1, 12-21-94) 
Sec. 14-60. - Military service. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of this fund to the contrary, contributions, benefits, and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with the Internal Revenue Code, Section 414(u). 
(Ord. No. 3030, § 4, 9-19-07) 
Sec. 14-61. - Deferred retirement option program (DROP). 
    In general, and subject to the provisions of this section, the Board of Trustees of the Riviera Beach Municipal Firefighters' Pension Trust Fund is authorized to establish and maintain a deferred retirement option program, hereinafter referred to as DROP. The DROP is a program under which an eligible member of the retirement system may elect to participate by deferring receipt of retirement benefits while continuing employment with the city. Upon entry into DROP a member's accrued vacation and sick leave balances not used in calculation of normal retirement benefits shall be carried forward and the DROP participant shall accrue additional vacation and sick leave during participation in DROP. However, any accrued vacation or sick leave balance at termination of the DROP period shall be forfeited. Upon termination of employment, the participant shall begin to receive the previously determined normal retirement benefits. Participation in the DROP does not guarantee employment for the specified period of DROP. 
(1)  Eligibility of member to participate in the DROP. All retirement system members are eligible to elect participation in the DROP on or after attaining their normal retirement date or age provided that election to participate is made within five years after the member first reaches his or her normal retirement date or age, except as provided for in subparagraphs (2)a. or (2)b., below. The member shall advise the city and the retirement system in writing at least 30 days in advance of the date on which the DROP shall begin. 
(2)  Participation in the DROP. 
a.  An eligible member may elect to participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed a maximum of 60 consecutive months nor beyond a total of 30 years of credited service with the city. Any member who has exceeded the 60-month or 30-year limitations shall not be eligible to continue participation in the DROP. 
b.  Any member who has more than 25 years of credited service at the effective date of this section will have 90 days to make an election to participate in the DROP. If such member makes such an election within the 90-day period the member will be permitted to remain in the DROP for the entire 60 months, regardless of years of service. Any member with more than 25 years of service who does not make an election within the 90-day period may do so at a later date, however, the member's DROP will be limited to the period remaining until their thirtieth year. 
c.  Upon deciding to participate in the DROP, the member shall submit on forms required by the retirement system: 
1.  A written election to participate in the DROP. 
2.  Selection of the DROP participation and termination dates, which satisfy the limitations stated in paragraph (1) and subparagraphs (2)a. or (2)b.. Such termination date shall be in an irrevocable and binding letter of resignation with the city, establishing a deferred termination date. The member may terminate before the termination date within the limitations of subparagraphs (2)a. or (2)b., but only with not less than 30 days advance written notice to the city from the new termination date. 
3.  A properly completed DROP application for service retirement as provided in this section. 
4.  A written election of form of pension payment. 
5.  Any other information required by the pension trust fund's board of trustees. 
d.  The DROP participant shall be retired under the pension trust fund for all purposes except that payment of benefits shall be deferred until separation from city employment. 
e.  A re-employed DROP participant with renewed membership shall not be eligible for DROP participation. 
(3)  Benefits payable under the DROP. The DROP account shall, unless a member elects a self-directed DROP, earn interest at a rate set quarterly by the board of trustees. Such interest shall be equal to the system's net rate of investment return for the year and shall be credited to each individual account balance on a quarterly basis. Members selecting a self-directed DROP shall select from one or more providers selected by the board of trustees and shall be subject to all fees provided in such self-directed DROP. Self-directed investments shall be invested as permitted in the self-directed DROP agreement. 
a.  Effective with the date of DROP participation, the member's initial normal monthly benefit, including the value of accrued unused leave (per city policy as amended from time to time), credited service, and final average compensation, shall be fixed. The value of accrued unused leave, whether or not payment for such is actually received by the participant, shall be included in the calculations to determine said normal monthly benefit, with appropriate contributions being made on entry into DROP. However, actual payment for such accrued unused leave shall be made in no more than five equal installments, paid no less frequently than annually on the anniversary of the member's entry into DROP, provided however, that the first installment shall be at least sufficient to cover the cost of the employee's contribution to the employee's pension, after all other deductions have been made. The city will, however, make a one-time payment at the entry into DROP to employees who have no more than 12 days leave remaining. Interest on any unpaid portion of such accrued leave payment shall be calculated annually at simple interest at the rate earned by the city's largest investment fund (excluding pension investment funds). Termination from DROP prior to the maximum DROP period shall result in a lump sum payment of any remaining balance of said accrued leave installments with interest calculated for each completed calendar quarter. 
Such retirement benefit shall accrue monthly to the participant's individual DROP account. The board of trustees shall administer these individual DROP accounts. DROP accounts shall accrue interest at a rate set quarterly by the board of trustees. These DROP accounts shall be subject to administrative fees or charges as established by the board of trustees. 
b.  The effective date of retirement of a DROP participant shall be the first day of the month selected by the member to begin participation in the DROP. No person may enter DROP prior to attending a city sponsored employee education program. Such program shall be in addition to any education program sponsored by the pension plan. 
c.  Normal retirement benefits shall continue to accrue in the DROP until the established termination date of the DROP or until the participant terminates employment or dies prior to such date. A separate accounting of each participant's accrued benefits under the DROP shall be calculated, and be available to participants annually. 
d.  At the conclusion of the participant's DROP, the pension plan shall direct that the participant's total accumulated DROP benefits be distributed, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  The retirement system shall receive verification from the city that the participant has terminated employment. 
2.  The terminated DROP participant or if deceased, such participant's named beneficiary, shall elect on forms provided by the pension plan to receive payment of the DROP benefits in accordance with one of the options listed below. For a participant or beneficiary who fails to elect a method of payment within 60 days of termination of the DROP, the retirement system shall direct that a lump sum be distributed as provided in subsection i. below. 
i.  Lump sum: All accrued DROP benefits, plus interest, less withholding taxes remitted to the Internal Revenue Service, shall be paid to the DROP participant or surviving beneficiary. 
ii.  Direct rollover: All accrued DROP benefits, plus interest, shall be paid from the DROP directly to the custodian of an eligible retirement plan as defined in Section 402(c)(8)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse of a deceased participant, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or an individual retirement annuity as described in Section 402(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
iii.  Partial lump sum: A portion of the accrued DROP benefits shall be paid to the DROP participant or surviving spouse, less withholding taxes remitted to the Internal Revenue Service, and the remaining DROP benefits shall be transferred directly to the custodian of an eligible retirement plan as defined in Section 402(c)(8)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse of a deceased participant, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or an individual retirement annuity as described in Section 402(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. The proportions shall be specified by the DROP participant or surviving beneficiary. 
3.  The form of payment selected by the DROP participant or surviving beneficiary shall comply with the minimum distribution requirements of the Internal Revenue Code and payments shall begin no later than the date on which the participant reaches age 70 years and six months. Regardless of the form of payout, a participant's DROP account continues until the account balance is exhausted. 
4.  For a DROP participant who fails to terminate city employment at the expiration of the 60-month maximum DROP participation period or the 30-year credited service maximum, unless authorized to do so pursuant to subparagraphs (2)a. and (2)b.; the member shall be deemed not to be retired, the DROP election shall be null and void, and the member shall have no accumulated DROP benefits. Retirement system membership shall be reestablished retroactively to the date of the commencement of the DROP, and the member shall be required to pay to the retirement system the member contributions as if the participant had continued service to the city, and the city contributions during the period the member participated in the DROP, plus an interest rate equal to the annual assumed investment return during each year the member participated in the DROP. 
e.  The accrued benefits of any DROP participant, and any contributions accumulated under such program, shall not be subject to assignment, execution, attachment, or to any legal process whatsoever, except for an income deduction order of a court of competent jurisdiction, income deduction orders as provided in F.S. § 61.1301, and federal income tax levies. 
f.  DROP participants shall not be eligible for disability retirement benefits as provided in sections 14-49 and 14-50 of this article, and the participant's beneficiaries and survivors shall not be eligible for the automatic survivor pension, death in the line of duty pension, or survivor pension as provided respectively in section 14-53 of this article. 
(4)  Death benefits under the DROP. 
a.  Upon the death of a DROP participant, the named beneficiary shall be entitled to apply for and receive the accrued benefits in the DROP as provided in this section. 
b.  The normal retirement benefit accrued to the DROP during the month of a participant's death shall be the final monthly benefit credited for such DROP participant. 
c.  Eligibility to participate in the DROP terminates upon death of the participant. If the participant dies on or after the effective date of enrollment in the DROP, but prior to the first monthly benefit being credited to the DROP, pension plan benefits shall be paid as though the DROP election had not been made. 
(5)  Contributions. Neither city nor member contributions shall be made, due, or payable during a participant's DROP participation, notwithstanding any other section of this article. 
(6)  Forfeiture of retirement benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP participants from the scope of Section 8(d). Art. II of the State Constitution, and F.S. § 112.3173. DROP participants who commit a specified felony offense while employed will be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits, pursuant to those provisions of law. 
(7)  Administration of program. The board of trustees shall make such rules as are necessary for the effective and efficient administration of this subsection and individual DROP accounts. The retirement system shall not be required to advise members of the federal tax consequences of an election related to the DROP but may advise members to seek independent advice. 
(Ord. No. 3057, § 1, 5-6-09) 
Sec. 14-62. - Share plan. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of F.S. ch. 175 and to provide a mechanism to pay required "Chapter 175 monies" to firefighters and current and future retirees based on the growth of premium tax revenue pursuant to Chapter 175. The fund created by this section, hereinafter the City of Riviera Beach Firefighters' Share Plan, shall be exclusively derived from and funded by monies received from the state and not from any additional taxes levied by the City and shall be in addition to, and shall supplement, the defined benefit pension paid by the City of Riviera Beach Firefighters' Retirement System. The share plan shall be administered by the board of trustees of the City of Riviera Beach Firefighters' Retirement System (hereinafter "Retirement System"). The implementation (including fund distribution), operation, and/or administration of the share plan shall not cause the city to incur any cost and/or liability in addition to that required to adequately fund the defined benefit pension paid by the City of Riviera Beach Firefighter's Retirement System. 
(b)  In each fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year beginning January 1, 1998 and each fiscal year thereafter, as determined by the board of trustees, the board of trustees shall determine the amount of premium tax revenues accrued by the city during the preceding fiscal year which are above the adjusted base amount pursuant to F.S. § 175.131. The sum of all premium tax revenues accrued by the city above the adjusted base amount shall be known as the "funds in excess of the based amount." All funds in excess of the based amount which have not specifically allocated to a different benefit enacted heretofore or hereinafter will be known as "available funds." 
(c)  In each fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year beginning January 1, 1998 and each fiscal year thereafter, as determined by the board of trustees, each member of the retirement system, which shall not include a beneficiary of a member of the retirement system or any person receiving a survivor benefit, shall accrue one-twelfth of a share, if the member is actively employed as a firefighter by the city, for each month of credited service earned within the fiscal year or, if the member is a retired firefighter receiving a defined benefit from the retirement system, for each month the member receives a defined benefit payment from the retirement system (including those members participating in the DROP and receiving a defined benefit payment into a DROP account). Provided however, for the fiscal year beginning January 1, 2005, through September 30, 2005 each member of the retirement system, which shall not include a beneficiary of a member of the retirement system or any person receiving a survivor benefit, shall accrue one-ninth of a share, if the member is actively employed as a firefighter by the city, for each month of credited service earned within the fiscal year or, if the member is retired firefighter receiving a defined benefit from the retirement system, for each month the member receives a defined benefit payment from the retirement system (including those members participating in the DROP and receiving a defined benefit payment into a DROP account). Shares shall not accrue from one fiscal year to the next and each member shall begin each fiscal year with zero shares. No member shall accrue more than one share in any one fiscal year. 
(d)  In accordance with the provisions of section 14-62, in each fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year January 1, 1998 and each fiscal year thereafter, as determined by the board of trustees, all available funds shall be allocated to those active and retired members eligible to receive a distribution or allocation from the share plan based on the number of shares accrued by each member in the preceding fiscal year. The value of each share shall be equal to the quotient of: the total amount of all available funds divided by the total number of shares earned by all members during the preceding fiscal year. Each share shall have equal value such that all members with an equal share shall receive the same distributions or allocation. 
(e)  An individual share account shall be established for each member of the retirement system to receive an allocation or distribution from the share plan. These members shall include all members who, at any time on or after January 1, 1998, are or were actively employed as firefighters by the city or who are or were retired members receiving a defined benefit payment from the retirement system (including those members participating in the DROP and receiving a defined benefit payment into a DROP account). Available funds shall be allocated to each member eligible for an allocation of the available funds by credit to the member's individual account. In order to be eligible for an allocation of the available funds, a member must have been either actively employed on October 1 of the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in which the allocation is to be made or must have received a defined benefit payment for the month of October of the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in which the allocation is to be made. Available funds shall be allocated and paid directly to each retired member who is separated from service and is no longer employed by the city as a firefighter. 
(f)  All members will vest in their share account after ten years of credited service. If a member terminates or terminated his or her employment or has or had his or her employment terminated for any reason without vesting, the balance of the member's share account shall be re-allocated among the remaining members of the share plan and shall be considered available funds at the time of the next allocation. 
(g)  All available funds, and all funds allocated to an individual share account but not yet distributed, shall be invested by the board of trustees and may be commingled for the purposes of investment with other assets of the retirement system. Individual share accounts shall be credited or debited quarterly at a rate equal to the actual rate of return (positive or negative) earned by the assets of the share plan net of any expenses associated with the investment of such assets. The board of trustees shall produce to each member with an individual share account balance an annual statement clearly identifying the balance of the member's individual share account, the annual allocation to the individual share account, the earnings or losses credited to or debited from the individual share account, and any expense charge debited from the individual share account. 
(h)  Members of the share plan with an individual share account who have completed at least ten years of credited service shall be eligible to receive payment of the balance of the individual share account in the form of either a lump sum payment or direct rollover to a qualified plan upon separation from employment with the city and receipt of a defined benefit from the retirement system. Any member who separates from employment with the city without having completed at least ten years of credited service shall forfeit the balance of his or her individual share account and the balance of that individual share account shall be reallocated as provided herein. Members of the share plan with an individual share account who become disabled in the line of duty and receive an in the line of duty disability benefit from the retirement system shall be eligible to receive payment of the balance of the individual share account in the form of either a lump sum payout or direct rollover to a qualified plan upon separation from employment with the city and receipt of the disability benefit regardless of years of service. 
(i)  In the event of the death of a firefighter who was actively employed by the city at the time of death and who had completed at least ten years of credited service at the time of death, the balance of that firefighter's individual share account shall be paid to the designated beneficiary. In the event of an in the line of duty death of an actively employed firefighter, the balance of that firefighter's individual share account shall be paid to the designated beneficiary regardless of years of service. In the event of the death of a retired member, the retired member shall not accrue a share, or any portion of a share, for any month beginning on or after the first day of the first month following the death of the retired member. In the event of the death of a retired member, the balance of the retired member's individual share account, which shall include an allocation for any shares earned up to and including the month in which the retired member died, shall be paid to the retired member's beneficiary. 
(j)  The board of trustees shall be authorized to adopt any rules, policies, or procedures necessary for the effective and efficient administration of the share plan so long as those rules, policies, or procedures are consistent with section 14-62, the Internal Revenue Code (to include Section 401 (a)(9)) and any other applicable local, state, or federal law. The board of trustees shall adopt rules, regarding the distribution of amount allocated to individual share accounts, which rules may allow the board of trustees to retain a portion of the balance of the individual share account until such time as the final balance of the individual share account to be distributed is determined. These rules may also allow the board of trustees to charge a fee for administration of the share plan. 
(k)  The use of future chapter 175 funds in excess of the base amount is subject to bargaining. It is the intention of the city not to create vested rights with regard to the use of future chapter 175 revenue. 
(Ord. No. 4013, §§ 1, 2, 5-16-12) 
Secs. 14-63-14-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POLICE OFFICERS' PENSION PLAN[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Police, ch. 16; police department, § 16-21 et seq.; casualty insurance premium tax levied for police officers pension program, § 18-22. 
State Law reference- Police officers pension fund, F.S. ch. 185. 

Sec. 14-71. - Police pension fund created. 
    There is hereby created a special fund to be known as the Riviera Beach Police Pension Fund for the city police department. 
(Code 1957, § 14-5) 
Sec. 14-72. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Average final compensation means the average annual compensation of a police officer during the highest two years of his last ten years of contributing service prior to retirement, termination or death, whichever occurs first. Provided, however that an award or other disbursements for back pay shall be credited to the computation period to which the award or disbursement pertains (would have been earned); not to the computation period in which the award or disbursement was made, paid, or received. 
    Credited service, creditable service and service mean the total number of years and fractional parts of years of service of any police officer, omitting intervening years and fractional parts of years, when such police officer may not be employed by the city. 
(1)  Provided, however, that no police officer will receive credit for years or fractional parts of years of service for which he has withdrawn his contributions to the pension fund for those years or fractional parts of years of service. Further providing that a police officer may voluntarily leave his contributions in the pension fund for a period of five years after leaving the employ of the police department, pending the possibility of his being rehired by the police department, without losing credit for the time he has participated actively as a police officer. Should he not be reemployed as a police officer with the police department within five years, his contributions shall be returned to him with interest not to exceed four percent per annum. 
(2)  In determining the aggregate number of years of service of any police officer, the time spent in the military service of the United States or United States Merchant Marine by the police officer on leave of absence for such reason shall be added to the years of service; provided, however, that to receive credit for such service the police officer must have re-entered the police department within one year of the date of release from service. Further, a police officer may, within the first year of employment as a police officer of the City of Riviera Beach (or within 90 days of being notified of eligibility by the city for police officers employed prior to enactment of this ordinance amendment), purchase up to five years, not to exceed 60 months, of service for service in the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or service as a police officer for any employer prior to employment as a police officer by the city. Such prior service purchase shall be made by depositing with the pension fund the full actuarial costs of such years of service. Such payment for said prior credited service may be made as a lump sum or in installments not to exceed the years of service purchased; however, the amount must be paid in full prior to retirement. Installment payments shall require interest at the actuarial rate of return for the years purchased, said interest to be determined by the fund actuary. Such purchase of prior credited service shall take effect upon vesting. If a member terminates service prior to vesting and receives a refund of employee contributions, the amount paid for such prior credited service shall also be refunded. 
Eligibility to purchase prior credited service shall also be subject to the following: 
a.  Prior credited service shall not be granted for service where the participant is receiving or is entitled to receive a benefit from another governmental pension system. 
b.  Prior credited service under this section shall only be provided only for service as a full time police officer, who is certified or required to be certified as law enforcement officer in compliance with F.S. § 943.1395 with any law enforcement agency including the city. 
c.  Total prior credited service, for prior police officer service, United States Armed Forces and Merchant Marine service, shall not exceed five years (60 months). Actual prior service credit purchased shall be added to the years of service with the city. 
d.  Election to purchase prior credited service, for prior service with the city, prior service with any other law enforcement agency or prior service in the United States Armed Forces or Merchant Marine, shall be made in writing to the board of trustees. The cost of prior credited service purchased for such prior service shall be the full actuarial cost of all credited service purchased hereunder computed as a lump sum payment into the plan. Actual payment may, at the member's option, be extended over a period of time not to exceed the years purchased and shall be subject to interest at the actuarial rate of return for the years purchased. Such payment may be by direct in-service transfer from a participant's deferred compensation account (457 account) pursuant to Section 457(e)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code or any other qualified plan. Full payment of such purchased prior credited service must be completed prior to the member's actual retirement. 
(3)  If the police officer recovers from disability and re-enters the service of the city as a police officer, his service will be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month for which he received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date the officer is reemployed as a police officer will not be considered as credited service. 
    Enrolled actuary means an actuary who is enrolled under Subtitle C of Title III of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 and who is a member of the Society of Actuaries or the American Academy of Actuaries and meets the requirements of F.S. § 185.06(5). 
    Pension fund and fund mean the city police pension fund. 
    Police officer means any person who is elected, appointed or employed full-time by the city who is certified or required to be certified as a law enforcement officer in compliance with F.S. § 943.14 and 185.02(11) who is vested with authority to bear arms and make arrests, and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of the penal, criminal, traffic or highway laws of the state. This definition includes all certified supervisory and command personnel whose duties include, in whole or in part, the supervision, training, guidance and management responsibilities of full-time law enforcement officers, part-time law enforcement officers, but does not include part-time law enforcement officers or auxiliary law enforcement officers as the same are defined in F.S. §§ 943.10(6) and 943.10(7), respectively. Provided, that the chief of police shall have the option of declining to participate in this pension plan. The exercise of said option shall be within 90 days of initial employment and shall be irrevocable. 
    Salary and compensation Salary and compensation mean the total cash remuneration paid to a police officer for services rendered, and shall include those items as have been included as compensation in accordance with past practice and F.S. § 185.02(4) 
    Total disability means a police officer who, in the opinion of the board of trustees, is wholly prevented from rendering useful and efficient service as a police officer and is likely to remain so disabled continuously for the foreseeable future. Nothing in this definition shall prohibit the board of trustees from requiring periodic examinations by a duly qualified physician or surgeon pursuant to F.S. § 185.18(4). 
(Code 1957, § 14-6; Ord. No. 2853, § 1, 4-19-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 2928, § 1, 9-18-02; Ord. No. 2987, § 1, 3-2-05; Ord. No. 3004, § 1, 3-15-06; Ord. No. 3094, § 2, 6-15-11; Ord. No. 4052, § 2, 10-15-14) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-73. - Compliance with and incorporation of F.S. ch. 185; withdrawal from general fund. 
(a)  This article is to be administered pursuant to the provisions of F.S. ch. 185, and all of the minimum terms thereof are hereby incorporated into this article by reference and made a part hereof. 
(b)  The city director of finance shall withdraw from the general fund of the city and shall deliver to the pension fund a sum which, together with the contributions from the police officers and the amount derived from the premium tax provided in F.S. ch. 185 and other income sources as authorized by law, shall be sufficient to meet the normal cost of the pension fund and to fund the actuarial deficiency over a period of not longer than 40 years for initial benefits and not longer than 30 years for added benefits. These payments shall be made at least quarterly throughout the fiscal year of the city with the first payment due prior to December 31 each year. 
(Code 1957, § 14-6.1; Ord. No. 2835, § 2, 4-19-00) 
Sec. 14-74. - Sources of revenue. 
    The financing of the pension fund shall consist of the following sources of revenue: 
(1)  Taxes of insurance companies. The moneys shall be returned to the city as provided by F.S. ch. 185. The use of such moneys shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of F.S. ch. 185. All such moneys shall be deposited into the pension fund no more than five days after receipt by the city. 
(2)  City contributions. The city shall contribute to the pension fund annually an amount which, together with the contributions from the police officers and the amount derived from the premium tax provided in F.S. ch. 185 and other income sources as authorized by law, shall be sufficient to meet the normal cost of the pension fund and to fund the actuarial deficiency over a period of not longer than 40 years for initial benefits and not longer than 30 years for added benefits. These payments shall be made at least quarterly. 
(3)  Employees' contributions. Employees shall contribute eight percent of their salary to the pension fund to be deposited into the fund each pay period. 
(4)  Gifts, etc. All gifts, bequests and devises when donated to the pension fund. 
(5)  Interest from deposits. All accretions to the pension fund by way of interest on bank deposits or otherwise. 
(6)  Other sources. All other sources of income now or hereafter authorized by law for the augmentation of the pension fund. 
(Code 1957, § 14-6.2; Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 4-19-00) 
Sec. 14-75. - Board of trustees; created, powers, duties. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of trustees of the city police pension fund. The board of trustees shall consist of five members. Two of such members, unless otherwise prohibited by law, shall be legal residents of the city and shall be appointed by the city council. Two of such members shall be police officers and shall be elected by a majority of the police officers who are members of this pension fund. The fifth member shall be chosen by a majority of the previous four members, and such person's name shall be submitted to the city council. Upon receipt of the fifth person's name, the city council shall, as a ministerial duty, appoint such person to the board of trustees as its fifth member. The fifth member shall have the same rights as each of the other four members appointed or elected as herein provided and may succeed him or herself in office. Each resident member shall serve as trustee for a period of four years, unless sooner replaced by the city council at whose pleasure the trustee shall serve, and may succeed him or herself as a trustee. Each elected police officer member shall serve as trustee for a period of four years, unless the member sooner leaves the employment of the city as a police officer, whereupon the police officers shall choose the police officer trustee's successor in the same manner as an original elected officer trustee. Each police officer may succeed him or herself in office. Each trustee shall attend educational opportunities and attain appropriate certification within two years of initial appointment or election to the position of trustee. Such certification shall be maintained during the trustees' tenure as a trustee. 
(1)  In the event that the appointed trustee does not obtain and maintain certification as stated in subsection (a) of this section, the city council shall be notified by the board, and such trustee may be removed by the city council. 
(2)  In the event that an elected trustee does not obtain and maintain certification, as stated in subsection (a) of this section, the board shall conduct a vote to determine if the trustee should be removed and if so decided shall request a new election be conducted to replace such trustee. 
Said elected trustee to be removed shall not be eligible for re-election at the subsequent election. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall meet at least quarterly each year. 
(c)  The board of trustees shall be a legal entity with, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained herein, the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature and description. 
(d)  The trustees shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings and hearings of the board. 
(e)  The trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by law. 
(f)  The board of trustees shall, by majority vote, elect from its members a chairman and a secretary. 
(g)  The board of trustees may: 
(1)  Invest and reinvest the assets of the retirement trust fund in: 
a.  Time or savings accounts of a national bank, a state bank or a savings and loan association insured by the Bank Insurance Fund or a savings, building, and loan association insured by the Savings Association Insurance Fund which is administered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or a state or federal chartered credit union whose share accounts are insured by the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund. 
b.  Obligations of the United States or obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States. 
c.  Bonds issued by the State of Israel. 
d.  Bonds, stocks, or other evidences of indebtedness issued or guaranteed by a corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized territory of the United States, or the District of Columbia, provided: 
(i)  The corporation is listed on any one or more of the recognized national stock exchanges and, in the case of bonds only, holds a rating of investment grade or higher by a major rating service; and 
(ii)  The board of trustees shall not invest more than five percent of its assets in the common stock or capital stock of any one issuing company, nor shall the aggregate investment in any one issuing company exceed five percent of the outstanding stock of the company or the aggregate of its investment under this subparagraph at market exceed 60 percent of the funds assets; and 
(iii)  The board of trustees shall identify and publicly report any direct or indirect holdings it may have in any scrutinized company, as defined in F.S. § 215.473, and proceed to sell, redeem, divest, or withdraw all publicly traded securities it may have in such company beginning January 1, 2010 and shall thereafter be prohibited from purchasing or holding such securities. The divestiture of any such security must be completed by September 30, 2010. In accordance with Ch. 2009-97, Laws of Florida, no person may bring any civil, criminal, or administrative action against the board or any employee, officer, director, or advisor of such board based upon the divesture of any security pursuant to this paragraph. 
e.  Interests in or obligations secured by real property, the cost of which shall not exceed ten percent of fund assets. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the board of trustees may invest up to 25 percent of fund assets, at market value, in foreign securities. 
(2)  Issue drafts upon the pension fund pursuant to F.S. ch. 185 and rules and regulations prescribed by the board of trustees. All such drafts shall be consecutively numbered, shall be signed by the chairman and secretary and shall state upon their faces the purposes for which the drafts are drawn. The city director of finance or other depository shall retain such drafts when paid, as permanent vouchers for disbursements made, and no money shall otherwise be drawn from the pension fund. 
(3)  Finally decide all claims to relief under the board's rules and regulations and pursuant to the provisions of F.S. ch. 185. 
(4)  Convert into cash any securities of the pension fund. 
(5)  Keep a complete record of all receipts and disbursements and of the board's acts and proceedings. 
(h)  Any and all acts and decisions shall be by at least three members of the board; however, no trustee shall take part in any action in connection with his own participation in the pension fund, and no unfair discrimination shall be shown to any individual employee participating in the pension fund. 
(i)  The sole and exclusive administration of and the responsibilities for the proper operation of the pension fund and for making effective the provisions of this article are vested in the board of trustees; however, nothing herein shall empower the board of trustees to amend the provisions of this article without the approval of the city. The board of trustees shall keep in convenient form such data as shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of the pension fund and for checking the actual experience of the pension fund. 
(j)  At least once every three years, the board of trustees shall, in accordance with F.S. § 185.06(5)(a), retain an independent consultant professionally qualified to evaluate the performance of professional money managers. The independent consultant shall make recommendations to the board of trustees regarding the selection of money managers for the next investment term. These recommendations shall be considered by the board of trustees at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The date, time, place and subject of this meeting shall be advertised in the same manner as for any meeting of the board of trustees. 
(k)  When the board of trustees purchases an annuity or life insurance contract to provide all or part of the benefits promised by this article, the principles enunciated in F.S. § 185.061 shall be observed. 
(l)  The secretary of the board of trustees shall, in accordance with F.S. § 185.06(3), keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under the provisions of this article, in which shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the same shall cease to be paid. In this book the secretary shall keep a record of all police officers employed by the city and a record shall be kept in such manner as to show the name, address and time of employment of such police officer and when such police officer ceased to be employed by the city. 
(Code 1957, § 14-6.3; Ord. No. 2650, § 1, 12-21-94; Ord. No. 2818, § 1, 6-2-99; Ord. No. 2853, § 4, 4-19-00; Ord. No. 2860, § 1, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 3095, § 2, 6-15-11; Ord. No. 4018, § 1, 9-5-12; Ord. No. 4051, §§ 2-4, 10-15-14) 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-41 et seq. 
Sec. 14-76. - Retirement monthly income. 
    Any police officer who completes ten or more years of creditable service as a police officer and attains age 55 years, or completes 20 years of creditable service as a police officer and attains age 50 years, and for such period has been a member of the pension fund is eligible for normal retirement benefits. Normal retirement is retirement from the service of the city on or after the normal retirement date. In such event, payment of retirement income shall be governed by the following provisions: 
(1)  The normal retirement date of each police officer will be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date on which he has completed ten or more years of creditable service and attained age 55 years or completed 20 years of creditable service and attained age 50 years. 
(2)  The amount of the monthly retirement income payable to a police officer who retires on or after his normal retirement date shall be an amount equal to the number of his years of credited service multiplied by three percent of his average final compensation. 
(3)  The monthly retirement income payable in the event of normal retirement will be payable on the first day of each month. The first payment will be made on the police officer's normal retirement date, or on the first day of the month coincident with or next following his actual retirement, if later, and the last payment will be the payment due next preceding the police officer's death, except that if the police officer dies after his retirement but before he has received retirement benefits for a period of ten years, the same monthly benefit will be paid to the beneficiary as designated by the police officer for the balance of such ten-year period, or, if no beneficiary is designated, to the surviving spouse, descendants, heirs at law or estate of the police officer, as provided in section 14-78. If a police officer continues in the service of the city beyond his normal retirement date and dies prior to his date of actual retirement, without an option made pursuant to section 14-79 being in effect, monthly retirement benefit income payments will be made for a period of ten years to a beneficiary designated by the police officer as if the police officer had retired on the date on which his death occurred, or, if no beneficiary is designated, to the surviving spouse, descendants, heirs at law or estate of the police officer, as provided in section 14-78. 
(4)  Early retirement is retirement from the service of the city, with the consent of the city, as of the first day of any calendar month which is prior to the police officer's normal retirement date but subsequent to the date of which he has both attained the age of 50 years and completed ten years of contributing service. In the event of early retirement, payment of retirement income will be governed as follows: 
a.  The early retirement date shall be the first day of the calendar month coincident with or immediately following the date a police officer retires from the service of the city under the provisions of this section prior to his normal retirement date. 
b.  The monthly amount of retirement income payable to a police officer who retires prior to his normal retirement date under the provisions of this section shall be an amount computed as described in subsection (2) of this section, taking into account his credited service to his date of actual retirement and his final monthly compensation of such date, such amount of retirement income to be actuarially reduced to take into account the police officer's younger age and the earlier commencement of retirement income payments. In no event shall the early retirement reduction exceed three percent for each year by which the member's age at retirement preceded the member's normal retirement age. 
c.  The retirement income payable in the event of early retirement will be payable on the first day of each month. The first payment will be made on the police officer's early retirement date and the last payment will be the payment due next preceding the retired police officer's death, except that if the police officer dies before he has received retirement benefits for a period of ten years, the same monthly benefit will be paid the beneficiary designated by the police officer for the balance of such ten-year period, or if no designated beneficiary is surviving, the same monthly benefit for the balance of such ten-year period shall be payable as provided in F.S. § 185.162. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any provisions in the police pension fund to the contrary, all police officers employed by the city on or after the effective date of the ordinance creating this subsection may retire after 20 years of credited services regardless of age. Officers retiring after 20 years shall be eligible to receive 100 percent of their accrued sick time not to exceed 132 days and 100 percent of their vacation time not to exceed two times the maximum accrual of vacation time permitted by the city. 
(6)  Supplemental retirement benefit: There is hereby provided for all police officers and retirees who attained credited service of 20 or more years in addition to all other benefits provided in this article, an annual supplemental retirement benefit. Effective October 1, 2010 all vested police officers and retirees regardless of years of credited service shall be eligible for this supplemental retirement benefit. Entitlement to such supplemental retirement benefit shall be determined annually based upon the receipt by the fund of any "additional premium tax revenues," as defined in F.S. § 185.35(1 (b). Payment of such supplemental retirement benefit shall be made annually to each eligible police officer or retiree, (as defined in subsection) no later than the 1st of December after receipt of the "additional premium tax revenues" from the state, provided that it has been confirmed in writing that the eligible police officer or retiree was alive on September 30th of such year, beginning with the year 2000. The amount of such supplemental retirement benefit shall be equal to the quotient of: the total amount of all "additional premium tax revenues" received by the fund during that calendar year (regardless of the year to which the revenues relate), divided by the number of eligible police officers and retirees. Such supplemental benefit for active police officers shall be credited to an account to be maintained by the fund, which shall be credited or debited with the actual rate of investment return (less expenses) of the fund and shall be rolled over to a designated qualified plan on retirement or in the event of death prior to retirement paid to a designated beneficiary. Such supplemental retirement benefit for eligible retirees shall be added to the next monthly benefit payment or paid separately as the trustees may from time to time decide. Should a retiree die between September 30th and that year's payment date, payment shall be made to the retiree's designated beneficiary By accepting payment of the supplemental retirement benefit provided above an eligible retiree thereby waives any and all rights to any legal claim arising under this section or section 14-84 of this article. 
(7)  Vesting of benefits upon normal retirement date. Any provision of this plan to the contrary notwithstanding, a member's accrued benefit shall become 100 percent vested upon the attainment of the normal retirement date. 
(Code 1957, § 14-7; Ord. No. 2734, § 2, 3-5-97; Ord. No. 3034, § 1, 12-19-07; Ord. No. 4000, § 1, 8-3-11; Ord. No. 4052, § 3, 10-15-14) 
Sec. 14-77. - Optional forms of retirement income. 
(a)  In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable in the event of normal or early retirement as specified in this article, a police officer, upon written request to the board of trustees and subject to the approval of the board of trustees, may elect to receive a retirement income or benefit of equivalent actuarial value payable in accordance with one of the following options: 
(1)  A retirement income of larger monthly amount, payable to the police officer for his lifetime only. 
(2)  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the police officer during the joint lifetime of the police officer and a joint pensioner designated by the police officer, and following the death of either of them, 50 percent, 75 percent, 66 2/3 percent or 100 percent of such monthly amount payable to the survivor for the lifetime of the survivor. 
(3)  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount payable to the police officer that retires on or after October 1, 2008, during the joint lifetime of the police officer and a joint pensioner designated by the police officer, and following the death of the police officer, 50 percent, 75 percent, 66 2/3 percent or 100 percent of such monthly amount payable to the joint pensioner for the lifetime of the joint pensioner. 
(4)  Such other amount and form of retirement payments or benefit as, in the opinion of the board of trustees, will best meet the circumstances of the retiring police officer. 
(b)  The police officer upon electing any option of this section will designate the joint pensioner or beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, payable under this article, and will have the power to change such designation from time to time but any such change shall be deemed a new election and will be subject to approval by the board of trustees. Such designation will name a joint pensioner or one or more primary beneficiaries where applicable. If a police officer has elected an option with a joint pensioner or beneficiary and his retirement income benefits have commenced, he may thereafter change his or her joint pensioner or beneficiary up to two times without the approval of the board or the current designated survivor. The police officer need not provide proof of the good health of the joint pensioner or beneficiary being removed, and the joint pensioner or beneficiary being removed need not be living. The amount of the retirement income payable to the police officer upon the designation of a new joint pensioner shall be actuarially redetermined taking into account the ages and sex of the former joint pensioner, the new joint pensioner, and the police officer. Each such designation will be made in writing on a form prepared by the board of trustees, and on completion will be filed with the board of trustees. If no designated beneficiary survives the police officer, such benefits as are payable in the event of the death of the police officer subsequent to his retirement shall be paid as provided in section 14-78. 
(c)  Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  If a police officer dies prior to his normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first occurs, no benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under F.S. § 185.21. 
(2)  If the designated beneficiary or joint pensioner dies before the police officer's retirement under this article, the option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the police officer upon his retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with the provisions of this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the police officer prior to his retirement and within 90 days after the death of the beneficiary. 
(3)  If both the retired police officer and the beneficiary designated by him die before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period certain and life thereafter made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a)(3) of this section, the board of trustees may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be paid in a lump sum and in accordance with F.S. § 185.162. 
(4)  If a police officer continues beyond his normal retirement date pursuant to the provisions of section 76 and dies prior to his actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to the provisions of this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made, or a retirement benefit will be paid, under the option to a beneficiary designated by the police officer in the amount or amounts computed as if the police officer had retired under the option on the date on which his death occurred. 
(d)  No police officer may make any change in his retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his first retirement check. 
(e)  If the member selects a joint and survivor option or if this article specifies the member's spouse is to receive the benefits which continue to be payable upon the death of the member, then in both of these cases after the benefits have commenced, a retired member may change his designation of joint annuitant or beneficiary only twice. If the retired member desires to change his joint annuitant or beneficiary, he shall file with the board of trustees a notarized notice of such change either by registered letter or on a form as provided by the board of trustees. Upon receipt of a complete change of joint annuitant form or such other notice, the board of trustees shall adjust the member's monthly benefit by the application of actuarial tables and calculations developed to ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the present value of the member's current benefit. Nothing herein shall preclude the pension fund from actuarially adjusting benefits or offering options based upon sex, age, early retirement or disability. 
(f)  Deferred retirement option program (DROP). In general, and subject to the provisions of this section, the board of trustees of the police officer's pension plan is authorized to establish and maintain a deferred retirement option program, hereinafter referred to as DROP. The DROP is a program under which an eligible member of the retirement system may elect to participate by deferring receipt of retirement benefits while continuing employment with the city. Upon entry into DROP a member's accrued vacation and sick leave balances not used in calculation of normal retirement benefits shall be carried forward and the DROP participant shall accrue additional vacation and sick leave during participation in DROP. However, any accrued vacation or sick leave balance at termination of the DROP period shall be forfeited. Upon termination of employment, the participant shall begin to receive the previously determined normal retirement benefits. Participation in the DROP does not guarantee employment for the specified period of DROP. 
(1)  Eligibility of member to participate in the DROP. All retirement system members are eligible to elect participation in the DROP on or after attaining their normal retirement date or age provided that election to participate is made within five years after the member first reaches his or her normal retirement date or age, except as provided for in subparagraphs (2)a. or (2)b., below. The member shall advise the city and the retirement system in writing at least 30 days in advance of the date on which the DROP shall begin. 
(2)  Participation in the DROP. 
a.  An eligible member may elect to participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed a maximum of 60 consecutive months nor beyond a total of 30 years of credited service with the city. Any member who has exceeded the 60-month or 30-year limitations shall not be eligible to continue participation in the DROP. 
b.  Any member who has more than 25 years of credited service at the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection (f) derives will have 90 days to make an election to participate in the DROP. If such member makes such an election within the 90-day period the member will be permitted to remain in the DROP for the entire 60 months, regardless of years of service. Any member with more than 25 years of service who does not make an election within the 90-day period may do so at a later date, however, the member's DROP will be limited to the period remaining until their thirtieth year. 
c.  Upon deciding to participate in the DROP, the member shall submit on forms required by the retirement system: 
1.  A written election to participate in the DROP. 
2.  Selection of the DROP participation and termination dates, which satisfy the limitations stated in paragraph (1) and subparagraphs (2)a. or (2)b. Such termination date shall be in an irrevocable and binding letter of resignation with the city, establishing a deferred termination date. The member may terminate before the termination date within the limitations of subparagraphs (2)a. or (2)b., but only with not less than 30 days advance written notice to the city from the new termination date. 
3.  A properly completed DROP application for service retirement as provided in this section. 
4.  A written election of form of pension payment, pursuant to section 14-77 of this article. 
5.  Any other information required by the pension plan's board of trustees. 
d.  The DROP participant shall be retired under the pension plan for all purposes except that payment of benefits shall be deferred until separation from city employment. 
e.  A re-employed DROP participant with renewed membership shall not be eligible for DROP participation. 
(3)  Benefits payable under the DROP. The DROP account shall, unless a member elects a self-directed DROP, earn interest at a rate set quarterly by the board of trustees. Such interest shall be equal to the system's net rate of investment return for the year and shall be credited to each individual account balance on a quarterly basis. Members selecting a self-directed DROP shall select from one or more providers selected by the board of trustees and shall be subject to all fees provided in such self-directed DROP. Self-directed investments shall be invested as permitted in the self-directed DROP agreement. 
a.  Effective with the date of DROP participation, the member's initial normal monthly benefit, including the value of accrued unused leave (per city policy as amended from time to time), credited service, and final average compensation, shall be fixed. The value of accrued unused leave, whether or not payment for such is actually received by the participant, shall be included in the calculations to determine said normal monthly benefit, with appropriate contributions being made on entry into DROP. However, actual payment for such accrued unused leave shall be made in no more than five equal installments, paid no less frequently than annually on the anniversary of the member's entry into DROP, provided however, that the first installment shall be at least sufficient to cover the cost of the employee's contribution to the employee's pension, after all other deductions have been made. The city will, however, make a one-time payment at the entry into DROP to employees who have no more than 12 days leave remaining. Interest on any unpaid portion of such accrued leave payment shall be calculated annually at simple interest at the rate earned by the city's largest investment fund (excluding pension investment funds). Termination from DROP prior to the maximum DROP period shall result in a lump sum payment of any remaining balance of said accrued leave installments with interest calculated for each completed calendar quarter. 
Such retirement benefit shall accrue monthly to the participant's individual DROP account. The board of trustees shall administer these individual DROP accounts. DROP accounts shall accrue interest at a rate set quarterly by the board of trustees. These DROP accounts shall be subject to administrative fees or charges as established by the board of trustees. 
b.  The effective date of retirement of a DROP participant shall be the first day of the month selected by the member to begin participation in the DROP. No person may enter DROP prior to attending a city sponsored employee education program. Such program shall be in addition to any education program sponsored by the pension plan. 
c.  Normal retirement benefits shall continue to accrue in the DROP until the established termination date of the DROP or until the participant terminates employment or dies prior to such date. A separate accounting of each participant's accrued benefits under the DROP shall be calculated and be available to participants annually. 
d.  At the conclusion of the participant's DROP, the pension plan shall direct that the participant's total accumulated DROP benefits be distributed, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  The retirement system shall receive verification from the city that the participant has terminated employment. 
2.  The terminated DROP participant or if deceased, such participant's named beneficiary, shall elect on forms provided by the pension plan to receive payment of the DROP benefits in accordance with one of the options listed below. For a participant or beneficiary who fails to elect a method of payment within 60 days of termination of the DROP, the retirement system shall direct that a lump sum be distributed as provided in subsection i. below. 
i.  Lump sum: All accrued DROP benefits, plus interest, less withholding taxes remitted to the Internal Revenue Service, shall be paid to the DROP participant or surviving beneficiary. 
ii.  Direct rollover: All accrued DROP benefits, plus interest, shall be paid from the DROP directly to the custodian of an eligible retirement plan as defined in Section 402(c)(8)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse of a deceased participant, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or an individual retirement annuity as described in Section 402(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
iii.  Partial lump sum: A portion of the accrued DROP benefits shall be paid to the DROP participant or surviving spouse, less withholding taxes remitted to the Internal Revenue Service, and the remaining DROP benefits shall be transferred directly to the custodian of an eligible retirement plan as defined in Section 402(c)(8)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse of a deceased participant, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or an individual retirement annuity as described in Section 402(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. The proportions shall be specified by the DROP participant or surviving beneficiary. 
3.  The form of payment selected by the DROP participant or surviving beneficiary shall comply with the minimum distribution requirements of the Internal Revenue Code and payments shall begin no later than the date on which the participant reaches age 70 years and six months. Regardless of the form of payout, a participant's DROP account continues until the account balance is exhausted. 
4.  For a DROP participant who fails to terminate city employment at the expiration of the 60-month maximum DROP participation period or the 30-year credited service maximum, unless authorized to do so pursuant to subparagraphs (2)a. and (2)b.; the member shall be deemed not to be retired, the DROP election shall be null and void, and the member shall have no accumulated DROP benefits. Retirement system membership shall be reestablished retroactively to the date of the commencement of the DROP, and the member shall be required to pay to the retirement system the member contributions as if the participant had continued service to the city, and the city contributions during the period the member participated in the DROP, plus an interest rate equal to the annual assumed investment return during each year the member participated in the DROP. 
e.  The accrued benefits of any DROP participant, and any contributions accumulated under such program, shall not be subject to assignment, execution, attachment, or to any legal process whatsoever, except for an income deduction order of a court of competent jurisdiction, income deduction orders as provided in F.S. § 61.1301, and federal income tax levies. 
f.  DROP participants shall not be eligible for disability retirement benefits as provided in sections 14-79 and 14-80 of this article, and the participant's beneficiaries and survivors shall not be eligible for the automatic survivor pension, death in the line of duty pension, or survivor pension as provided respectively in sections 14-83 of this article. 
(4)  Death benefits under the DROP. 
a.  Upon the death of a DROP participant, the named beneficiary shall be entitled to apply for and receive the accrued benefits in the DROP as provided in this section. 
b.  The normal retirement benefit accrued to the DROP during the month of a participant's death shall be the final monthly benefit credited for such DROP participant. 
c.  Eligibility to participate in the DROP terminates upon death of the participant. If the participant dies on or after the effective date of enrollment in the DROP, but prior to the first monthly benefit being credited to the DROP, pension plan benefits shall be paid as though the DROP election had not been made. 
(5)  Contributions. Neither city nor member contributions shall be made, due, or payable during a participant's DROP participation, notwithstanding any other section of this article. 
(6)  Forfeiture of retirement benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP participants from the scope of Section 8(d). Art. II of the State Constitution, and F.S. § 112.3173. DROP participants who commit a specified felony offense while employed will be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits, pursuant to those provisions of law. 
(7)  Administration of program. The board of trustees shall make such rules as are necessary for the effective and efficient administration of this subsection and individual DROP accounts. The retirement system shall not be required to advise members of the federal tax consequences of an election related to the DROP but may advise members to seek independent advice. 
(8)  415 Limitations. All benefit payments and accruals under the DROP shall be in accordance with Subsection 415(c) of the Internal Revenue Code and all regulations thereunder, which subsections and regulations are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1957, § 14-7.1; Ord. No. 2853, § 5, 4-19-00; Ord. No. 3053, § 1, 10-1-08; Ord. No. 3058, § 1, 5-6-09; Ord. No. 3095, § 3, 6-15-11; Ord. No. 4052, § 4, 10-15-14; Ord. No. 4052, § 4, 10-15-14) 
Sec. 14-78. - Beneficiaries. 
(a)  Each police officer may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board of trustees, designate a beneficiary to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the event of his death, and each designation may be revoked by such police officer by signing and filing with the board of trustees a new designation of beneficiary form. 
(b)  If a deceased police officer failed to name a beneficiary in the manner above prescribed, or if the beneficiary named by a deceased police officer predeceases the police officer, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under this article with respect to such deceased police officer may be paid, in the discretion of the board of trustees, either to: 
(1)  Any one or more of the persons composing the group consisting of the police officer's spouse, descendants, parents or heirs at law, and the board of trustees may pay the entire benefit to any member of such group or apportion such benefit among any two or more of them in such shares as the board of trustees, in its sole discretion, shall determine; or 
(2)  The estate of such deceased police officer, provided that in any of such cases the board of trustees, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income payments be paid in a lump sum. Any payment made to any person pursuant to the power and discretion conferred upon the board of trustees by the preceding sentence shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under this article with regard to such deceased police officer and shall not be subject to review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Code 1957, § 14-7.2) 
Sec. 14-79. - Disability retirement. 
(a)  For disability retirement, all of the terms and conditions as set forth in F.S. §§ 185.18 and 185.34, including the calculation of benefits, which sections are a part of this article, shall apply with the following exceptions: A police officer may retire from the service of the city under this article if, prior to his normal retirement date, he becomes totally and permanently disabled by reason of any cause other than a cause set out in subsection (b) of this section. Such retirement shall herein be referred to as disability retirement. In order to be eligible for disability retirement, the police officer shall meet either of the following requirements: 
(1)  Be totally disabled while in the line of duty. 
(2)  Have ten or more years of credited service and have contributed to the pension fund for ten or more years and be totally disabled from any cause whatsoever. 
(b)  A police officer will not be entitled to receive any disability retirement income if the disability is a result of: 
(1)  Excessive and habitual use by the police officer of drugs, intoxicants or narcotics. 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained by the police officer while wilfully and illegally participating in fights, riots, civil insurrections or while committing a crime. 
(3)  Injury or disease sustained by the police officer while serving in any armed forces. 
(4)  Injury or disease sustained by the police officer after his employment has terminated. 
(5)  Injury or disease sustained by the police officer while working for anyone other than the city and arising out of such employment. 
(c)  No police officer shall be permitted to retire under the provisions of this section until examined by a duly qualified physician, psychologist, surgeon, or other medical, vocational, and rehabilitation professionals to be selected by the board of trustees for that purpose, and is found to be disabled in the degree and in the manner specified in this section. Any police officer retiring under this section shall be examined periodically and by a duly qualified physician, psychologist, surgeon or other medical, vocational, and rehabilitation professionals to be selected by the board of trustees for that purpose, to determine if such disability has ceased to exist. 
(d)  The monthly retirement income to which a police officer is entitled in the event of his disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board of trustees determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date the board determines such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the first payment. The last payment will be: 
(1)  If the police officer recovers from the disability prior to his normal retirement date, the payment due next preceding the date of such recovery; or 
(2)  If the police officer dies without recovering from his disability or attains his normal retirement date while still disabled, the payment due next preceding his death or the 120th monthly payment, whichever is later. 
Any monthly retirement income payments due after the death of a disabled police officer shall be paid to the police officer's designated beneficiary as provided in F.S. §§ 185.162 and 185.21. 
(e)  If the board of trustees finds that a police officer who is receiving a disability retirement income is at any time prior to his normal retirement date no longer disabled, as provided herein, the board of trustees shall direct that the disability retirement income be discontinued. Recovery from disability as used herein shall mean the ability of the police officer to render useful and efficient service as a police officer. 
(f)  Any condition or impairment of health of a police officer caused by tuberculosis, hypertension, heart disease or hardening of the arteries, resulting in total or partial disability or death, shall be presumed to be accidental and suffered in the line of duty unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence. Any condition or impairment of health caused directly or proximately by exposure, which exposure occurred in the active performance of duty at some definite time or place without willful negligence on the part of the police officer, resulting in total or partial disability, shall be presumed to be accidental and suffered in the line of duty, provided that such police officer shall have successfully passed a physical examination upon entering such service, which physical examination, including an electrocardiogram, failed to reveal any evidence of such condition. 
(Code 1957, § 14-7.3; Ord. No. 2853, § 6, 4-19-00) 
Sec. 14-80. - Retirement disability benefits. 
    The benefit payable to a police officer who retires from the service of the city with a total and permanent disability as a result of a disability commencing prior to his normal retirement date is the monthly income payable for ten years certain and life for which, if the police officer's disability occurred in the line of duty, his monthly benefit shall be the accrued retirement benefit, but shall not be less than 50 percent of his average monthly compensation as of his disability retirement date. If the disability is other than in the line of duty, the police officer's monthly benefit shall be the accrued normal retirement benefit, but shall not be less than 40 percent of his average monthly compensation as of his disability retirement date. 
(Code 1957, § 14-7.4) 
Sec. 14-81. - Refund of contributions. 
(a)  Should any police officer leave the service of the city as a police officer before accumulating aggregate time of ten years toward retirement and before being eligible to retire under the provisions of this article, such police officer shall be entitled to a refund of all of his contributions made to the pension fund, with interest not to exceed four percent per annum. The rate of interest per annum and the method of calculating the interest shall be established from time to time by the board of trustees, but in no event shall the rate of interest exceed four percent per annum. 
(b)  Should any police officer who has been in the service of the city for at least ten years and has contributed to the pension fund for at least ten years elect to leave his accrued contributions in the pension fund, such police officer upon attaining age 50 years or more may retire at the actuarial equivalent of the amount of such retirement income otherwise payable to him. 
(Code 1957, § 14-7.5) 
Sec. 14-82. - Lump sum payment of small retirement income. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, if the monthly retirement income payable to any person entitled to benefits hereunder is less than $100.00 or if the single sum value of the accrued retirement income is less than $2,500.00 as of the date of retirement or termination of service, whichever is applicable, the board of trustees, in the exercise of its discretion, may specify that the actuarial equivalent of such retirement income be paid in a lump sum. 
(Code 1957, § 14-7.6; Ord. No. 2853, § 7, 4-19-00) 
Sec. 14-83. - Death prior to retirement; refunds of contributions or payment of death benefits. 
(a)  Should any police officer die before being eligible to retire under the provisions of this article, the heirs, legatees, beneficiaries or personal representative of such deceased police officer shall be entitled to a refund of 100 percent, with interest not to exceed four percent per annum, of the contributions made to the pension fund by such deceased police officer or, if an annuity or life insurance contract has been purchased by the board on such police officer, then to the death benefits available under such life insurance or annuity contract, subject to the limitations on such death benefits set forth in F.S. § 185.061, whichever amount is greater. If any police officer dies prior to retirement but has at least ten years of contributing service, his beneficiary is entitled to the benefits otherwise payable to the police officer at early or normal retirement age. If the death benefit paid by a life insurance company exceeds the limit set forth in F.S. § 185.061(6), the excess of the death benefit over the limits shall be paid to the pension fund. However, the benefits as provided in F.S. §§ 112.19 and 112.1904 shall not be included as death or retirement benefits under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  In the event a member dies on or after January 1, 2007, while performing USERRA Qualified Military Service, the beneficiaries of the member are entitled to any benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) as if the member had resumed employment and then died while employed. 
(Code 1957, § 14-7.7; Ord. No. 3095, § 4, 6-15-11) 
Sec. 14-84. - Application of additional benefits. 
    The increased pension benefits as provided for by sections 14-76 through 14-81 and any and all additional benefits that may accrue in the future shall apply to all police officers now receiving retirement income payments, to all police officers who are now eligible to receive retirement income payments, and to all police officers who may in the future be eligible to receive retirement income payments under this article. Notwithstanding the above this section shall not apply to any participant that is employed after the effective date of this ordinance amendment. 
(Code 1957, § 14-7.8; Ord. No. 4000, § 2, 8-3-11) 
Sec. 14-85. - Payment of member contributions; past continuous service. 
    Application may be made by any employee who has completed one or more years of continuous past service to purchase retirement credit for a part or all of the employee's continuous past service by paying into the pension fund an amount equal to the actual cost of the contributions that the employee would otherwise have paid for such continuous past service, plus interest. For purposes of determining credit for prior service as a police officer, in addition to service as a police officer in this state, credit may be given for federal, other state, or county service if the prior service is recognized by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement as provided under Chapter 633, or the police officer provides proof to the board of trustees that his or her service is equivalent to the service required to meet the definition of a police officer under F.S. § 185.02(5)(c). If such application is made within 12 months of being reemployed by the city the required interest rate shall be equal to the actual interest earned by the pension fund during that period of past service but shall not exceed seven and one-half percent. If such application is made after said 12-month period the interest rate shall be equal to the actual interest, without any such cap, earned by the pension fund during that period of past service. Such amount shall be repaid to the pension fund either in a lump sum or by installment payments by way of payroll deduction, at the election of the employee. If the repayment is not made in a lump sum, the employee shall repay such amount by installment payments over a period not to exceed five years from the date the employee's application is submitted, with a fixed simple interest rate being calculated based on the pension fund's actuarially assumed investment return in effect at the time the application is submitted. Any employee who desires to purchase retirement credit more than 60 days after final adoption of this section must repay at least one-third of the actual cost of the contributions in a lump sum. Continuous past service shall be credited to the employee each year on a prorata basis based on the amount repaid. 
(Code 1957, § 14-8; Ord. No. 2818, § 2, 6-2-99; Ord. No. 2852, § 1, 4-19-00; Ord. No. 3095, § 5, 6-15-11) 
Sec. 14-86. - Exemption from execution. 
    The pensions, annuities and any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this article and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the funds created under this article are hereby exempted from any state, county or municipal tax of the state and shall not be subject to execution or attachment or to any legal process whatsoever, except that the recipient of any monthly benefit may authorize the board of trustees to withhold from the monthly benefit those funds necessary to pay for benefits being received through the city, the certified bargaining agent, alimony, child support or medical payments to a former spouse or minor child, and to pay for accident, health, and long-term care insurance premiums for the recipient, the recipient's spouse and the recipient's dependents. The pension fund shall not incur any liability for making or failing to make such withholdings. 
(Code 1957, § 14-8.1; Ord. No. 3095, § 6, 6-15-11) 
Sec. 14-87. - Conflict with other ordinances and regulations. 
    All ordinances or regulations of the city, insofar as they are in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this article, be and the same are hereby repealed; provided, however, the minimum provisions of F.S. ch. 185 to the contrary notwithstanding shall prevail over this article in such conflict or inconsistency. 
(Code 1957, § 14-8.2) 
Sec. 14-88. - Effective date. 
    This article shall take effect retroactively to October 1, 1986, except that section 14-79 shall be applied prospectively from the date of passage of Ordinance No. 2411, that is, January 4, 1989, insofar as section 14-79 permits members to retire on duty disability with less than five years of service. 
(Code 1957, § 14-8.3) 
Sec. 14-89. - Effective date; compliance with Internal Revenue Code. 
    The effective date of the program is January 1 following receipt of a favorable determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service. At that time, the city shall pick up the member contributions required by subsection 14-74(3). The contributions so picked up shall be treated as employer contributions in determining tax treatment under the United States Internal Revenue Code. The city shall pick up the member contributions from funds established and available in the salaries account, which funds would have otherwise been designated as contributions and paid to the pension fund. Member contributions picked up by the city pursuant to this subsection shall be treated for purposes of making a refund of member's contributions, and for all other purposes of this and other laws, in the same manner and to the same extent as member contributions made prior to the effective date of this subsection. The intent of this subsection is to comply with section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 2601, § 1, 10-6-93; Ord. No. 3094, § 3, 6-15-11) 
Sec. 14-90. - Compliance with Internal Revenue Code. 
(a)  Maximum amount of retirement income. 
(1)  The limitations of this subsection (a) shall apply in limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, except as otherwise provided herein, and are intended to comply with the requirements of the Pension Protection Act of 2006 and shall be construed in accordance with said Act and guidance issued thereunder. The provisions of this subsection (a) shall supersede any provision of the plan to the extent such provision is inconsistent with this subsection. 
The annual pension as defined in paragraph (2) below otherwise payable to a member at any time shall not exceed the dollar limitation for the member multiplied by a fraction whose value cannot exceed one, the numerator of which is the member's number of years (or part thereof, but not less than one year) of service with the city and the denominator of which is 10. For this purpose, no more than one year of service may be credited for any plan year. If the benefit the member would otherwise accrue in a limitation year would produce an annual pension in excess of the dollar limitation, the benefit shall be limited (or the rate of accrual reduced) to a benefit that does not exceed the dollar limitation. 
(2)  "Annual pension" means the sum of all annual benefits, payable in the form of a straight life annuity. Benefits payable in any other form shall be adjusted to the larger of: 
(A)  For limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007: 
(I)  The straight life annuity (if any) payable to the member under the plan commencing at the same annuity starting date as the member's form of benefit; or 
(II)  The actuarially equivalent straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date, computed using a 5.00% interest rate and the mortality basis prescribed in Code Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v). 
(B)  For limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007: 
(I)  The actuarially equivalent straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date, computed using the interest rate and mortality basis specified by the board of trustees for determining actuarial equivalence under the plan for the particular form of payment; or 
(II)  The actuarially equivalent straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date, computed using a 5.00% interest rate and the mortality basis prescribed in Code Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v). 
No actuarial adjustment to the benefit shall be made for benefits that are not directly related to retirement benefits (such as a qualified disability benefit, preretirement incidental death benefits, and postretirement medical benefits); or the inclusion in the form of benefit of an automatic benefit increase feature, provided the form of benefit is not subject to § 417(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and would otherwise satisfy the limitations of this subsection (a), and the amount payable under the form of benefit in any limitation year shall not exceed the limits of this subsection (a) applicable at the annuity starting date, as increased in subsequent years pursuant to § 415(d) of the Code. For this purpose, an automatic benefit increase feature is included in a form of benefit if the form of benefit provides for automatic, periodic increases to the benefits paid in that form. 
(3)  "Dollar Limitation" means, effective for the first limitation year beginning after January 1, 2001, $160,000.00, automatically adjusted under Code Section 415(d), effective January 1 of each year, as published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin, and payable in the form of a straight life annuity. The new limitation shall apply to limitation years ending with or within the calendar year of the date of the adjustment, but a member's benefits shall not reflect the adjusted limit prior to January 1 of that calendar year. The dollar limitation shall be further adjusted based on the age of the member when the benefit begins as follows: 
(A)  For annuity starting dates in limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007: 
(I)  If the annuity starting date for the member's benefit is after age 65; 
(ii)  If the plan does not have an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 65 and the age of benefit commencement. 
The dollar limitation at the member's annuity starting date is the annual amount of a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the member's annuity starting date that is the actuarial equivalent of the dollar limitation with actuarial equivalence computed using a 5.00% interest rate assumption and the mortality basis prescribed in Code Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) for that annuity starting date (and expressing the member's age based on completed calendar months as of the annuity starting date). 
(ii)  If the plan does have an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 65 and the age of benefit commencement 
The dollar limitation at the member's annuity starting date is the lesser of (aa) the dollar limitation multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at the member's annuity starting date to the annual amount of the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at age 65, both determined without applying the limitations of this subsection (a), and (bb) the limitation determined under subparagraph (3)(A)(I)(i) of this subsection(a). For this purpose, the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at the member's annuity starting date is the annual amount of such annuity payable to the member, computed disregarding the member's accruals after age 65 but including actuarial adjustments even if those actuarial adjustments are used to offset accruals; and the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at age 65 is the annual amount of such annuity that would be payable under the plan to a hypothetical member who is age 65 and has the same accrued benefit as the member. 
(II)  Except with respect to a member who is a "qualified member" as defined in Section 415(b)(2)(H) of the Code, for benefits (except survivor and disability benefits as defined in Section 415(b)(2)(I) of the Code), if the annuity starting date for the Member's benefit is before age 62: 
(i)  If the plan does not have an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 62 and the age of benefit commencement 
The dollar limitation at the member's annuity starting date is the annual amount of a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the member's annuity starting date that is the actuarial equivalent of the dollar limitation with actuarial equivalence computed using a 5.00% interest rate assumption and the mortality basis prescribed in Code Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) for that annuity starting date (and expressing the member's age based on completed calendar months as of the annuity starting date). 
(ii)  If the plan does have an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 62 and the age of benefit commencement 
The dollar limitation at the member's annuity starting date is the lesser of (aa) the dollar limitation multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at the member's annuity starting date to the annual amount of the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at age 62, both determined without applying the limitations of this subsection (a), and (bb) the limitation determined under subparagraph (3)(A)(II)(i) of this subsection (a). 
(B)  For annuity starting dates in limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007 
_____ 
Age as of Annuity 
Starting Date: Adjustment of Dollar Limitation: Over 65 The smaller of: (a) the actuarial equivalent of the limitation for age 65, computed using the interest rate and mortality basis specified by the Board of Trustees for determining actuarial equivalence under the Plan, or (b) the actuarial equivalent of the limitation for age 65, computed using a 5.00% interest rate and the mortality basis prescribed in Code Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v). Any increase in the Dollar Limitation determined in accordance with this paragraph shall not reflect a mortality decrement between age 65 and the age at which benefits commence if benefits are not forfeited upon the death of the Member. If any benefits are forfeited upon death, the full mortality decrement is taken into account. 62 to 65 No adjustment. Less than 62 The smaller of: (a) the actuarial equivalent of the limitation for age 62, computed using the interest rate and mortality basis specified by the Board of Trustees for determining actuarial equivalence under the Plan, or (b) the actuarial equivalent of the limitation for age 62, computed using a 5.00% interest rate and the mortality basis prescribed in Code Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v). This adjustment shall not apply to any "Qualified Member" as defined in Section 415(b)(2)(H), nor to survivor and disability benefits as defined in Section 415(b)(2)(I) of the Code.  
_____ 
(4)  With respect to clause (3)(A)(I)(i), clause (3)(A)(II)(i) and paragraph (3)(B) above, no adjustment shall be made to the dollar limitation to reflect the probability of a member's death between the annuity starting date and age 62, or between age 65 and the annuity starting date, as applicable, if benefits are not forfeited upon the death of the member prior to the annuity starting date. To the extent benefits are forfeited upon death before the annuity starting date, such an adjustment shall be made. For this purpose, no forfeiture shall be treated as occurring upon the member's death if the plan does not charge members for providing a qualified preretirement survivor annuity, as defined in Code Section 417(c), upon the member's death. 
(5)  The term "limitation year" is the 12 month period which is used for application of the limitations under Code Section 415 and shall be the calendar year. 
(6)  The limitations set forth in this subsection (a) shall not apply if the annual pension does not exceed $10,000.00 provided the member has never participated in a defined contribution plan maintained by the city. 
(7)  Cost-of-living adjustments in the dollar limitation for benefits shall be limited to scheduled annual increases determined by the Secretary of the Treasury under Section Subsection 415(d) of the Code. 
(8)  In the case of a MEMBER who has fewer than ten years of participation in the plan, the dollar limitation set forth in paragraph (3) of this subsection (a) shall be multiplied by a fraction - (i) the numerator of which is the number of years (or part thereof) of participation in the Plan, and (ii) the denominator of which is 10. 
(9)  Any portion of a member's benefit that is attributable to mandatory member contributions (unless picked-up by the city) or rollover contributions, shall be taken into account in the manner prescribed in the regulations under Section 415 of the Code. 
(10)  Should any member participate in more than one defined benefit plan maintained by the city, in any case in which the member's benefits under all such defined benefit plans (determined as of the same age) would exceed the dollar limitation applicable at that age, the accrual of the member's benefit under this plan shall be reduced so that the member's combined benefits will equal the dollar limitation. 
(11)  For a member who has or will have distributions commencing at more than one annuity starting date, the annual benefit shall be determined as of each such annuity starting date (and shall satisfy the limitations of this section as of each such date), actuarially adjusting for past and future distributions of benefits commencing at the other annuity starting dates. For this purpose, the determination of whether a new starting date has occurred shall be made without regard to § 1.401(a)-20, Q&A 10(d), and with regard to § 1.415(b)1(b)(1)(iii)(B) and (C) of the Income Tax Regulations. 
(12)  The determination of the annual pension under paragraph (A)(1) of this subsection (a) shall take into account (in the manner prescribed by the regulations under Section 415 of the Code) social security supplements described in § 411(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and benefits transferred from another defined benefit plan, other than transfers of distributable benefits pursuant § 1.411(d)-4, Q&A-3(c) of the Income Tax Regulations. 
(13)  The above limitations are intended to comply with the provisions of Section 415 of the Code, as amended, so that the maximum benefits provided by plans of the city shall be exactly equal to the maximum amounts allowed under Section 415 of the Code and regulations thereunder. If there is any discrepancy between the provisions of this subsection (a) and the provisions of Section 415 of the Code and regulations thereunder, such discrepancy shall be resolved in such a way as to give full effect to the provisions of Section 415 of the Code. The value of any benefits forfeited as a result of the application of this subsection (a) shall be used to decrease future employer contributions. 
(14)  For the purpose of applying the limitations set forth in Sections 401(a)(17) and 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, compensation shall include any elective deferral (as defined in Code Section 402(g)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code), and any amount which is contributed or deferred by the employer at the election of the member and which is not includible in the gross income of the Member by reason of Section 125 or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2001, for the purposes of applying the limitations described in this subsection (a), compensation paid or made available during such limitation years shall include elective amounts that are not includible in the gross income of the member by reason of Section 132(f)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code. For limitation years on or after July 1, 2007, compensation shall include payments that otherwise qualify as compensation and that are made by the later of: (a) 21/2 months after severance from employment with the employer, and (b) the end of the limitation year that includes the date of severance. 
(b)  Required beginning date. Notwithstanding any other provision of the plan, payment of a participant's retirement benefits under the plan shall commence not later than the participant's required beginning date, which is defined as the later of: 
- April 1 of the calendar year that next follows the calendar year in which the participant attains or will attain the age of 701/2 years; or 
- April 1 of the calendar year that next follows the calendar year in which the participant retires. 
(c)  Required minimum distributions. 
(1)  Required beginning date. The participant's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the participant no later than the participant's required beginning date as defined in subsection (b) of this section 14-90. 
(2)  Death of participant before distributions begin. 
(A)  If the participant dies before distributions begin, the participant's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, no later than as follows: 
(i)  If the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the participant died, or by December 31 of the calendar year in which the participant would have attained age 701/2, if later. 
(ii)  If the participant's surviving spouse is not the participant's sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the participant died. 
(iii)  If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the participant's death, the participant's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death. 
(B)  The participant's entire interest shall be distributed as follows: 
(i)  Participant survived by designated beneficiary. If the participant dies before the date distribution of his or her interest begins and there is a designated beneficiary, the participant's entire interest will be distributed, beginning no later than the time described in Subparagraph (2)(A) above, over the life of the designated beneficiary or over a period certain not exceeding: 
(I)  Unless the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year of the participant's death; or 
(II)  If the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. 
(ii)  No designated beneficiary. If the participant dies before the date distributions begin and there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the participant's death, distribution of the participant's entire interest will be completed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death. 
(C)  Death of surviving spouse before distributions to surviving spouse begin. In any case in which (i) the participant dies before the date distribution of his or her interest begins, (ii) the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's sole designated beneficiary, and (iii) the surviving spouse dies before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, Subparagraphs (2)(A) and 2(B) above shall apply as though the surviving spouse were the participant. 
(3)  Requirements for annuity distributions that commence during participant's lifetime. 
(A)  Joint life annuities where the beneficiary is not the participant's spouse. If the participant's interest is being distributed in the form of a joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the participant and a nonspousal beneficiary, annuity payments to be made on or after the participant's required beginning date to the designated beneficiary after the participant's death must not at any time exceed the applicable percentage of the annuity payment for such period that would have been payable to the participant using the table set forth in Q&A-2 of section 1.401(a)(9)-6 of the Treasury regulations. If the form of distribution combines a joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the participant and a nonspousal beneficiary and a period certain annuity, the requirement in the preceding sentence will apply to annuity payments to be made to the designated beneficiary after the expiration of the period certain. 
(B)  Period certain annuities. Unless the participant's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain for an annuity distribution commencing during the participant's lifetime may not exceed the applicable distribution period for the participant under the uniform lifetime table set forth in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations for the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. If the annuity starting date precedes the year in which the participant reaches age 70, the applicable distribution period for the participant is the distribution period for age 70 under the uniform lifetime table set forth in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations plus the excess of 70 over the age of the participant as of the participant's birthday in the year that contains the annuity starting date. If the participant's spouse is the participant's sole designated beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain may not exceed the longer of the participant's applicable distribution period, as determined under this subparagraph (3)(B), or the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the participant and the participant's spouse as determined under the joint and last survivor table set forth in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations, using the participant's and spouse's attained ages as of the participant's and spouse's birthdays in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. 
(4)  Form of distribution. Unless the participant's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with subparagraphs (4)(A), (4)(B) and (4)(C) below. If the participant's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Code and the Treasury regulations. Any part of the participant's interest which is in the form of an individual account described in section 414(k) of the Code will be distributed in a manner satisfying the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Code and the Treasury regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
(A)  General annuity requirements. If the participant's interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
(i)  The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one year; 
(ii)  The distribution period will be over a life (or lives) or over a period certain, not longer than the distribution period described in paragraphs (2) or (3) above, whichever is applicable, of this subsection (c); 
(iii)  Once payments have begun over a period certain, the period certain will not be changed even if the period certain is shorter than the maximum permitted; 
(iv)  Payments will either be non-increasing or increase only as follows: 
(I)  By an annual percentage increase that does not exceed the annual percentage increase in a cost-of-living index that is based on prices of all items and issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics; 
(II)  To the extent of the reduction in the amount of the participant's payments to provide for a survivor benefit upon death, but only if the beneficiary whose life was being used to determine the distribution period dies or is no longer the participant's beneficiary pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order within the meaning of section 414(p) of the Code; 
(III)  To provide cash refunds of employee contributions upon the participant's death; or 
(IV)  To pay increased benefits that result from a plan amendment. 
(B)  Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The amount that must be distributed on or before the participant's required beginning date (or, if the participant dies before distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under subparagraph (2)(A)(i) or (2)(A)(ii), whichever is applicable) is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g., bi-monthly, monthly, semi-annually or annually. All of the participant's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the participant's required beginning date. 
(C)  Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the participant in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues. 
(5)  For purposes of this subsection (c), distributions are considered to begin on the participant's required beginning date. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the participant (or to the participant's surviving spouse) before the participant's required beginning date (or, if to the participant's surviving spouse, before the date distributions are required to begin in accordance with subparagraph (2)(A) above), the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. 
(6)  Definitions. 
(A)  Designated beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the Plan and is the designated beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the Code and section 1.401(a)(9)-4 of the Treasury regulations. 
(B)  Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the participant's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the participant's required beginning date. For distributions beginning after the participant's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection (c). 
(C)  Life expectancy. Life expectancy as computed by use of the single life table in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations. 
(d)  (1)  Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the administrator, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(2)  Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section: 
(A)  Eligible rollover distribution: An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: 
(i)  Any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; 
(ii)  Any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the Code; 
(iii)  The portion of any distribution which is made upon hardship of the member; and 
(iv)  The portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income (determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities), provided that a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax Employee contributions which are not includible in gross income. However, such portion may be transferred only to an individual retirement account or annuity described in section 408(a) or (b) of the Code, or to a qualified defined contribution plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible. 
(3)  Eligible retirement plan. An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Code, an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Code, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Code, a qualified trust described in section 401 (a) of the Code, an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan, or, with respect to distributions on or after January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA (subject to the limitations of Code section 408A(c)(3)) that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. 
(4)  Distributee. A distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined in section 414(p) of the Code, are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse. Furthermore, effective January 1, 2007, a surviving designated beneficiary as defined in section 401(a)(9)(E) of the Code who is not the surviving spouse and who elects a direct rollover to an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Code or an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Code shall be considered a distributee. 
(5)  Direct rollover. A direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(e)  [Maximum amount of mandatory distribution.] Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, the maximum amount of any mandatory distribution, as defined in section 401(a)(31) of the Code, payable under the plan shall be $1,000.00. 
(f)  Compensation limitations under section 401(a)(17). In addition to other applicable limitations set forth in the plan, and notwithstanding any other provision of the plan to the contrary, the annual compensation of each participant taken into account under the plan shall not exceed the EGTRRA annual compensation limit for limitation years beginning after December 31, 2001. The EGTRRA annual compensation limit is $200,000.00, as adjusted by the commissioner for increases in the cost of living in accordance with section 401(a)(17)(B) of the Code. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to any period, not exceeding 12 months, over which compensation is determined (determination period) beginning in such calendar year. If a determination period consists of fewer than 12 months, the EGTRRA annual compensation limit will be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the determination period, and the denominator of which is 12. 
    Any reference in the plan to the limitation under section 401(a)(17) of the Code shall mean the EGTRRA annual compensation limit set forth in this provision. 
(g)  [Diverted funds.] At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan with respect to members and their spouses or beneficiaries, shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(Ord. No. 2650, § 2, 12-21-94; Ord. No. 3094, § 4, 6-15-11; Ord. No. 4052, §§ 5, 6, 10-15-14) 
Sec. 14-91. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3094, § 5, adopted June 15, 2011, repealed § 14-91, which pertained to required distributions and derived from Ord. No. 2650, § 3, adopted Dec. 21, 1994. 
Sec. 14-92. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3094, § 6, adopted June 15, 2011, repealed § 14-92, which pertained to rollover distributions and derived from Ord. No. 2650, § 4, adopted Dec. 21, 1994. 
Sec. 14-93. - Repeal or termination of fund. 
    In the event of the termination or partial termination of this plan, each affected participant's accrued pension benefit shall become nonforfeitable, i.e., 100 percent vested. At such time, the fund shall be distributed in accordance with F.S. ch. 185.37. 
(Ord. No. 2651, § 1, 1-18-95; Ord. No. 3095, § 7, 6-15-11) 
Secs. 14-94-14-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOCIAL SECURITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-161 et seq.; personnel, ch. 15; police department, § 16-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Social security, F.S. ch. 650. 

Sec. 14-101. - Federal old age benefits extended. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of January 1, 1954, to the employees and officials thereof not excluded by law nor excepted herein and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of old age and survivor's insurance as authorized by the federal social security act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734, 81st Congress, and by F.S. ch. 650 and to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment as defined in F.S. § 650.02, performed in the employ of the city by employees except service of an emergency nature, service in all classes of elective positions, service in part-time positions and service in positions the compensation for which is on a fee basis. 
(Code 1957, § 14-9) 
Sec. 14-102. - Mayor and clerk authorized to enter agreement. 
    The mayor and city clerk are authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by the system of old age and survivor's insurance to the employees and officials of this city, which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan by the city as are found by the state agency to be necessary for the proper and efficient administration thereof, and shall be effective with respect to services in employment covered by such agreement performed after January 1, 1954. 
(Code 1957, § 14-10) 
Sec. 14-103. - Withholdings. 
    Withholdings from salaries, wages, or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 14-101 are hereby authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency designated by such laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1957, § 14-11) 
Sec. 14-104. - Contributions, assessments. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from the general fund of the city, such amounts, at such times, as may be required to pay promptly the contributions and assessments required of the city as employer by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, which shall be paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 1957, § 14-12) 
Sec. 14-105. - Records. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall adhere to the regulations of the state agency. 
(Code 1957, § 14-13) 
Sec. 14-106. - Exclusions. 
    There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered, or authorized to be covered, by any other law creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 14-14) 
Sec. 14-107. - Adoption of federal act. 
    The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges and other conditions thereunto appertaining of Title II of the social security act as amended by Public Law 734, 81st Congress, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees thereof and of its departments and agencies, save and except any of such officers and employees now covered or authorized to be covered by any retirement system provided by law, and further excepting any official or employee who occupies any position, office, or employment not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, or whose service is specifically excepted. 
(Code 1957, § 14-15) 
Sec. 14-108. - Custodian designated. 
    The director of finance is designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the appropriated funds for the contribution of the city and the director of finance is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 14-16) 
Chapter 16 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; offenses, ch. 12; pensions and retirement programs, ch. 14; police officers' pension fund, § 14-71 et seq.; security and fire warning systems, ch. 17; burglar alarms, § 17-21 et seq.; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 19. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- City personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7; officers and employees, § 2-161 et seq.; police officers pension fund, § 14-71 et seq.; social security, § 14-101 et seq.; personnel, ch. 15; casualty insurance premium tax levied for police officers' pension program, § 18-22; powers and duties of chief of police and police department to regulate traffic, § 19-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 16-21-16-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHIEF OF POLICE 

Sec. 16-41. - Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to attend all regular and special meetings of the city council and to aid in the enforcement of order under the direction of the presiding officer and to execute the commands of the city council and the mayor in the line of his duty. 
(b)  It shall also be the duty of the chief of police to preserve peace and good order within the city and to see that the ordinances of the city are enforced and to bring all violators of any ordinance of the city before the courts in the manner prescribed by law and to perform all the duties generally incident to the office of chief of police and the enforcement of law and order within the city. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to assist the city clerk in the collection of all occupational license taxes and to arrest and bring before the court all persons subject to such tax who have not obtained a proper license. 
(d)  The chief of police shall direct all employees and activities of the police department. He shall be responsible for the protection of lives and property in the city through the supervision of all police functions. He shall be responsible for the efficient operation of the police department through control of its activities, seeing that order is maintained and that laws and ordinances are enforced and by taking measures to prevent crime and protect lives and property of the public through the planning of activities and the selection, training, assignment, supervision and discipline of all department members. He shall be permitted considerable independence and latitude in the conduct of the performance of police operation, but shall be subject to the executive direction of the city manager. 
(e)  He shall formulate orders and regulations governing activities of the police department; confer with the city manager and subordinate officers on the formulation of policies and practices of the department. He shall formulate and prescribe work methods and procedures to be followed by members of the department and take necessary steps in improving police operation and shall take appropriate disciplinary action as required. He shall plan and supervise enforcement of traffic and safety regulations and programs of crime prevention and detection and cooperate with state and federal officers in the apprehension and detention of wanted persons and with other agencies where activities of the police department are involved. He shall advise and assist police officers in nonroutine criminal or other investigations and personally participate in the more difficult problems encountered by subordinates. 
(f)  He shall attend civic club meetings, churches, schools and other places of public gatherings to explain the activities and functions of the police department and to establish favorable public relations and perform related work as required. 
(Code 1957, § 2-40) 
Sec. 16-42. - Supervision. 
    The chief of police shall have supervision of the police force subject to the commands of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2-41) 
Sec. 16-43. - Special powers. 
    The chief of police shall have authority in case of riot, insurrection or in case of great public danger or emergency to appoint special police officers to serve until the next meeting of the city council thereafter. 
(Code 1957, § 2-43) 
Sec. 16-44. - Assistant police chief. 
    The position of assistant chief of police is created. The assistant chief of police shall be appointed or removed by the city manager, and the compensation shall be determined by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2-43.1) 
Secs. 16-45-16-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVE POLICE FORCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-161 et seq. 

Sec. 16-61. - Created; under direction of chief of police. 
    In order to provide for the public safety in time of emergency, there is hereby created and established a reserve police force for the city. The reserve police force shall be under the supervision, direction and control of the chief of police. The chief shall promulgate reasonable rules and regulations for the proper governing of such reserve police force in accordance with state law and such rules and regulations shall first be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2-60) 
Sec. 16-62. - Definition and classification. 
(a)  Reserve police officer means any person employed with or without compensation less than full-time by the city and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of the penal, traffic or highway laws of the city or state. 
(b)  Reserve police officers are reserve as opposed to full-time or part-time and have no expressed arrest authority. The utilization of these services are confined within the framework of the following: 
(1)  Patrol operations performed for the purpose of detection, prevention and suppression of crime or enforcement of the traffic or highway laws of the city or state and must be in the company and under direct control of a police officer certified under the police standards act. 
(2)  Traffic direction control may be performed without immediate supervision; provided, however, that supervisory control is exercised by a certified police officer whose total span of control would be considered within reasonable limits. 
(3)  Crowd control assistance may be rendered for any special event which severely taxes or exhausts the manpower resources of the police department responsible for the welfare and safety of the assemblage. Supervisory control will be exercised by a certified police officer whose total span of control would be considered within reasonable limits. 
(Code 1957, § 2-61) 
Sec. 16-63. - Oath. 
    Before entering upon the duties as a reserve police officer of the city, each such officer shall take an oath before the city clerk that he will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Florida and that he will enforce the ordinances of the city and all lawful orders, rules and regulations promulgated under authority of the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2-62) 
Sec. 16-64. - Training and active duty. 
    Reserve police officers may be called upon by the chief of police for training in service with the regularly employed police officers of the city. They shall also be subject to call for active duty at such times and places within the city as the chief of police may deem necessary in order to fully protect life and property within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2-63) 
Sec. 16-65. - Powers and duties. 
    While on duty under the orders of the chief of police, reserve police officers shall possess all the powers and perform all the duties and functions of members of the regular police force of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2-64) 
Sec. 16-66. - Uniforms and insignia. 
    When called for training in service or for active duty, reserve police officers are hereby required to wear such identifying uniform and insignia as may be provided by the chief of police. It shall be unlawful for any reserve officer to wear such identifying uniform and insignia except while on duty. It shall also be unlawful for any reserve police officer to attempt to enforce any ordinance or state law or to carry out any order, rule or regulation of the city while such reserve police officer is not wearing such identifying uniform and insignia. 
(Code 1957, § 2-65) 
Sec. 16-67. - Appointments subject to cancellation. 
    Such appointments may be canceled at any time by the chief of police for cause. Each such appointee shall be a credit to the force and to the city. His conduct shall never be unbecoming a police officer or employee of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2-66) 
Sec. 16-68. - Compensation. 
    Members of the reserve police force shall serve for a nominal consideration of one dollar per year or an amount hereafter determined by city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2-67) 
Secs. 16-69-16-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WEAPONS CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses, ch. 12; discharging firearms, § 12-9. 

Sec. 16-81. - Purpose. 
    The procedure in this article shall be followed in order to maintain the responsible control and disposition of firearms falling under the control of the police department. 
(Code 1957, § 2-13.3) 
Sec. 16-82. - Receipt of firearms; police officer's responsibility. 
(a)  Every officer making an arrest under F.S. § 790.07 or under any other law or ordinance shall take possession of any firearm found at or upon the person arrested and place it into evidence. 
(b)  All such weapons coming into the hands of any police officer which have been found abandoned or otherwise discarded or left in their hands shall likewise be placed into evidence as indicated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1957, § 2-13.3(a)) 
Sec. 16-83. - Disposition of firearms; property control's responsibility. 
(a)  The evidence custodian shall secure all firearms. 
(b)  If the person arrested is convicted of violating F.S. § 790.07 or of a similar offense under any ordinance or any other offense involving the use of such firearm, the firearm shall become forfeited to the city without any order of forfeiture being necessary. 
(c)  If the person arrested is acquitted of the offenses mentioned in subsection (b) of this section, the firearm taken from him shall be returned to him. If he fails to call for or receive the firearm within six months from and after the acquittal or the dismissal of the charges against him, the firearm shall become forfeited to the city without any order of forfeiture being necessary. 
(d)  All firearms in the hands of the evidence custodian which have been found abandoned or otherwise discarded or left in his hands and not reclaimed by the owner within six months shall become forfeited to the city without any order of forfeiture being necessary. 
(e)  Any and all such firearms which have become forfeited to the city and are suitable for use by the police department may be so used. 
(f)  All firearms which have become forfeited to the city and are not needed or which are useless or unfit for use by the police department shall be listed and advertised for sale of the total lot to the highest bidder holding a current federal firearm dealers license. 
(g)  Such sales shall be conducted during the months of March and September of each year. Revenue generated by all such sales shall be credited to the police department forfeiture account. 
(Code 1957, § 2-13.3(b)) 
Chapter 16.5 - PROCUREMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4010, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 18, 2012, repealed the former uncodified procurement code of the city and enacted new regulations designated as Chapter 32. In order to group related subject matter together and to conform to the alphabetical sequence of subject matter used in this Code of chapters, the editor has redesignated the provisions added by Ord. No. 4010 as Chapter 16.5. The numbering of specific provisions has been provided by the editor to conform to the format used in this Code. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE AND APPLICATION 

Sec. 16.5-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the city of Riviera Beach Procurement Code (hereinafter, "this chapter") is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in purchasing by the city, to encourage participation by and utilization of locally-owned businesses, to maximize the purchasing value of public funds, and to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(1-101), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-2. - Application. 
    This chapter applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies, services, and construction entered into by the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, unless the parties agree to its application to contracts entered into prior to the effective date. It shall apply to every expenditure of public funds by the city for public purchasing irrespective of the source of the funds. When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance of contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any mandatory applicable federal or state law and regulations. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, or bequest that is otherwise consistent with law. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(1-102), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-3-16.5-10. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 16.5-11. - Definitions. 
    Actual costs. All direct and indirect costs which have been incurred for services rendered, supplies delivered, or construction built, as distinguished from allowable costs only. 
    Architect, engineer and land surveying services. Those professional services within the scope of the practice of architecture, professional engineering, or land surveying, as defined by the laws of the State of Florida. 
    Blind trust. An independently managed trust in which the employee-beneficiary has no management rights and in which the employee-beneficiary is not given notice of alterations in, or other dispositions of, the property subject to the trust. 
    Brand name or equal specification. A specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance, and other salient characteristics needed to meet city requirements, and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
    Brand name specification. A specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers. 
    Business. Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal entity. 
    Change order. Any written purchase order signed and issued by the purchasing agent or designee, directing the contractor to make changes which the "changes" clause of the contract authorized by the purchasing agent to order without the consent of the contractor. 
    Confidential information. Any information which is available to an employee only because of the employee's status as an employee of the city and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request. 
    Construction. The process of building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. The item does not include the routine operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real property. 
    Contract. Any agreement, regardless of style or form, for the procurement of supplies, services, or construction. 
    Contract modification. Any written alternation in specifications, price, quantity, or other provision of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract. 
    Contractor. Any person or business having a contract with the city. 
    Cooperative purchasing. Procurement conducted by, or on behalf of, more than one public procurement unit, or by a public procurement unit with an external procurement activity. 
    Cost analysis. The evaluation of cost data for the purpose of arriving at costs actually incurred or estimates of costs to be incurred, prices to be paid, and costs to be reimbursed. 
    Cost data. Factual information concerning the cost of labor, material, overhead, and other cost elements which are expected to be incurred or which have been actually incurred by the contractor in performing the contract. 
    Cost-reimbursement contract. A contract under which a contractor is reimbursed for costs which are allowable and applicable in accordance with the contract terms and the provisions of this chapter, and a fee or profit, if any. 
    Direct or indirect participation. Involvement through decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or acting in any other advisory capacity. 
    Discrimination. An act or failure to act, intentional or unintentional, the effect of which is that a person, because of race, color, sex, or national origin, has been otherwise subjected to unequal treatment under any activity to be assisted under federal, state, county or city activity. 
    Employee. An individual drawing a salary or wages from the city, whether elected or not; any non-compensated individual performing personal services for the city or for any department, agency, commission, council, board, or for any other entity established by the executive or legislative branch of the city; and any non-compensated individual serving as an elected official of the city. 
    Established Catalogue Price. The price included in a catalogue, price list, schedule, or other form that: 
(1)  Is regularly maintained by a manufacturer or contractor; 
(2)  Is either published or otherwise available for inspection by customers; and 
(3)  States prices at which sales are currently or were last made to a significant number of any category of buyers or buyers constituting the general buying public for the supplies or services involved. 
    Excess supplies. Any nonexpendable supplies having a remaining useful life but which are no longer required by the using department in possession of the supplies. 
    Expendable supplies. All tangible supplies having an original acquisition cost of $100.00 or less per unit and a probable useful life of one year or less. 
    External procurement agency. Any buying organization not located in this state which, if located in this state, would qualify as a public procurement unit. 
    Financial interest. 
(1)  Ownership of any interest or involvement in any relationship from which, or as a result of which, a person within the past year has received, or is presently or in the future entitled to receive, more than $100.00 per year, or its equivalent; 
(2)  Ownership of five percent or more of any property or business; or 
(3)  Holding a position in a business such as officer, director, trustee, partner, employee, or the like, or holding any position of management. 
    Governmental body. Any department, commission, council, board, bureau, committee, institution, legislative body, agency, government corporation, or other establishment or official of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of any government in the United States of America. 
    Grant. The furnishing by a governmental body of assistance, whether financial or otherwise, to any person to support a program authorized by law. It does not include an award whose primary purpose is to procure an end product, whether in the form of supplies, services, or construction; a contract resulting from such an award is not a grant but a procurement contract. 
    Gratuity. A payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, service, or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is received. 
    Immediate family. A spouse, children, parents, brothers, and sisters. 
    Invitation for bids. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids. 
    Local public procurement unit. Any county, municipality, school board, and any other subdivision of the State or agency of any such subdivision; any public authority, educational, health, or other public institution; and to the extent provided by law, any other entity which expends public funds for the procurement of supplies, services, and construction. 
    Local business enterprise. Local business enterprise is a business with a permanent, physical place of business within the corporate city limits and a valid business tax receipt applicable to the required goods, services or construction being procured. Post office boxes or locations at a postal service center shall not be used for the purposes of establishing a physical address. 
    May. Denotes the permissive. 
    Nonexpendable supplies. All tangible supplies having an original acquisition cost of over $100.00 per unit and a probable useful life of more than one year. 
    Person. Any natural or artificial person, business, corporation, union, committee, club, other organization, or group of individuals. 
    Price analysis. The evaluation of price data, without analysis of the separate cost components and profit as in cost analysis, which may assist in arriving at prices to be paid and costs to be reimbursed. 
    Pricing data. Information concerning prices for items substantially similar to those being procured, including offered or proposed selling prices, historical selling prices and current selling prices. The term refers to data relevant to both prime and subcontract prices. 
    Prime contractor. Any person who has a contract with the city to build, alter, repair, improve, or demolish any public structure or building, or perform other improvements of any kind to any public real property. 
    Procurement. The buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise acquiring of any supplies, services, or construction, including all functions that pertain hereto such as the description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
    Public agency of the city. A public entity subject to or created by the city. 
    Public procurement unit. Either a local public procurement unit or a state public procurement unit. 
    Purchasing agency. Any governmental body which is authorized to enter into contracts. 
    Purchasing agent. Any person duly authorized to enter into and administer contracts and make written determinations with respect thereto. The term also includes the position of "director of purchasing." 
    Qualified products list. An approved list of supplies, services, or construction items described by model or catalogue numbers which, prior to competitive solicitation, the city has determined will meet the applicable specification requirements. 
    Regulation. A governmental body's statement, having general or particular applicability and future effect, designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe law or policy, or describing organization, procedure, or practice requirements, which has been lawfully promulgated. 
    Request for proposals. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals. Also referred to as "RFP". 
    Responsible bidder or offeror. A person who has the capability, in all respects, to perform fully the contract requirements, and the tenacity, perseverance, experience, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment, and credit which will assure good faith performance. 
    Responsive bidder. A person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids. 
    Services. The furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance. This term shall not include services provided pursuant to employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements. 
    Shall. Denotes the imperative. 
    Specification. Any description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item. The terms may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply, service, or construction item for delivery. 
    State public procurement unit. The office of the chief procurement officer and any other purchasing agency of the State of Florida. 
    Supplies. All property, including but not limited to equipment, materials, printing, insurance, and leases of real property, excluding land or a permanent interest in land. 
    Surplus supplies. Any nonexpendable supplies no longer having any use to the city, including obsolete supplies, scrap materials, and nonexpendable supplies that have completed their useful life cycle. 
    Using agency. Any department, commission, board, or other agency of the city requiring supplies, services, or construction procured pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(1-201), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-12-16.5-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC ACCESS TO PROCUREMENT INFORMATION 

Sec. 16.5-21. - Public access to procurement information. 
    Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent provided in F.S. ch. 119, and shall be available to the public as provided in such statute. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(1-301), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-22-16.5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICE OF THE PURCHASING AGENT 

Sec. 16.5-41. - Establishment, appointment, and tenure. 
(a)  Appointment. The director of purchasing shall be appointed as purchasing agent by the city manager pursuant to section 2-118 of the city Code. Qualifications for the purchasing agent are contained in the job classification system descriptions. 
(b)  Tenure . The purchasing agent shall be appointed to serve an indefinite term and may be removed under procedures outlined in the personnel polices and general codes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(2-101), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-42. - Authority and duties. 
(a)  Principal public purchasing official . Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of purchasing shall serve as the principal public purchasing official for the city, and shall be responsible for the procurement of supplies, services, and construction in accordance with this chapter, as well as the management and disposal of supplies. The director of purchasing shall have the authority to execute all purchases or dues for purchases which are approved by the city council in the appropriations ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  Duties. In accordance with this chapter, and subject to the supervision of the city manager, the director of purchasing shall: 
(1)  Procure or supervise the procurement of all supplies, services, and construction needed by the city; 
(2)  Sell, trade, or otherwise dispose of surplus supplies; and 
(3)  Establish and maintain programs for specifications development, contract administration and inspection and acceptance, in cooperation with public agencies using the supplies, services, and construction. 
(c)  Regulations and operational procedures. Consistent with this chapter, and with the approval of the city manager, the purchasing agent: 
(1)  Shall have the authority and responsibility to promulgate regulations governing the procurement, management, control and disposal of any and all supplies, services and construction. 
(2)  May adopt operational procedures relating to the execution of the duties of the purchasing agent. These may be set forth in a manual or handbook. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(2-102), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-43. - Delegations to other city officials. 
    The director of purchasing may not delegate authority to purchase certain supplies, services, or construction items to other city officials, unless specifically authorized by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(2-103), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-44. - Unauthorized purchases. 
    Except as herein provided in this chapter, or otherwise provided in the city's general codes, it shall be a violation of this chapter for any city officer, employee, or other person, to order the purchase of, or make any contract for, materials, supplies or services within the purview of this chapter, in the name of or on behalf of the city other than through the director of purchasing or a designee of the director of purchasing, and the city shall not be bound by a purchase order or contract made contrary to any of the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(2-104), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-45-16.5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOURCE SELECTION AND CONTRACT FORMATION 
DIVISION 1. - METHODS OF SOURCE SELECTION 

Sec. 16.5-61. - Competitive Sealed Bidding. 
(a)  Conditions for use. All contracts of the city exceeding $25,000.00 shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as otherwise provided in Sections 16.5-62 (Competitive sealed proposals), 16.5-63 (Contracting for designated professional services), 16.5-64 (Small purchases), 16.5-65 (Sole source procurement), 16.5-66 (Emergency procurements), or 16.5-171 (Public announcement and selection process) of this chapter, or as otherwise approved in public session by city council. 
(b)  Invitation for bids . An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include specifications, all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. 
(c)  Public notice. Public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given not less than 14 calendar days prior to the date set forth in the notice for the opening of bids. Such notice may be given by publication in a subscription newspaper of general circulation in the city or by posting the particulars to the purchasing department web-page. The notice shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening. 
(d)  Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the public notice of the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid and such other relevant information as the director of purchasing deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded. 
(e)  Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alternation or correction, except as authorized in this chapter. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids shall generally set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. 
(f)  Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before the bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bids prior to time set for bid opening. After bid opening, corrections in bids shall be permitted only to the extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if: 
(1)  The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or 
(2)  The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the director of purchasing. 
(g)  Award. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by appropriate written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. In the event the low responsive and responsible bid for a project exceeds available funds, and such bid does not exceed such funds by more than 15 percent, the director of purchasing is authorized, when time or economic considerations preclude solicitation of work of a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the low responsive and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. Any such negotiated adjustment shall be based only upon eliminating independent deductive items specified in the invitation for bids. The city retains the right to reject all bids should negotiations fail. 
(h)  Pre-qualification of bidders. When it is considered impractical to initially prepare a purchase description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-101), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-62. - Competitive sealed proposals. 
(a)  Conditions for use. When the director of purchasing determines in writing that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposals method. 
(b)  Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. 
(c)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided in section 16.5-61(c) (Competitive Sealed bidding, Public Notice). 
(d)  Receipt of proposals. No proposals shall be opened until the time designated in the public notice of the request for proposals. A register of proposals shall be prepared containing the name of each offeror, the number of modifications received, if any, and a description sufficient to identify the item offered. 
(e)  Evaluation factors. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price, if appropriate, and other evaluation factors. 
(f)  Discussion with responsible offerors and revision to proposals. As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be capable of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. 
(g)  Award. Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-102), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-63. - Contracting for designated professional services. 
(a)  General authority. Procurement of professional services of accountants, dentists, physicians, psychologists, and veterinarians, licensed to practice in Florida, shall be by the use of the competitive sealed proposals method set forth in section 16.5-62 (Competitive sealed proposals), except as authorized by section 16.5-65 (Sole source procurement) or section 16.5-66 (Emergency procurement), or except when the fee for professional services is limited to $25,000.00 or less per fiscal year of the city. Procurement of professional services may be authorized by section 16.5-64 (Small purchases). 
(b)  Contracts for legal services. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council may authorize the procurement of legal services by negotiating with a lawyer or lawyers selected or recommended by the city attorney on the basis of experience and skill. Further, as it relates to litigation matters, the city attorney has the authority to negotiate with and hire attorneys necessary to defend the city, subject to terms and conditions as may be outlined in contracts with insurance carriers. 
(c)  Contracts for medical services. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council may authorize the procurement of medical services by negotiating with a medical doctor or doctors selected or recommended by the city manager or designee on the basis of experience and skill. 
(d)  Contracts for other services. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council may authorize the procurement of other services, such as social services, by negotiating with organizations selected or recommended by the city manager or designee on the basis of experience and skill. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-103), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-64. - Small purchases. 
(a)  General. Any contract not exceeding $25,000.00 may be made in accordance with the small purchase procedures authorized in this section. Contracts shall not be divided for the purpose of avoiding the application of these purchasing requirements. 
(b)  Small purchases over $2,500.00. Insofar as it is practical for small purchases in excess of $2,500.00, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations. The process for soliciting quotations requires the requesting department to submit to the director of purchasing a requisition with a sufficient description of the services or goods required, and the purchasing department shall obtain the necessary quotes. Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(c)  Small purchases of $2,500.00 or less. The director of purchasing shall adopt operational procedures for making small purchases of $2,500.00 or less. Such operational procedures shall provide for obtaining adequate and reasonable competition for the supply, service, or construction being purchased. Further, such operational procedures shall require the preparation and maintenance of written records adequate to document the competition obtained, properly account for the funds expended, and facilitate and audit of the small purchase made. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-104), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-65. - Sole source procurement. 
    A contract may be awarded without competition when the director of purchasing determines in writing, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required supply, service, or construction item. The director of purchasing shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public record and shall list each contractor's name, the amount and type of each contract, a listing of the item(s) procured under each contract, and the identification numbers of each contract file. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-105), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-66. - Emergency procurements. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the city manager or designee may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of supplies, services, or construction items when there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety; provided that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. As soon as practicable, a record of each emergency procurement shall be made and shall set forth the contractor's name, the amount and type of the contract, a listing of the item(s) procured under the contract, and the identification numbers of the contract file. 
    Further, during the aftermath of a locally designated disaster emergency as declared under Article II, section 15 of the city's Charter or in carrying out emergency management powers as defined in F.S. § 252.38, as may be amended from time to time, these procurement procedures shall authorize the city manager and the director of purchasing, to contract and make payment for repairs to damaged city facilities for a thirty-day period following the disaster emergency. The city manager will report to the city council on expenditures following the disaster. Further, the city manager and the director of purchasing may utilize the resources of the city's insurance underwriter as part of the city's due diligence process in identifying vendors to complete repairs in the most timely and cost effective manner. These emergency procurement procedures will be in effect until repairs on city-owned facilities are completed. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-106), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-67. - Cancellation of invitations for bids or request for proposals. 
    An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation may be cancelled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is for good cause and in the best interests of the city. The reasons therefore shall be made part of the contract file. Each solicitation issued by the city shall state that the solicitation may be cancelled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in whole or in part for good cause when in the best interest of the city. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. The notice shall identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation and, where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any resolicitation or any future procurement of the same or similar items. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-107), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-68. - Nonbudgeted items. 
(a)  Inventory items. Items which are kept on hand as stock inventory may be purchased by the director of purchasing provided orders of $20,000.00 or more but less than $40,000.00 shall first be approved by the city manager. Orders of $40,000.00 or more shall be approved by the city council. 
(b)  Operating expenditures. Non-budgeted operating items may be purchased by the director of purchasing provided the cost does not exceed $20,000.00. All such items over $20,000.00 must be approved by the city manager. 
(c)  Special-purpose purchases. Items from renewal and replacement funds and from trust funds may be purchased by the director of purchasing provided the requesting department has first received approval from the city manager. 
(d)  Capital expenditures. Non-budgeted capital items must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-108), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-69-16.5-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIES 

Sec. 16.5-81. - Responsibility of bidders and offerors. 
    If a bidder or offeror who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found non-responsible, a written determination of non-responsibility, setting forth the basis of the finding, shall be prepared by the director of purchasing. Grounds for a determination of non-responsibility may include, but are not limited to, the unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to promptly supply information in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility. A copy of the determination shall be sent promptly to the non-responsible bidder or offeror. The final determination shall be made part of the contract file and be made a public record. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-201), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-82. - Cost or pricing data. 
(a)  Required submissions relating to the award of contracts. A prospective contractor shall submit cost or pricing data when the contract is expected to exceed $100,000.00 and is to be awarded by competitive sealed proposals (section 16.5-62), or by sole source procurement authority (section 16.5-65). 
(b)  Exceptions. The submission of cost or pricing data relating to the award of a contract is not required when: 
(1)  The contract price is based on adequate price competition; 
(2)  The contract price is based on established catalogue prices or market prices; 
(3)  The contract price is set by law or regulation; or 
(4)  It is determined in writing by the director of purchasing that the requirements of section 16.5-82(a) above may be waived, and the determination states the reasons for such waiver. 
(c)  Required submissions relating to change orders or contract modifications. A contractor shall submit cost or pricing data prior to the pricing or any change order or contract modification, including adjustments to contracts awarded by competitive sealed bidding, whether or not cost or pricing data was required in connection with the initial pricing of the contract, when the change or modification involves aggregate increases or aggregate decreases in costs plus applicable profits that are expected to exceed ten percent of the initial contract. 
(d)  Exceptions. The submission of cost or pricing data relating to the pricing of a change order or contract modification is not required when: 
(1)  Unrelated and separately priced adjustments for which cost or pricing data would not be required are consolidated for administrative convenience; or 
(2)  It is determined in writing by the director of purchasing that the requirements of subsection 16.5-82(c) above may be waived, and the determination states the reasons for such waiver. 
(e)  Certification required. A contractor, actual or prospective, required to submit cost or pricing data in accordance with this section, shall certify that the cost or pricing data submitted is accurate, complete, and current as of a mutually specified date prior to the award of the contract or the pricing of the change order or contract modification. 
(f)  Price adjustment provision required. Any contract award, change order, or contract modification under which the submission and certification of cost or pricing data are required shall contain a provision stating that the price to the city, including profit or fee, shall be adjusted to exclude any significant sums by which the city finds that such price was increased because the contractor-furnished cost or pricing data was inaccurate, incomplete, or not current. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-202), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-83. - Cost or price analysis. 
    A cost analysis or a price analysis, as appropriate, shall be conducted prior to award of the contract other than one awarded under section 16.5-61 (Competitive sealed bidding). A written record of such cost analysis or price analysis shall be made a part of the contract file. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-203), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-84. - Bid, performance and payment bonds on supply or service contracts. 
    Bid, performance and payment bonds or other security may be requested for supply contracts or service contracts as the purchasing agent or head of a using agency deems advisable to protect the city's interests. Any such bonding requirements shall be set forth in the solicitation. Bid, performance or payment bonds shall not be used as a substitute for a determination of a bidder or offeror's responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-204), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-85-16.5-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TYPES OF CONTRACTS AND CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 16.5-91. - Types of contract. 
(a)  General authority. Subject to the limitations of this section, any type of contract which is appropriate to the procurement and which will promote the best interests of the city may be used, provided that the use of a cost-plus-percentage-of-cost contract is prohibited. A cost reimbursement contract may be used only when a determination is made in writing that such contract is likely to be less costly to the city than any other type or that it is impractical to obtain the supply, service, or construction item required except under such a contract. 
(b)  Multi-term contracts. 
(1)  Specified period. Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for supplies or services may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interest of the city, provided the term of the contract and conditions or renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds therefore in the budget of the city, as determined by the city council. 
(2)  Determination prior to use. Prior to the utilization of a multi-term contract, it shall be determined in writing: 
a.  That estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are reasonably firm and continuing; and 
b.  That multi-year contracts for continuing services for engineering, architectural, and landscape architectural services, shall contain a non-exclusivity clause that permits the city to utilize, at its option, either the services of the person, business, or organization holding a multi-year continuing service contract or to solicit requests for proposals on a project basis. 
(3)  Cancellation due to unavailability of funds in succeeding fiscal periods. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be cancelled and the contractor shall be reimbursed for the reasonable value of any nonrecurring costs incurred but not amortized in the price of the supplies or services delivered under the contract. The cost of cancellation may be paid from any appropriations available for such purposes. 
(c)  Multiple source contracting. 
(1)  General. A multiple source award is an award of an indefinite quantity contract for one or more similar supplies or services to more than one bidder or offeror. The obligation to order the city's actual requirements is limited by the Uniform Commercial Code. 
(2)  Limitations on use. A multiple source award may be made when award to two or more bidders or offerors for similar products is necessary for adequate delivery, service, or product compatibility. Any multiple source award shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section 16.5-61 (Competitive sealed proposals), section 16.5-64 (Small purchases), or section 16.5-66 (Emergency procurements), as applicable. Multiple source awards shall not be made when a single award will meet the city's needs without sacrifice of economy or service, unless Local business and SBE conditions are involved. Awards shall not be made for the purpose of dividing the business, making available product or supplier selection to allow for user preference unrelated to utility or economy, or avoiding the resolution of tie bids. Any such awards shall be limited to the least number of suppliers necessary to meet the valid requirements. 
(3)  Contract and solicitation provisions. All eligible users of the contract shall be named in the solicitation, and the actual requirements of such users that can be met under the contract shall be obtained in accordance with the contract, provided that: 
a.  The city shall reserve the right to take bids separately if a particular quantity requirement arises which exceeds its normal requirement or an amount specified in the contract; and 
b.  The city shall reserve the right to take bids separately if the director of purchasing approves a finding that the supply or service available under the contract will not meet a nonrecurring special need of the city. 
(4)  Intent to use. If a multiple source award is anticipated prior to issuing a solicitation, the city shall reserve the right to make such an award and the criteria for award shall be stated in the solicitation. 
(5)  Determination required. The director of purchasing shall make a written determination setting forth the reasons for a multiple source award, which shall be made a part of the contract file. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-301), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-92. - Contract clauses and their administration. 
(a)  Contract clauses. All city contracts for supplies, services, and construction shall include provisions necessary to define the responsibilities and rights of the parties to the contract. The city manager or designee, after consultation with the city attorney, may include clauses appropriate for supply, service, or construction contracts regarding: 
(1)  The unilateral right of the city to order, in writing, changes in the work within the scope of the contract; 
(2)  The unilateral right of the city to order, in writing, temporary stopping of the work or delaying performance that does not alter the scope of the contract; 
(3)  Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in contract and actual quantities; 
(4)  Defective pricing; 
(5)  Time of performance and liquidated damages; 
(6)  Specified excuses for delay or nonperformance; 
(7)  Termination of the contract for default; 
(8)  Termination of the contract in whole or in part for the convenience of the city; 
(9)  Suspension of work on a construction project ordered by the city; 
(10)  Site conditions differing from those indicated in the contract, or ordinarily encountered, except that a differing site conditions clause need not be included in a contract; 
a.  When the contract is negotiated; 
b.  When the contractor provides the site or design; or 
c.  When the parties have otherwise agreed with respect to the risk of differing site conditions; 
(11)  Anti-discrimination assurance from the contractor. 
(b)  Price adjustments. 
(1)  Adjustments in price resulting from the use of contract clauses required by subsection (a) of this section shall be computed in one or more of the following ways: 
a.  By agreement on a fixed price adjustment before commencement of the pertinent performance or as soon thereafter as practicable; 
b.  By the unit prices specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon; 
c.  By the costs attributable to the events or situations under such clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon; 
d.  In such other manner as the contracting parties may mutually agree; or 
e.  In the absence of agreement by the parties, by a unilateral determination by the city of the costs attributable to the events or situations under such clauses with adjustment of profit or fee as computed by the city, as accounted for in accordance with the city cost accounting principles regulations, or lacking applicable city regulations in accordance with generally accepted cost accounting principles, and subject to the provisions of Article IX (Appeals and Remedies). 
(2)  A contractor shall be required to submit cost or pricing data if any adjustment in contract price is subject to the provisions of section 16.5-82 (Cost or pricing data). 
(c)  Standard clauses and their modification. The city manager or designee, after consultation with the city attorney, may establish standard contract clauses for use in city contracts. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-302), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-93. - Contract administration. 
    A contract administration system designed to insure that a contract is performing in accordance with the solicitation under which the contract was awarded, and the terms and conditions of the contract, should be maintained. For every contract a city contact person will be designated. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-303), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-94. - Cost reimbursement provisions. 
    If a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, then reimbursement to contractors for incurred costs or cost estimates included in negotiated prices may be subject to federal cost principles. Individual federal agencies may have requirements applicable to their particular assistance programs. Lacking applicable federal regulations, individual federal agency regulations, or city regulations, cost reimbursement shall be in accordance with generally accepted cost accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-304), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-95. - Approval of accounting system. 
    Except with respect to firm fixed-price contracts, no contract type shall be used unless it has been determined in writing by the director of purchasing that: 
(1)  The proposed contractor's accounting system will permit timely development of all necessary cost data in the form required by the specified contract type contemplated; and 
(2)  The proposed contractor's accounting system is adequate to allocate costs in accordance with generally accepted cost accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-305), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-96. - Right to inspect plant. 
    The city may, at reasonable times, inspect any part of the plant, place of business, or worksite of a contractor or subcontractor which is pertinent to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-306), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-97. - Right to audit records. 
(a)  Audit of cost or pricing data. The city may, at reasonable times and places, audit the books and records of any contractor who has submitted cost or pricing data pursuant to section 16.5-82 (Cost or pricing data) to the extent that such books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to such cost or pricing data. Any person who receives a contract, change order, or contract modification for which cost or pricing data is required, shall maintain such books, documents, papers, and records that are pertinent to such cost or pricing data for three years from the date of the final payment under the contract. 
(b)  Contract audit. The city shall be entitled to audit the books and records of a contractor, or a subcontractor at any tier, under any negotiated contract or subcontract other than a firm fixed-price contract to the extent that such books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to the performance of such contract or subcontract. Such books and records shall be maintained by the contractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the prime contract and by the subcontractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the subcontract. 
(c)  Contractor records. If a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, then the contract shall include provisions: 
(1)  Requiring the contractor, and subcontractors at any tier, to maintain for three years from the date of final payment under the contract all books, documents, papers, and records pertinent to the contract; and 
(2)  Requiring the contractor, and subcontractor at any tier, to provide to the city, the federal grantor agency, the Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their duly authorized representatives access to such books, documents, papers, and records for the purpose of examining, auditing, and copying them. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-307), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-98. - Reporting of anticompetitive practices. 
    When for any reason collusion or other anti-competitive practices are suspected among any bidders or offerors, a notice of the relevant facts shall be transmitted by the complainant to the state attorney in Palm Beach County and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-308), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-99. - City procurement records. 
    All determinations and other written records pertaining to the solicitation, award, or performance of a contract shall be maintained for the city in a contract file by the director of purchasing, and shall be retained and disposed of in accordance with records retention guidelines and schedules as required by Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-309), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-100. - Patents. 
    If a contract involving research and development, experimental, or demonstration work is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from another governmental agency, then the contract shall include provisions: 
(1)  Giving notice to the contractor of the applicable grantor agency requirements and regulations concerning reporting of, and rights to, any discovery or invention arising out of the contract; and 
(2)  Requiring the contractor to include a similar provision in all subcontracts involving research and development, experimental, or demonstration work. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-310), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-101. - Notice of federal public policy requirements. 
    If the contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from another governmental agency, and the contract is subject to one or more federal public policy requirements, such as, for example, equal employment opportunity, fair labor standards, energy conservation, environmental protection, or other similar socio-economic programs, then the director of purchasing should include contract provisions giving the contractor notice of these requirements and, where appropriate, including in those contract provisions the requirement that the contractor give a similar notice to all of its subcontractors, material men, etc. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(3-311), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-102-16.5-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 16.5-121. - Maximum practicable competition. 
    All specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the city's needs, and shall not be unduly restrictive. The policy enunciated in this Section applies to all specifications, including, but not limited to, those prepared for the city by architects, engineers, designers and draftsmen. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(4-101), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-122. - Qualified products list. 
(a)  Use. A qualified products list may be developed by the director of purchasing when testing or examination of the supplies or construction items prior to issuance of the solicitation is desirable or necessary in order to best satisfy the city's requirements. 
(b)  Comments. Prior to final approval of the proposed specifications for a qualified products list item, the director of purchasing shall provide the using department, and a reasonable number of manufacturers or suppliers as the director of purchasing deems appropriate, an opportunity to comment on the draft of the proposed specifications. 
(c)  Solicitation. When developing a qualified products list, a representative group of potential suppliers should be solicited in writing to submit products for testing and examination to determine acceptability for inclusion on a qualified products list. Any potential supplier, even though not solicited, may offer its products for consideration. 
(d)  Testing. Inclusion on a qualified products list shall be based on results of tests or examinations conducted in accordance with prior published requirements. 
(e)  Final approval, revisions and cancellation. The final approval of, revisions to and cancellation of qualified products lists shall be made only upon approval of the director of purchasing or designee. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(4-102), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-123. - Brand name specification. 
(a)  Use. Brand name or equal specifications may be used when the purchasing agent determines in writing that: 
(1)  No other design or performance specification or qualified products list is available; 
(2)  Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase description; 
(3)  The nature of the product or the city's requirements makes use of a brand name or equal specification suitable for the procurement; 
(4)  Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the city's best interests. 
(b)  Designation of several brand names. Brand name or equal specifications shall seek to designate three, or as many different brands as are practicable, as "or equal" references and shall further state that substantially equivalent products to those designated will be considered for award. 
(c)  Required characteristics. Unless the director of purchasing determines in writing that the essential characteristics of the brand names included in the specifications are commonly known in the industry or trade, brand name or equal specifications shall include a description of the particular design, functional, or performance characteristics which are required. 
(d)  Nonrestrictive use of brand name of equal specifications. Where a brand name or equal specification is used in solicitation, the solicitation shall contain explanatory language that the use of a brand name is for the purpose of describing the standard of quality, performance, and characteristics desired and is not intended to limit or restrict competition. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(4-103), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-124. - Brand name specification determination. 
(a)  Use. Because the use of a brand name specification is restrictive of product competition, it may be used only when the director of purchasing makes a written determination that only the identified brand name item or items will satisfy the city's needs. 
(b)  Competition. The director of purchasing shall seek to identify sources from which the designated brand name items or items can be obtained and shall solicit such sources to achieve whatever degree of price competition is practicable. If only one source can supply the requirement, the procurement shall be made under section 16.5-5 (Sole source procurement). 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(4-104), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-125. - Energy conservation. 
    If a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from another governmental agency, then the city's solicitation shall seek to promote energy conservation and shall comply with any mandatory standards and policies which are contained in the state energy conservation plan issued in compliance with the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (Public Law 94-163). 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(4-105), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-126-16.5-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROCUREMENT OF CONSTRUCTION, ARCHITECT-ENGINEER AND LAND SURVEYING SERVICES 
DIVISION 1. - MANAGEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTING 

Sec. 16.5-141. - Responsibility for selection of methods of construction contracting management. 
    The city manager or designee shall have discretion to select the appropriate method of construction contracting management for a particular project. In determining which method to use, the director of purchasing shall consider the city's requirements, its resources, and the potential contractor's capabilities. The director of purchasing shall execute and include in the contract file a written statement setting forth the facts which led to the selection of a particular method of construction contracting management for each project. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(5-101), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-142-16.5-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BID SECURITY AND PERFORMANCE BONDS 

Sec. 16.5-151. - Bid security. 
(a)  Requirement for bid security. Bid security shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts when the price is estimated by the director of purchasing to exceed $100,000.00. Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in the State, or the equivalent in case, or otherwise supplied in a form satisfactory to the city. Nothing herein shall prevent the requirement of such bonds on construction contracts under $100,000.00 when the circumstances warrant in the opinion of the city manager. 
(b)  Amount of bid security. Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least five percent of the amount of the bid. 
(c)  Rejection of bids for noncompliance with bid security requirements. When the invitation for bids requires bid security, a bid shall be rejected in the event of non-compliance unless it is determined that the bid fails to comply only in a non-substantial manner with the security requirement. 
(d)  Withdrawal of Bids. If a bidder is permitted to withdraw its bid before award as provided in subsection 16.5-61(f)(2) (Competitive sealed bidding; Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards), no action shall be taken against the bidder or the bid security. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(5-201), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-152. - Contract performance and payment bonds. 
(a)  When required-Amounts. When a construction contract is awarded in excess of $100,000.00, the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the city and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract; 
(1)  Performance bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety insurer authorized to do business in the State as a surety, in an amount equal to 100% of the price specified in the contract, conditioned that the contractor perform the contract in the time and manner prescribed in the contract; and 
(2)  A payment bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety insurer authorized to do business in the state as a surety, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract, conditioned that the contractor promptly make payments to all persons supplying labor, materials of supplies used directly or indirectly in the performance of the work provided for in the contract, and who are claimants as defined in F.S. § 255.05(1). 
(b)  Reduction of bond amounts. The city manager is authorized to reduce the amount of performance and payment bonds to 50 percent of the contract price for each bond when a written determination is made that it is in the best interests of the city to do so. 
(c)  Authority to requirement additional bonds. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the city to require a performance bond or other security in addition to those bonds, or in circumstances other than specified in subsection (a) of this Section 16.5-152. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(5-202), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-153. - Copies of bond forms. 
    Any person may request and obtain from the city a certified copy of a bond upon payment of the cost of reproduction of the bond and postage, if any. A certified copy of a bond shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, execution, and delivery of the original. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(5-203), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-154-16.5-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY 

Sec. 16.5-161. - Fiscal responsibility. 
    Every contract modification, change order, or contract price adjustment in excess of ten percent under a construction contract with the city shall be subject to prior approval by the city council after receiving a report as to the effect of the contract modification, change order, or contract price adjustment on the total project budget or the total contract budget. Contract modifications, change orders, or contract price adjustments totaling less than ten percent cumulatively may be processed subject to the approval of the city manager without prior approval of city council; however, each successive cumulative $15,000.00 increment shall be subject to the approval of city council, prior to the next successive cumulative $20,000.00 increment being approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(5-301), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-162-16.5-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECTURAL, ENGINEERING, LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURAL AND LAND SURVEYING SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Acquisition of professional architectural, engineering, landscape architectural, or surveying and mapping services, etc., F.S. § 287.055. 

Sec. 16.5-171. - Public announcement, competitive selection and negotiation. 
(a)  Public announcement. It is the policy of the city to publicly announce all requirements for professional architectural, engineering, landscape architectural, and land surveying services and to negotiate such contracts on the basis of demonstrated competence and qualifications at fair and reasonable prices. In the procurement of such services, the director of purchasing may require firms to submit a statement of qualifications, performance data and a quotation of their proposed fees for the performance of professional services. 
(1)  Scope of project requirements. No less than 14 days prior to the anticipated mailing date and advertising date of the public announcement for professional services, the using department or agency for which the professional services are requested shall submit to the director of purchasing written project requirements indicating the nature and scope of the professional services needed by the using department or agency including but not limited to the following: 
a.  The general purpose of the service study; 
b.  The objectives of the study or service; 
c.  Estimated period of time needed for the service of the study; 
d.  The estimated cost of the service or study; 
e.  Whether the proposed study or service would or would not duplicate any prior or existing study or service; 
f.  List of current contracts or prior services or studies which are related to the proposed study or service; and 
g.  The desired qualifications, listed in order of importance, of the person or firm applicable to the scope and nature of the services requested. 
(2)  Review of project requirements. The city manager or designee shall review the scope of project requirements and, if revisions of project requirements may be warranted to best meet the needs of the city, copies of the project requirements shall be submitted to the user department and the director of purchasing for their consideration of revision prior to public distribution of the project requirements. 
(3)  Distribution of project requirements. The director of purchasing shall distribute the written project requirements to all persons on the mailing list, if one exists, who have indicated an interest in being considered for the performance of such professional services and to any other additional persons as the director of purchasing or using agency deems desirable. The project requirements shall be accompanied by an invitation to such persons to submit an indication of interest in performing the required services, and by notification of a reasonable period of time within which such indications of interest will be accepted, which period shall not be less than 14 days from the date of distribution. The director of purchasing shall also publish once in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city and Palm Beach County, at least 14 days prior to the closing date for the acceptance of indications of interest, a general notice of the project requirements and an invitation to submit indications of interest. 
(4)  Re-solicitation. If the city receives indications of interest from less than three persons, it may re-solicit indications of interest from all persons previously solicited and from such additional persons as it may deem advisable. Thereafter, it may proceed to consider those persons responding to the solicitation or re-solicitation. 
(5)  Modifications prohibited. After the publicized submission time and date, indications of interest shall not be modified or allowed to be modified in any manner except for correction of clerical errors or other similar minor irregularities as may be allowed prior to the selection of those best qualified to be formally interviewed. 
(6)  Reuse of existing plans. There shall be no public notice requirement or utilization of the selection process as provided in this section for projects in which the city is able to reuse existing plans from a prior project. However, public notice of any plans which are intended to be reused at some future time shall contain a statement which provides that the plans are subject to reuse. 
(7)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to a professional service contract for a project whose basic construction cost is estimated to be below the threshold established in F.S. §§ 287.055 and 287.017, or for a planning or study activity when the fee for professional services is below the applicable threshold, or in the cases of valid public emergency so certified by the city manager. This section shall not apply to any requirement for professional services if a continuing contract to provide such services is in effect and a determination is made to utilize the continuing contract to obtain such services. 
(b)  Selection. Depending on the expected complexity and expense of the professional services to be contracted, the city manager or designee shall determine whether a selection committee will best serve the needs of the city. 
(c)  Evaluation procedures. 
(1)  Membership. Prior to the award of a contract for the performance of professional services, the city manager may appoint an evaluation committee. The committee shall consist of one representative from the finance department and at least one representative from the using department for which the professional services will be performed. Other members may be appointed to the committee by the city manager. 
(2)  Approval and distribution of project requirements. 
a.  The using department shall submit to the city manager written project requirements indicating the nature and scope of the professional services needed by the using department and shall also submit a certification of information required by the committee, including the following: 
1.  The general purpose of the service or study. 
2.  The objectives of the study or service. 
3.  The estimated period of time needed for the service or the study. 
4.  The estimated cost of the services or study. 
5.  Whether the proposed study or service would or would not duplicate a prior or existing study or service. 
6.  List of current contracts or prior services or studies which are related to the proposed study or service. 
Upon receipt of the scope and the certification, the city manager shall immediately send copies to the evaluation committee. The evaluation committee shall then review the scope and approve or disapprove the scope of services. 
b.  The evaluation committee or city manager's designee shall have the prepared written project requirements indicating the nature and scope of professional services needed by a using department distributed by the purchasing department to the persons on the mailing list, if one exists, who have indicated an interest in being considered for the performance of the professional services for using agencies and to other additional persons as the evaluation committee or designee deems desirable. The project requirements shall be accompanied by an invitation to the persons to submit an indication of interest in performing the required services and by notification of a reasonable period of time within which the indications of interest will be accepted, which period shall also be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city (at least ten days prior to the closing date for the acceptance of indications of interest) a general notice of the project requirements and an invitation to submit indications of interest. 
(3)  Work description. If the evaluation committee or designee determines that it is unable to define with reasonable precision the nature and scope of the professional services needed by the using agency, it shall also require interested persons to submit a detailed description of the work to be performed in order to meet the general project requirements. 
(4)  Certain prior contractees disqualified. A person who has contracted with a city department for the performance of professional services for the purpose of defining with reasonable precision the nature and scope of other professional services needed by the department may, in the discretion of the evaluation committee, be disqualified from the award of a contract to perform the other professional services which the person or entity was previously contracted by the city to define. 
(5)  Quotation of fees. The evaluation committee or designee shall also require interested persons to submit a quotation of their proposed fees for the performance of the professional services, unless the interested persons are prohibited by law from doing so. 
(6)  Re-solicitation. If the evaluation committee or designee receives indications of interest from less than three persons, it may re-solicit indications of interest from persons previously solicited and from the additional persons as it may deem advisable. Thereafter, it may proceed to consider those persons responding to the solicitation or re-solicitation. 
(7)  Modifications prohibited. Once written indications of interest have been accepted by the evaluation committee or designee, they shall not be modified or allowed to be modified subsequently in any manner whatsoever except for correction of clerical errors or other similar minor irregularities as may be allowed by the evaluation committee or designee prior to making its recommendations as to interest, availability and qualifications to an awarding authority. 
(d)  Selection of persons qualified, interested and available. 
(1)  From among those persons evidencing an interest in performing the services, the evaluation committee or designee shall: 
a.  Prepare an alphabetical list of those persons determined to be qualified, interested and available, and 
b.  Designate three persons on the alphabetical list considered by the evaluation committee or designee to be best qualified to perform the work required. 
(2)  The best qualified selection shall be based upon the evaluation committee's or designee's ability to differentiate qualifications applicable to the scope and nature of the services to be performed. 
(3)  The evaluation committee or designee shall determine qualifications, interest and availability by reviewing the written responses received that express an interest in performing the services. When required by F.S. § 287.055 thresholds, an evaluation committee shall conduct formal interviews of selected respondents that are determined to be best qualified based upon the evaluation of written responses. The determinations shall be based upon the following considerations: 
a.  Competence, including technical education and training, experience in the kind of project to be undertaken, availability of adequate personnel, equipment and facilities, the extent of repeat business of the persons and, where applicable, the relationship of construction cost estimated by the person to actual costs on previous projects. 
b.  Current work load. 
c.  Financial responsibility. 
d.  Ability to observe and advise whether plans and specifications are being complied with, where applicable. 
e.  Past record of professional accomplishments. 
f.  Proximity to the project involved. 
g.  Past record of performance for using agencies. 
h.  Ability to design and approach and work plan to meet the project requirements, where applicable. 
i.  Quotation of rates, fees or charges and other detailed cost-proposal or cost-breakdown information. 
j.  The volume of current and prior work performed for using agencies shall be considered a minus factor. 
(4)  The absence of professional experience in a specialized area shall not inhibit proper consideration of otherwise qualified, competent persons. 
(5)  In determining the best qualified persons, the evaluation committee shall give preference to persons having local places of business where no other differentiation in qualifications can be made. 
(6)  In determining the best qualified persons, the evaluation committee shall give preference to persons that are local businesses. 
(7)  Minutes. The evaluation committee shall keep official minutes of its meetings, which shall be maintained on file in the respective using department as a permanent public record. 
(8)  Public notice of meetings. The evaluation committee shall cause a written notice of time, place and purpose of each of its meetings to be filed as a public record with the city clerk's office at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. 
(e)  Award of contract; independent agencies. In cases where an independent agency is directed by law to award its respective contracts, the evaluation committee shall forward to the independent agency the alphabetical list of persons qualified, interested and available and its recommendation regarding the three persons considered best qualified. After receipt of the list and recommendation, the independent department shall select three persons in order of preference based on most qualified to perform the services and shall engage in negotiation according to this order, beginning with the first best qualified, proceeding to commence negotiation with the second best qualified person or, failing accord with the second most qualified and terminating the negotiation, proceeding to undertake the negotiation with the third best qualified person. Thereafter, the selection and negotiation procedure shall be continued with additional selected persons in order of best qualified until a mutual agreement is reached. No independent agency which is required by law to utilize the services of the purchasing department shall award a contract for professional services until after receipt of the recommendations of the evaluation committee. 
(f)  Other cases. In those cases to which F.S. ch. 287 does not apply, the evaluation committee or designee shall forward to the requesting department an alphabetical list of persons qualified, interested and available and its recommendation regarding the three persons considered best qualified in order of first, second and third best qualified. The city manager shall approve or disapprove the recommendation of the evaluation committee. Upon approval, the evaluation committee or designee shall negotiate with the first most qualified person and recommend to the city manager, for approval, mutually satisfactory terms of employment, including the professional fee to be charged. If no mutual agreement is approved by the city manager, the city manager shall terminate negotiations with the person by written notice and negotiation shall commence with the second most qualified person. Upon failing accord and terminating negotiation with the second most qualified person, negotiations shall be commenced with the third most qualified person. This selection and negotiation procedure shall be continued with additional selected persons in order of best qualified until a mutual agreement is approved by the city manager. The city council may then award a contract for the performance of the required professional services to the person with whom a mutual agreement is reached. If the city manager disapproves the recommendation of the evaluation committee or designee as to the ranking of the three best qualified, then the selection process may continue as to additional firms in the order of their competence and qualifications until an agreement is reached or it is determined that no agreement will be reached. 
(g)  Truth-in-negotiation certificate required for contracts in excess of $50,000.00 . For all lump sum or cost-plus-a-fixed-fee professional service contracts over $50,000 the person receiving the award shall execute a truth-in-negotiation certificate stating that wage rates and other factual unit costs supporting the compensation are accurate, complete and current at the time of contracting. A professional service contract under which a certificate is required shall contain a provision that the contract price shall be adjusted to exclude any significant sums where the agency determines the contract price was increased due to inaccurate, incomplete or non-current wage rates and other factual unit costs. Contract adjustments shall be made within one year following the end of the contract. 
(h)  Contingent fees prohibited. Each contract entered into for professional services shall contain a prohibition against contingent fees as follows: The architect, registered land surveyor, professional engineer or other person providing professional services (as applicable) warrants that he has not employed or retained a company or person, other than a bona fide employee working solely for the architect, registered land surveyor, professional engineer or other person providing professional services for any fee, commission, percentage, gift or any other consideration, contingent upon or resulting from the award or making of this agreement. 
    For the breach or violation of this provision, the city or independent department shall have the right to terminate the agreement without liability and, in its discretion, to deduct from the contract price, or otherwise recover the full amount of the fee, commission, percentage, gift or consideration. 
(i)  Continuing contracts. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit continuing contracts for professional services between a firm and the city. 
(j)  Exemptions. The provisions of this division shall not apply to the awarding of a contract: 
(1)  For the performance of professional services for a professional fee, exclusive of reimbursed expenses, of less than the thresholds specified now or hereafter in F.S. ch. 287. 
(2)  With another local, state or federal governmental agency for the performance of professional services. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(401), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-172-16.5-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION 

Sec. 16.5-191. - Authority to debar or suspend. 
    After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the director of purchasing, after consulting with the city attorney, is authorized to debar a person for cause from consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall be for a period of not more than three years. After consultation with the city attorney, the director of purchasing is authorized to suspend a person from consideration for award of contract if there is probable cause to believe that the person has engaged in any activity which might lead to debarment. The suspension shall be for a period not to exceed three months. The causes for debarment include: 
(1)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontractor; 
(2)  Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects responsibility as a city contractor; 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals; 
(4)  Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the purchasing agent to be so serious as to justify debarment action: 
a.  Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or 
b.  A record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with terms of one or more contracts; provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment; 
(5)  Violation of the ethical standards set forth in Article XI (Ethics in Public Contracting); and 
(6)  Any other cause the Director of Purchasing determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a city contractor, including debarment by another governmental entity for any cause listed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(6-101), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-192. - Decision to debar or suspend. 
    The director of purchasing shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform the debarred or suspended person involved of its rights concerning judicial or administrative review. A copy of the decision shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred or suspended person. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(6-102), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-193. - Finality of decision. 
    A decision to debar or suspend shall be final and conclusive, unless the debarred or suspended person within ten days after receipt of the decision files a written notice of appeal to the city council, in which event the decision shall be deemed final and conclusive if and when the decision is affirmed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(6-103), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-194-16.5-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SUPPLY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 16.5-211. - General supervision. 
    The director of purchasing or designee shall have general supervision of the management of supplies during their entire life cycle. The objectives of supply management include preventing waste, continuing utilization of supplies, and obtaining a fair return of value upon disposal of supplies. In order to achieve these objectives, sound inspection, testing, warehousing, and inventory practices are called for, and effective means of transferring and disposing of property shall be utilized. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(7-101), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-212. - Quality assurance, inspection, and testing. 
    The director of purchasing or designee shall take such steps as are deemed desirable to ascertain or verify that supplies, services, or construction items procured by the city conform to specifications. In performing this duty, the purchasing agent may establish inspection and testing facilities, enter into arrangements for the joint or cooperative use of laboratories and inspection and testing facilities, and contract with others for inspection or testing facilities, and contract with others for inspection or testing work as needed. The purchasing agent may delegate authority for inspection and testing to using departments. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(7-102), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-213. - Inventory management. 
    The director of purchasing or designee shall have general supervision of all inventories of tangible personal property, whether warehoused or in use, belonging to the city or any of its departments. This responsibility shall not, however, relieve any department of accountability for tangible personal property and other supplies under its control. All warehouses and similar storage areas shall be inventoried at least annually. The director of purchasing or designee shall have general supervision of the determination of appropriate stock levels and economic order quantities for all inventories belonging to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(7-103), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-214. - Warehousing and storage. 
    The director of purchasing or designee shall exercise general supervision of any receiving, storage, and distribution facilities and services maintained and operated by the city or any of its agencies. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(7-104), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-215. - Authorization to dispose of supplies. 
    No using department shall transfer, sell, trade-in, or otherwise dispose of supplies owned by the city without written authorization of the director of purchasing or designee. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(7-105), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-216. - Report of supplies. 
    Using departments shall notify the director of purchasing or designee, on such forms and at such times as the director of purchasing may prescribe, of all excess supplies. In so doing, a using department may suggest a dollar value per item or per lot that it desires to receive from any transfer or disposition of such excess supplies, but the suggestion shall not constitute the minimum sale or transfer amount. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(7-106), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-217. - Transfer of excess and surplus supplies. 
    Insofar as is feasible and practical, the director of purchasing shall transfer excess supplies to other city departments. The price of the supply transferred shall be the fair market price based, where possible, on previous sales of similar products in the open market, or on an appraised value, and shall be one mutually agreed upon between the owning agency and the recipient, and approved by the director of purchasing. If agreement cannot be reached, the director of purchasing shall establish the price. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(7-107), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-218. - Disposition of surplus supplies. 
    Surplus supplies shall be offered through competitive sealed bids, public auction, or posted prices. It is recognized, however, that some types and classes of items can be sold or disposed of more readily and advantageously by other means, including barter. In such cases, and also where the nature of the supply or unusual circumstances call for its sales to be restricted or controlled, the director of purchasing may employ such other means, including appraisal, provided such officer makes a written determination that such procedure is advantageous to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(7-108), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-219. - Auctions. 
    When authorized by the director of purchasing, city employees or an experienced professional auctioneer may be used to cry the sale and assist in the preparation of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(7-109), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-220. - Posted prices. 
    Surplus supplies may be sold at posted prices as determined by the director of purchasing when such prices are based on fair value and the sale is conducted pursuant to written procedures established by the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(7-110), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-221. - Trade-in. 
    Surplus supplies may be traded-in only when the director of purchasing determines the trade-in value is expected to exceed the value estimated to be obtained through the sale or other disposition of such supplies. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(7-111), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-222-16.5-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - APPEALS AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 16.5-241. - Bid protests. 
(a)  Right to protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the city council. Protestors shall seek resolution of their complaints initially with the director of purchasing, and secondly with the city manager prior to protesting to the city council. A protest with respect to an invitation for bids or request for proposals shall be submitted in writing prior to the opening of bids or the closing date of proposals, unless the aggrieved person did not know and could not have been reasonably expected to know of the facts giving rise to such protest prior to bid opening or the closing date for proposals. The protest shall be submitted within five calendar days after such aggrieved person knows or could have reasonably been expected to know of the facts giving rise thereto. 
(b)  Stay of procurements during protests. In the event of a timely protest under subsection (a) of this section, the director of purchasing shall not proceed further with the solicitation or award of the contract until all administrative remedies have been exhausted or until the city manager makes a written determination that the award of a contract without delay is necessary to protect substantial interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(8-101), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-242. - Contract claims. 
(a)  Decision of the city manager. All claims by a contractor against the city relating to a contract, except bid protests, shall be submitted in writing to the city manager or designee for a decision. The contractor may request a conference on the claim. Claims include, without limitation, disputes arising under a contract, and those based upon breach of contract, mistake, misrepresentation, or other cause for contract modification or rescission. 
(b)  Notice to the Contractor of the city manager's decision. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be promptly issued in writing, and shall be immediately mailed or otherwise furnished to the contractor. The decision shall state the reasons for the decision reached, and shall inform the contractor of its appeal rights under this section. 
(c)  Finality of city manager's decision; contractor's right to appeal. The city manager's decision shall be final and conclusive unless, within ten calendar days from the date of receipt of the decision, the contractor files a written notice of appeal with the city council, in which event the decision shall be deemed final and conclusive if and when the decision is affirmed by the city council. 
(d)  Failure to render timely decision. If the city manager does not issue a written decision regarding any contract controversy within 15 work days after receipt of a written request for a final decision, or within such longer period as may be agreed upon between the parties, then the aggrieved party may proceed as if an adverse decision has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(8-102), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-243. - Authority of the director of purchasing to settle bid protests and contract claims. 
    The director of purchasing may be authorized to settle any protest regarding the solicitation or award of a city contract, or any claim arising out of the performance of a city contract, prior to an appeal to the city manager, city council or the commencement of an action in a court of competent jurisdiction, but may not settle any such protest or claim for consideration exceeding $5,000.00 in value without the prior approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(8-103), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-244. - Remedies for solicitations or awards in violation of law. 
(a)  Prior to bid opening or closing date for receipt of proposals. If prior to the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the director of purchasing, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that a solicitation is in violation of federal, state, or municipal law or ordinance, then the solicitation shall be cancelled or revised to comply with applicable law. 
(b)  Prior to award. If after bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, but prior to the award of contract, the director of purchasing, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that a solicitation or a proposed award of a contract is in violation of federal, state or municipal law, or ordinance, then the solicitation or proposed award shall be cancelled. 
(c)  After award. If, after an award the director of purchasing, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that solicitation or award of a contract was in violation of applicable law or ordinance, then: 
(1)  If the person awarded the contract has not acted fraudulently or in bad faith: 
a.  The contract may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined that doing so is in the best interest of the city; or 
b.  The contract may be terminated and the person awarded the contract shall be compensated for the actual costs reasonably incurred under the contract, plus a reasonable profit, but excluding attorney's fees, prior to the termination; or 
(2)  If the person awarded the contract has acted fraudulently or in bad faith the contract may be declared null and void, if such action is in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(8-104), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-245-16.5-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS 

Sec. 16.5-261. - Cooperative purchasing authorized. 
    The city's purchasing department may either participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of any supplies, services, or construction with one or more public procurement units or external procurement activities in accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants. Such cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multi-party contracts between public procurement units and open-ended state public procurement unit contracts which are made available to local public procurement units. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(9-101), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-262. - Sale, acquisition, or use of supplies by a public procurement unit. 
    The city's purchasing department may sell to, acquire from, or use any supplies belonging to another public procurement unit or external procurement activity independent of the requirements of Article III (Source Selection and Contract Formation) and Article VII (Supply Management) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(9-102), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-263. - Cooperative use of supplies or services. 
    The city's purchasing department may enter into an agreement, independent of the requirements of Article III (Source Selection and Contract Formation) and Article VII (Supply Management) of this code, with any other Public Procurement Unit or External Procurement Activity for the cooperative use of supplies or services under the terms agreed upon between the parties. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(9-103), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-264. - Joint use of facilities. 
    The city's purchasing department may enter into agreements for the common use or lease of warehousing facilities, capital equipment, and other facilities with another public procurement unit or an external procurement activity under the terms agreed upon between the parties. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(9-104), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-265. - Supply of personnel, information, and technical services. 
    Supply of personnel. The city's purchasing department is authorized, at its discretion, upon written request from another public procurement unit or external procurement activity, to provide personnel to the requesting public procurement unit or external procurement activity. The public procurement unit or external procurement activity making the request may pay the public procurement unit providing the personnel the direct and indirect cost of furnishing the personnel, in accordance with an agreement between the parties. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(9-105), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-266. - Public procurement units in compliance with code requirements. 
    Where the public procurement unit or external procurement activity administering a cooperative purchase complies with the requirements of this code, any public procurement unit participating in such a purchase shall be deemed to have complied with this code. Public procurement units may not enter into a cooperative purchasing agreement for the purpose of circumventing this code. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(9-106), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-267. - Contract prices established by other governmental units. 
    The city may purchase any item or service except as otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, at the same contract price as established by another governmental unit if the purchasing department or other city using department determines that the price is such that following Article III herein (Source Selection and Contract Formation) is not warranted. Such contracts, by way of example, are a contract price by another Florida municipality established by competitive bidding (piggybacking) or source selection similar to Article III, herein; a price established by a so-called State contract or a price established by a department or division of the United States Government, such as the General Services Administration. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(9-107), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-268-16.5-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PREFERENCES AND INCENTIVES 
DIVISION 1. - PREFERENCES FOR LOCAL VENDORS 

Sec. 16.5-281. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Local business. A local business, for the purposes of the application of a local vendor preference, means a bidder or proposer which has a permanent, physical place of business within the city limits, and a valid business tax receipt applicable to the required goods, services, or construction items being procured. Post office boxes or locations at a postal service center are not verifiable and shall not be used for the purpose of establishing said physical address. If the business is a joint venture/partnership, it is sufficient for qualification as a local business if at least one party of the joint venture/partnership meets the test set forth in this section. The bidder/proposer shall have the burden of demonstrating that it meets this definition. 
(2)  Non-local business. A bidder or proposer which is not a local business as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-101), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-282. - Lowest responsible bidder. 
(a)  In the event the lowest responsive, responsible bidder or the highest ranked responsive, responsible proposer in the procurement of goods, services or construction is a non-local business, then all bids and/or proposals from responsive, responsible local businesses to the same solicitation shall be adjusted by five percent, solely for the purpose of determining bid/contract award. The bid price of local bidders will be adjusted downward by five percent only for purposes of evaluating and ranking of bidders, not to exceed $25,000.00 In no event, shall the application of this adjustment to a responsive quote or bid change the actual bid amount. Further, in no event will it cause the city to pay more than $25,000.00 above the amount bid by the non-local vendor which would have been recommended for award if the local vendor preference had not been applied. 
(b)  If the application of the five percent local vendor preference causes the evaluated local vendor price to be less than the actual low-bid price, but the actual bid price of the local vendor is more than five percent (or $25,000.00, whichever is applicable) than the actual low-bid price of a non-local vendor, then the non-local vendor submitting the actual low-bid, shall be viewed as the low-bidder, and be recommended for award, unless for reasons other than price, the bid is not found to be responsive and/or responsible. 
(c)  The determination as to whether a bidder or proposer is a local or non-local business shall be made by the purchasing department, after confirming the vendor has a valid business tax receipt and certificate of occupancy, as reflected within the business master file of the city's FMS system. The bidder or proposer does not have to be a current vendor to the city (city as a customer) at the time of bidding/proposing, but must have been issued a business tax receipt applicable to the goods/services/construction being requested, prior to the due date/time for bids/proposals. Prior to making an award through the application of the local vendor preference, city staff may require a bidder or proposer to provide additional information at any time prior to the award. 
(d)  Example: The city receives bids/proposals from four businesses in response to a formal public solicitation. Each company is determined to be responsive and responsible and eligible for award of the contract. Two bidders/proposers are local companies with business operations located in Riviera Beach, the other two businesses are non-local companies with permanent business operations located in other communities. The following bid/proposal amounts were received: 
_____ 
Service/Goods XYZ Corporation West Palm Beach, FL John Smith Corp. Riviera Beach, FL Golden Eagle Inc. Weston, FL First Rate, LLC Riviera Beach, FL Park improvements $135,000 $109,000 $100,000 $104,000 5% local preference downward adjustment N/A 5% of $109,000 = <$5,450> N/A 5% of 104,000 = <$5,200> Adjusted bid amounts for purposes of ranking only $135,000 $103,550 $100,000 $98,800  
_____
The apparent low bidder is Golden Eagle Inc. of Weston, Florida; however, since the lowest responsive, responsible bidder is a non-local business, then all bids and/or proposals from responsive, responsible local businesses are adjusted by five (5) percent solely for the purpose of determining bid/contract award. 
The bid prices for John Smith Corp. and First Rate, LLC, local bidders, will be adjusted downward by five percent for purposes of ranking the bidders/proposers. After application of the five percent local preference, First Rate, LLC, a local Rivera Beach business, is ranked as the low bidder. The ranking is only for purposes of determining award of the bid/proposal. The contract amount for First Rate, LLC will be $104,000; the same as its bid. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-102), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-283. - Incentive for vendors who sub-contract at least 25 percent of contract with local businesses. 
    If no Riviera Beach company bids on a contract or responds to a proposal, preference will be given to non-local businesses which submit bids/proposals that utilize local Riviera Beach businesses for at least 25 percent of the contract award amount. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-103), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-284. - Other minimum qualifications. 
    The above preference criteria are based on the fact the company awarded the contract will have met all other qualifications necessary to provide the goods/services being bid. These qualifications include, but are not limited to, whether the SBE format has been achieved, experience, bond capacity, insurance requirements, financial capacity, and references. Failure to meet these qualifications and others as required by the general and special conditions of the bid will cause the bid to be rejected. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-104), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-285-16.5-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PARTICIPATION GOAL 

Sec. 16.5-291. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division only the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Acting as a conduit means, in part, not acting as a regular dealer by making sales of material, goods or supplies from items bought, kept in stock and regularly sold to the public, as opposed to only government agencies, in the usual course of business. Brokers, manufacturer's representatives, sales representatives and non-stocking distributors are considered as conduits that do not perform a commercially useful business function. 
(2)  Affiliation means that the entity applying for SBE certification controls, has the power to control, or is controlled by another entity or entities, or identify of interest exists between the entity applying for SBE certification and another entity or entities. In determining whether an affiliation exists, it is necessary to consider factors including, but not limited to, common ownership, common management, common use of facilities, equipment, and employees, contractual obligations and family interest in the business. Affiliated entities must be considered together in terms of gross receipts in determining whether a business entity meets SBE eligibility criteria. 
(3)  Business category means construction; professional services procured pursuant to the Competitive Consultant Negotiations Act (CCNA); other professional services, and commodities. For purposes of SBE eligibility criteria, a business entity shall be considered for eligibility in the business category in which it performs the largest portion of its work. 
(4)  Certification means the process by which the office of small business assistance determines a business meets the criteria for small, minority or woman business enterprise. 
(5)  Certified small business enterprise (SBE) means a business which has been certified as such by the State of Florida, Palm Beach County Office of Small Business Assistance or other county or state governmental agency (SBA). 
(6)  Code means the City of Riviera Beach Procurement Code. 
(7)  Commercially useful business function means adding value to the goods and services supplied under a contract. 
(8)  Days mean business days, unless specified otherwise. 
(9)  Domiciled in the county means the business holds a valid Palm Beach County business tax receipt and has a permanent place of business in the county. In order to establish a permanent place of business in the county, the business must: 
a.  Demonstrate business activity during the preceding twelve (12) months at the county location, and have sufficient full-time employees in the county to perform the contracted work; 
b.  The county business tax receipt bears the county address, and the county location is in an area zoned for the conduct of such business; 
c.  The county location must be verifiable through documentation such as lease agreement, utility bills, client invoices, payroll records or other appropriate documentation; and 
d  The county location must be identifiable through signage, telephone book listing, or other appropriate means. 
On-site visits may be conducted prior to and during the certification term to determine continued adherence to the domicile requirements and other requirements of the code. Additional backup documentation may be requested on a case-by-case basis. A county telephone number or post office box in the city shall not be sufficient to establish domicile in Palm Beach County. 
(10)  Front shall mean a business which purports to be a small business but which is actually owned and/or controlled in a manner which does not comply with the county's requirements of certification. 
(11)  Goals means annual small business goals expressed as percentages of total dollar volume for participation of small businesses in the city's procurement of goods, services and construction. 
(12)  Home business means a small business that operates form the business owner's home. Home businesses usually have a very small number of employees that are often members of the business owner's family. A home business is not affiliated with, nor a subsidiary of another company located outside of the home. Home businesses meeting this definition are eligible for certification as a small business, provided they meet all other certification criteria. Home offices of an employee working for a company located in another county do not establish domicile in Palm Beach County. 
(13)  Joint venture means an association of two or more persons or businesses registered with the State of Florida to carry out a single business enterprise for profit for which purpose they combine their property, capital, efforts, skills and knowledge. 
(14)  Manufacturer means a firm or business entity that produces an item from raw materials or who substantially alters the form of a product in order to make it suitable for a particular use. 
(15)  Prime contractor means any person who has a contract with the county to provide specific construction services, sales, supplies, materials, professional services, labor and/or equipment. 
(16)  Professional services means any narrow discipline wherein a known practitioner has thorough education and experience and has developed expert advisory and programming skills as a vocation; any service performed primarily by vocational personnel which requires the analysis or certification of a professional before the services are acceptable to the user of the service; or any other advisory study, or programming activity where the director of purchasing determines that the level of skills and/or creativity of the potential or known practitioner(s) warrants a competitive proposal or submittal process. 
(17)  Project goal means SBE goals expressed as percentages of total dollar volume for participation of small businesses, on individual city contracts. 
(18)  Small and minority/women business directory means a compilation of certified small businesses and M/WBEs which is maintained electronically by the city of Riviera Beach Purchasing Department and made available to contractor(s) or vendor(s) for use in identifying subcontractors, material suppliers, etc. 
(19)  Small business means a business domiciled in Palm Beach County and certified by the County or State of Florida which is an independently owned and operated for profit business concern organized to engage in commercial transactions. A small business must be owned and controlled by an individual who is a citizen or a lawful permanent resident of the United States. 
(20)  Small business enterprise means a business as defined under certified small business enterprise herein. Also referred to as "SBE". 
(21)  Subsidiary means a company whose controlling interest is owned by another company. A subsidiary cannot be considered an independent business. 
    All terms not specifically defined herein, but defined in the city's procurement ordinance [this chapter], shall carry the definition therein described. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-201), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-292. - Scope. 
    This part shall apply to the solicitation of all goods, services and construction by the city which is governed by this chapter, which may be amended from time to time. Whenever possible, the city shall utilize a solicitation process which encourages SBE participation even on those items which are exempt from the requirements of the procurement ordinance [this chapter]. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-202), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-293. - Goals. 
(a)  Annual goals. The annual SBE goal for city procurement of construction, professional services and commodities shall be a minimum of 15 percent. The annual goal shall be applied to each individual city procurement of goods, services or construction unless otherwise approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Evaluation of goal attainment. The goal shall be applied to the full monetary value of the contract and be reflected in the full monetary portion spent on subcontracts for supplies, consulting or construction services to be awarded to those SBEs meeting contract specifications. 
(1)  When a certified SBE submits a bid as a prime contractor, the SBE will be credited with meeting the percentage of the goal that the SBE will be performing with its own forces plus the percentage of subcontracts awarded to certified SBEs. A joint venture consisting of a small business and non-small business functioning together as a prime contractor will be credited with small business participation on the basis of the percentage of participation in the work, risk, and profit by the small business. 
(2)  Bidders will receive credit for goal attainment only for subcontractors who are certified and licensed, if required, in the specific area of expertise for which credit is sought at the time of bid opening. Bidders utilizing SBE suppliers will receive credit for goal attainment at 70 percent of the contract for supplies. 
(c)  In the event annual goals are not achieved, the city may implement programs, including, but not limited to, a sheltered market program for contracts under $200,000.00 to achieve goal attainment. Any programs, other than sheltered markets, must be approved by the city council prior to implementation. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-203), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-294. - Contract compliance requirements. 
    The purchasing department will establish procedures for monitoring and evaluating program performance and compliance, subject to the city manager's approval. In the addition to the remedies of suspension or debarment as provided herein, any contractor or firm that falsely represents to the city, pursuant to a city contract, that it is an SBE, or that it will utilize the services or commodities of an SBE and subsequently does not do so without the prior written approval of the city, may be in breach of contract. 
    Upon determination that a breach of contract has occurred, the city shall have all available remedies for breach of contract. In addition, all amounts paid to the contractor or firm under the contract intended for expenditure with SBEs will be forfeited and recoverable by the city. The city, at its sole discretion, may waive the breach and available remedies; however any such waiver shall not constitute a waiver of rights for breach of any provision of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-204), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-295. - Ranking of responsive bidders. 
    When evaluating competitive bids/quotes of up to $500,000.00 in which the apparent low bidder is determined to be nonresponsive to SBE requirements, the contract shall be awarded to the low bidder responsive to SBE requirements, or in the event there are no bidders responsive to the SBE requirements, to the bidder with the greatest SBE participation in excess of eight percent participation, as long as the bid does not exceed the low bid amount by five percent. 
    In cases where the low bid exceeds $500,000.00, the contract shall be awarded to the low bidder responsive to the SBE requirements, or in the event there are no bidders responsive to the SBE requirements, to the bidder with the greatest SBE participation in excess of eight percent participation, provided that such bid does not exceed the low bid otherwise responsive to the bid requirements by more than $50,000.00. 
    This section applies only when price is the determining factor. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-205), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-296. - Suspension/debarment. 
    The city reserves the right to suspend or debar any vendor who has previously failed to perform properly and who has done so by commission or omission of an act of such serious and compelling nature that the act indicates a serious lack of business integrity or honesty. Such acts include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The violation of any applicable law, regulation or contract provision relating to the performance of obligations incurred pursuant to an agreement with a recipient under a county contract. 
(2)  Making or procuring to make any false statement or use of deceit. 
(3)  Making false representations as a small business for purposes of qualifying for certification as such a business under a program that is designed to assist SBEs in the receipt of contracts with the county for the provision of goods or services. 
(4)  Representing a SBE as performing a commercially useful function when such business is merely acting as a conduit in order to participate in the county's SBE program or receive a preference or benefit under the SBE program. 
(5)  Repeatedly failing to meet SBE goals when submitting bids when there is documented availability of SBEs as shown by other bidders on the same projects meeting the stated goals. 
(6)  Failing to comply with the SBE requirements of an awarded contract. The director of the office of small business assistance may refer a business or firm to the director of purchasing for consideration of suspension or debarment. The procedures for suspension or debarment are provided for in this procurement code. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-206), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-297. - Prompt payment. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 218.735(6), as may be amended, when a prime contractor receives payment from the city for labor, services or materials furnished by subcontractors or suppliers hired by the prime contractor, the prime contractor shall remit payment due to those subcontractors and suppliers within ten days after the prime contractor's receipt of payment. When a subcontractor receives payment from a prime contractor for labor, services or materials furnished by sub-subcontractor and suppliers hired by the subcontractor, the subcontractor shall remit payment due to those sub-subcontractors and suppliers within seven days after the subcontractor's receipt of payment from the prime contractor. 
(b)  Every contract let by the city for the performance of work shall contain a provision requiring the prime contractor to certify in writing that all subcontractors, subconsultants and suppliers have been paid for work and materials from previous progress payments received, less any retainage, by the prime contractor prior to receipt of any further progress payments. During the contract and upon completion of the contract, the city may request documentation to certify payment to subcontractors, subconsultants or suppliers. Nothing herein shall prohibit a prime contractor or subcontractor from disputing, pursuant to the terms of a relevant contract, all or any portion of a payment alleged to be due to another party. In the vent of such dispute, the prime contractor or subcontractor may withhold the disputed portion of any such payment if the prime contractor or subcontractor notifies the party whose payment is disputed, in writing, of the amount in dispute and the actions required to cure the dispute. The prime contractor or subcontractor must pay all undisputed amounts due within the time limits imposed by this section. All payments not made within the time periods herein specified shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or the rate specified by the contract, whichever is greater. 
(c)  This provision in no way creates any contractual relationship between any subcontractor, subconsultant or supplier and the city or any liability on the city for the prime contractor's failure to make timely payment to the subcontractor, subconsultant or supplier. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-207), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-298. - Procurement procedures. 
    The purchasing department shall establish specific purchasing procedures to ncrease SBE participation, including, but not limited to, purchases under the mandatory bid or proposal amount set forth in the procurement code and purchases made by decentralized purchase orders (DPOs) under $1,200.00. 
    The purchasing procedures shall include a provision that every effort will be made by buyers to contact all registered certified SBE within a particular commodity area for purchases under the mandatory bid or proposal amount set forth in the procurement code. The purchasing procedures shall also include a process which allows as many vendors as possible to compete in providing goods and services to the city. The purchasing procedures shall also include a provision requiring awards of purchases under the mandatory bid or proposal amount set forth in the procurement code to be made to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder unless a certified small business is within ten percent of the lowest non-small business bid, in which case the award shall be made to the certified small business bidder submitting the lowest responsive, responsible bid. This section shall not apply to procurement of construction. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-208), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-299-16.5-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PARTICIPATION FOR PUBLIC SOLICITATIONS OTHER THAN BIDS 

Sec. 16.5-311. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division only the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Minority business enterprise means a business that is owned and controlled by minority persons. 
(2)  Minority persons are Blacks of not of Hispanic origin, Hispanics, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Pacific Islanders, Asians and women as set forth in F.S. § 288.703(4)(a-e), as may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  Owned, for the purpose of determining whether a business is a minority or women business enterprise, shall mean that the minorities or women, as the context requires, shall possess an ownership interest of at least 51 percent. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-301), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-312. - MBE participation for public solicitations other than bids. 
(a)  All proposers have an opportunity to increase their opportunity to be awarded a city contract/project by maximizing their use of qualified MBEs in accordance with the city's MBE program. 
(b)  All public solicitations other than bids (PSOTB) shall be reviewed by the purchasing director prior to advertisement to determine if there are components of the project that can be subcontracted to qualified minority business subcontractors and/or material suppliers. 
(c)  Relevant qualified MBEs will be notified by the purchasing department of the procurement opportunity. 
(d)  Contractor past performance. The city shall have the right to consider price, quality, past performance including meeting qualified MBE commitments, time required for performance and qualifications of the contractor in making awards. 
(e)  The proposer shall seek to maximize its use of qualified MBEs. The proposer shall complete the Tabulation of Subcontractors and Material Suppliers Form that will be provided with the project package by the city. The total qualified minority business participation shall be the percentage of the total contract/project dollar amount that will be completed by qualified minority businesses. The total qualified minority business participation percentage is non-cumulative; however, one or more qualified minority businesses can comprise the total qualified minority business participation percentage. The percentage of total bonus points awarded of maximum allowable points is non-cumulative and is the percentage of points to be awarded to a bidder/proposer based on the total qualified business participation. 
Total Qualified Business Participation in Excess of 15% Goal Percentage of Total Bonus Points Awarded of Maximum Allowable Points 0% - 15%  0% 20% - 30%  4% 31% - 40%  6% 41% - 50%  8% 51% and above 10%  
(f)  All proposed qualified businesses shall provide a letter of participation on its own letterhead and signed by the chief operating officer stating the actual dollar amount or percentage of work to be completed by its own forces. This information shall be submitted in the sealed proposal packet. After making an affirmative determination of qualified MBE participation, the director of purchasing shall assign bonus points as follows: 
Example: 
There are 100 maximum allowable points to score the proposals. The Contractor's price is $500,000.00. The RFP scoring assigns up to five points (five percent) to be allocated to a contractor if 15 percent of the total project cost is spent with qualified MBEs. The contractor lists four qualified MBEs to provide goods and services for the project. A total of $260,000.00 (52 percent) of the total project cost will be spent with the qualified MBEs. 
As an incentive for the Contractor maximizing the participation of qualified MBEs on the project, the Contractor receives an additional ten bonus points (ten percent) resulting in a cumulative total of 15 points (15 percent) of the 100 maximum allowable points. 
Project's Percentage of Minority Participation Percentage or Points 1-15% (depends on the RFP allocation) 5% or 5 points 46% and above 10% or 10 points Total points awarded of maximum allowable points 15% or 15 points  
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-302), 1-18-12) 
Secs. 16.5-313-16.5-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM 

Sec. 16.5-321. - Apprenticeship program requirements. 
    It shall be the policy of the City of Riviera Beach that contractors shall be required to comply with the apprenticeship program of the city as follows: 
(1)  On city-funded construction projects which exceed $750,000.00, 20 percent of laborers working specialties for which there are apprentice programs registered with the city shall be apprentices. Such apprentices shall be students in certified State of Florida pre-apprenticeship/apprenticeship programs which are located in the city, and, if such percentage of apprentices of such programs is not located in the city, then such programs may be located in Palm Beach County. 
(2)  A city registered apprenticeship program is one which has registered with the city and provided the required documentation, including but not limited to, proof of certification as an apprenticeship program with the State of Florida and proof of having educational facilities physically locate in the city. 
(3)  Unless the apprenticeship requirement is waived by the city, the failure of the contractor to demonstrate compliance with this requirement shall result in the contractor's bid being deemed nonresponsive. 
(4)  The apprentice requirement may be waived or modified by the city council: 
a.  Upon request of the contractor, if the contractor demonstrates that the required apprentices are not available despite a good faith effort on the contractor's part; or 
b.  Upon request of the contractor, if the contractor demonstrates that the available apprentices are not sufficient to meet the 20-percent requirement and the contractor commits to utilizing a specific percentage of apprentices demonstrated to be available; or 
c.  If the city determines it is in the best interests of the city to waive such requirement based on potential savings of money and time or grant requirements. 
(5)  The agreed upon percentage and type of apprentices will be included as a requirement of the construction contract. Failure to meet the terms of the apprenticeship requirement may result in the contractor being found in breach of the contract and subject to possible monetary sanctions. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(10-401), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-322-16.5-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING 

Sec. 16.5-341. - Criminal penalties. 
    To the extent that violations of the ethical standards of conduct set forth in this article constitute violations of the state criminal code they shall be punishable as provided therein. Such penalties shall be in addition to the civil sanctions set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(11-101), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-342. - Employee conflict of interest. 
(a)  It shall be unethical for any city employee to participate directly or indirectly in procurement contract when the city employee knows that: 
(1)  The city employee or any member of the city employee's immediate family has a financial interest in the procurement contract; or 
(2)  Any other person, business, or organization with whom the city employee or any member of a city employee's immediate family is negotiating or has an arrangement concerning prospective employment is involved in the procurement contract. 
(b)  A city employee or any member of a city employee's immediate family who olds a financial interest in a disclosed blind trust shall not be deemed to have a conflict of interest with regard to matter pertaining to that financial interest. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(11-102), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-343. - Gratuities and kickbacks. 
(a)  Gratuities. It shall be unethical for any person to offer, give, or agree to give any city employee or former city employee, or for any city employee or former city employee to solicit, demand, accept, or agree to accept from another person, a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with any decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, or preparation of any part of a program requirement or a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity in any proceeding or application, request for ruling, determination, claim or controversy, or other particular matter, pertaining to any program requirement or a contract or subcontract, or to any solicitation or proposal therefor. 
(b)  Kickbacks. It shall be unethical for any payment, gratuity, or offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor or any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or offer. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(11-103), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-344. - Prohibition against contingent fees. 
    It shall be unethical for a person to be retained, or to retain a person, to solicit or secure a city contract upon an agreement or understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee, except for retention of bona fide employees or bona fide established commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(11-104), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-345. - Employment of former city employees by any person, business, or organization contracting with the city regulated. 
    It shall be a violation for any person, business or organization contracting with the city to employ in any capacity, any former city employee or member of the city employee's immediate family within one year of that employee's separation from employment with the city, unless the employer or the former city employee files with the city clerk a disclosure statement on a form to be provided for that purpose, stating the date of employment of the former city employee by the employer. The penalty for a violation of this section shall be a fine of not less than $100.00 for a first offense, or not less than two hundred and $250.00 for a second or subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(11-105), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-346. - Waivers from conflicts of interests. 
    The city council may grant a waiver from the employee conflict of interest provision (section 16.5-342) upon making a written determination that: 
(1)  The financial interest of the city employee has been publicly disclosed; 
(2)  The city employee will be able to perform its procurement functions without actual or apparent bias or favorites; and 
(3)  The award will be in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(11-106), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-347. - Use of confidential information. 
    It shall be unethical for any employee or former employee knowingly to use confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain, or for the actual or anticipated personal gain of any other person. 
(1)  Employees. The city manager may impose any one or more of the following sanctions on a city employee for violations of the ethical standards in this article: 
a.  Oral or written warnings or reprimands; 
b.  Suspension with or without pay for specified periods of time; or 
c.  Termination of employment. 
(2)  Non-employees. The city council may impose any one or more of the following sanctions on a nonemployee for violations of the ethical standards; 
a.  Written warnings or reprimands; 
b.  Termination of contracts; or 
c.  Debarment or suspension as provided in section 16.5-191 (Authority to debar or suspend). 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(11-107), 1-18-12) 
Sec. 16.5-348. - Recovery of value transferred or received in breach of ethical standards. 
    The value of anything transferred or received in breach of the unethical standards of this chapter by a city employee or a nonemployee may be recovered from the city employee or the nonemployee, or both. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2(11-108), 1-18-12) 
Chapter 17 - SECURITY AND FIRE WARNING SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; offenses, ch. 12; police, ch. 16; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Visual or audio security warning systems. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner, occupier, tenant or person in control of any premises or mobile vehicle to discontinue any audio or visual security warning alarm upon the arrival of any authorized security personnel at the site of the property emitting such alarm. 
(b)  The city, through its police department or other authorized personnel, is directed and authorized to abate any audio or visual security warning alarm not otherwise under the control of any owner, occupier, tenant or person in control of any premises or mobile vehicle at the time of such personnel's arrival at the site of the property emitting such alarm by disconnecting such alarm, the use of forced entry onto the premises, the removal of the vehicle or other methods available. 
(c)  Any costs incurred in the abatement of any audio or visual security warning alarm shall be a lien against the premises or mobile vehicle necessitating the employment of such abatement actions authorized herein. 
(Code 1957, § 9-34) 
Sec. 17-2. - Enforcement of chapter and penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished in accordance with section 1-11. The city may also initiate action before the appropriate tribunal to obtain compliance with this chapter. Further, the city shall have the authority to place a lien against the property served by the alarm system in the amount of the assessed service charges. 
(Code 1957, § 9-35) 
Secs. 17-3-17-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4027, § 2, adopted July 7, 2013, repealed former Art. II, §§ 17-21-17-31, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein setout. Former Art. II pertained to burglar alarms and derived from the Code of 1957, § 9-32. 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; offenses, ch. 12; police, ch. 16; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 

Sec. 17-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or a meaning is otherwise provided in section 1-2 of this Code: 
    Alarm company means a person engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems utilized in the city. 
    Alarm permit means a permit issued annually by the city or its designee allowing the operation of an alarm system within the city. 
    Alarm signal means a detectable signal; audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to which the city's police department is requested to respond. 
    Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which the city's police department is requested to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
    Alarm user means any person owning, leasing, or operating an alarm system in the city, or on whose premises in the City an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
    Automatic dial protection device means an automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for police response. 
    Cancellation means the process where police response is terminated when the alarm company or alarm user notifies the city's police department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the alarm site, a false alarm has not occurred and no civil penalty will be assessed. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, which summons the city's police department. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the city's police department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. Further, a false alarm has not occurred for purposes of this article in the event of a cancellation prior to the police arriving at the alarm site. 
    Hearing officer means the chief of police or his or her designee or a special magistrate. If a special magistrate is used as the hearing officer, the special magistrate shall be an attorney admitted to the Florida Bar who possesses experience in administrative law. The special magistrate shall not be an employee of the city. 
    Permit year means a 12-month period beginning on the day and month on which an alarm permit is issued by the city or the city's designee. 
    SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by a nationally recognized testing organization, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction." 
    Verify means an attempt by the alarm company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting the city's police department response. For the purpose of this ordinance, telephone verification shall require, at a minimum that a second call, also known as enhanced call verification, be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach a person who can properly identify themselves in an attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting the city's police department to respond. 
(Ord. No. 4027, § 2, 7-7-13) 
Sec. 17-22. - Alarm permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall use an alarm system without first obtaining an annual permit for such alarm system from the city or its designee and paying the applicable permit fee as set by city resolution. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the alarm user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to facilitate dispatch and response by the city's police department. Prior to the expiration of the permit year, each alarm user shall apply to the city or its designee to have the alarm permit renewed. 
(b)  Application. The alarm permit or permit renewal shall be requested on an application form provided by the city or its designee. The application will be denied if all requested information is not provided or the alarm system, alarm user or alarm company is otherwise in violation of this article including without limitation failing to pay any assessed fees or civil penalty(ies) under this article. 
(c)  Transfer of possession. When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is maintained is sold, assigned or otherwise transferred, the new alarm user obtaining possession of the premises shall file an application with the city for an alarm permit transfer within 30 days of obtaining possession of the property and pay the alarm permit transfer fee set by city resolution. Failure to timely apply for an alarm permit transfer may result in a late fee as set by city resolution. If transferred, the original term of an alarm permit shall remain the same. 
(d)  Reporting updated information. Whenever the information provided on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the city or its designee within 30 days of the change. There shall be no fee to report updated information. 
(e)  Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures or units having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure and/or tenant. 
(f)  Term. An alarm permit shall have a term of one year. 
(g)  Fee. A fee in the amount established by city resolution shall be charged to the alarm user by the city for each permit issued and each annual renewal to defray the cost of alarm system regulation. If an alarm permit expires for an existing alarm system prior to the submission of an application to renew, the city may charge the alarm user a late fee along with the annual renewal fee as set by city resolution. 
(h)  Implementation. The police chief or designee is authorized to create a policy to facilitate the implementation of this article and its enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 4027, § 2, 7-7-13) 
Sec. 17-23. - Duties of the alarm user and alarm company. 
(a)  All alarm users shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will reduce or eliminate false alarms; and 
(2)  Provide the alarm company with the permit number (the number must be provided to the city's dispatch center by the alarm company to insure proper response by the city's police department). 
(3)  Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within a reasonable amount of time when notified by the city's police department. 
(4)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(5)  Pay all applicable fees under this article including without limitation permit fees, late fees, annual renewal fees, and any civil penalties. 
(b)  All alarm companies shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Chapter 489, Florida Statutes. 
(2)  Obtain and maintain the required state, county and/or city license(s). 
(3)  Provide name, address, and telephone number of the alarm company license holder or a designee, who can be called in an emergency, 24 hours a day; and be able to respond to an alarm call, when notified, within a reasonable amount of time. 
(4)  Possess and be able to provide the most current contact information for the alarm user. 
(5)  On all new installations ninety (90) days after enactment of this Ordinance, use only alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01. 
(6)  Provide instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user. 
(7)  Provide written information on how to obtain service from the alarm company for the alarm system. 
(c)  An alarm company performing monitoring services shall: 
(1)  Attempt to verify whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting the City's police department to respond including without limitation initiating an Enhanced Call Verification, if the first attempt fails EXCEPT in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified by video and/or audible means. 
(2)  Provide alarm user registration number to the city's dispatch center to facilitate city's police department response and/or cancellations. 
(3)  Communicate any available information about the location of the alarm to the city's dispatch center. 
(4)  Communicate a cancellation to the city's dispatch center as soon as possible following a determination that response is unnecessary. 
(Ord. No. 4027, § 2, 7-7-13) 
Sec. 17-24. - Prohibited acts. 
    In addition to any other violation of this article, it shall be a violation of this article to: 
(a)  Activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning the city's police department when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm; 
(b)  Install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than 15 minutes; and/or, 
(c)  Install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the city's police department. 
(Ord. No. 4027, § 2, 7-7-13) 
Sec. 17-25. - Enforcement and appeal. 
(a)  Excessive false alarms. It is hereby found and determined that three (3) or more false alarms within a permit year is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful. The city shall establish by resolution the civil penalties for three or more false alarms within a permit year. Notice of the first and second false alarm shall be provide to the alarm user by regular U.S. mail to the most recent address on the alarm permit; and, if no alarm permit has been obtained, to the alarm site. If the regular U.S. mail is returned, the notice of the first and second false alarm shall be posted at the alarm site. Notice of a third or subsequent false alarms will be provided in accordance with the notice requirement set forth below. 
(b)  Other violations of this article. The city shall establish by resolution the civil penalties for other violations of this article including without limitation failure to register an alarm system for an alarm permit; failure to update permit information; and failure to pay any delinquent fee or penalty(ies) assessed under this article. For these other violations, the city will provide the alleged violator with notice of the violation and provide the alleged violator with ten days to correct the violation or the applicable civil penalty(ies) will be assessed. It will be the responsibility of the alleged violator to notify the City that the violation has been corrected. Notice of such other violations will be provided in accordance with the notice requirement set forth below. 
(c)  Notice. Notice to persons in violation of this article and the assessment of civil penalty(ies) shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  If to the alarm user, by certified mail and regular U.S. mail, to the address listed in the most recent permit, permit renewal application or in a notice of a change of address. If both the certified mail and regular U.S. mailings are returned unclaimed or undeliverable, notice shall be by posting the alarm site. Alternatively, notice may be provided by hand-delivery by the city's police department or designee to the alarm user. 
(2)  If to an alarm company, by certified mail and regular U.S. mail, to the address listed in the most recent state, county and/or city license(s) for the alarm company. If both the certified mail and regular U.S. mailings are returned unclaimed or undeliverable, notice shall be by posting at the address listed in the most recent state, county and/or city license(s) for the alarm company. Alternatively, notice may be provided by hand-delivery by the city's police department or designee to the manager or other person in charge at the address listed in the most recent state, county and/or city license(s) for the alarm company. 
(3)  Evidence that an attempt(s) has been made to comply with the foregoing by mailing and posting or by hand-delivery shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this part have been met, without regard to whether or not the alarm user or alarm company actually received such notice. 
(4)  All notices to persons in violation of this article and the assessment of civil penalty(ies) shall include a statement regarding the appeals procedure as set forth herein. 
(d)  Payment of civil penalty(ies). Civil penalty(ies) shall be paid within (30) days from the date of the notice of the civil penalty(ies) unless an appeal is timely filed or if the violation is timely corrected as set forth in subsection (b) above. 
(e)  Appeals procedure. The following procedure shall apply to all appeals filed under this article: 
(1)  A notice of violation and assessment of civil penalty(ies) under this article may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the city's police department within 20 days after the date of the notice of violation and assessment of civil penalty(ies). The written notice of appeal shall provide the name and address of the person appealing; the grounds for the appeal; and, provide copies of any evidence supporting the grounds for the appeal. The failure to file a written notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the notice of violation and assessment of civil penalty(ies). 
(2)  Timely appeals shall be set for a hearing before the hearing officer. Notice of the appeal hearing shall be provided to the person filling the appeal by regular U.S. mail or hand-delivery to the address provided in the notice of appeal. Notice of the appeal hearing shall be provided at least ten days before the date of the appeal hearing. At the appeal hearing, the burden shall be on the city's police department to establish a violation(s) of this article by substantial competent evidence. The standard of proof shall be a preponderance of the evidence. The person appealing may present evidence to contradict or refute the police department's evidence. While strict rules of evidence shall not be required of the appeal hearing, fundamentals of due process shall be followed. 
(3)  Due to the confidential nature of the records associated with alarm permits, the appeal hearing shall be closed to the public and the only attendees shall be the hearing officer; the applicable police department personnel and/or their legal counsel; the person appealing and/or his or her representative; and, any other person requested to appear as a witness. A court reporter may also be authorized to attend. 
(4)  After all evidence is presented at the appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall have the authority to uphold or dismiss the violation(s). If the violation(s) is upheld, the hearing officer may reduce the assessed civil penalty(ies) when circumstances are presented to support said reduction including a lack of any prior violation(s) at the alarm site or by the alarm company or alarm user; prompt efforts to remedy the violation; and, other extenuating circumstances supporting a reduction. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and in written order. The written order shall be promptly provided to the person appealing by regular U.S. mail to the address provided in the written appeal. Any civil penalty(ies) assessed as a result of the appeal hearing shall be paid within 30 days unless such time is extended by the hearing officer. 
(f)  Non-exclusive remedy. In lieu of or in addition to the enforcement procedure herein, the city reserves the right to pursue all remedies available at law and/or equity to enforce this article including, but not limited to, a suit to recover damages or obtain equitable relief or code enforcement. 
(g)  Discontinuance of the city's police department response. The failure of an alarm user or the alarm user's alarm company to timely pay any civil penalty(ies) assessed under this ordinance may result in discontinuance of the city's police department response to alarm signals that may occur at the applicable alarm site. In addition, failure to register, obtain a permit or renew a permit may result in no response to an alarm. 
(Ord. No. 4027, § 2, 7-7-13) 
Sec. 17-26. - Alarm user awareness class. 
    The city may create and implement an alarm user awareness class and may request the assistance of the area alarm companies to assist in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false alarms. If implemented, the police department may grant the option of attending a class in lieu of paying a civil penalty(ies). 
(Ord. No. 4027, § 2, 7-7-13) 
Sec. 17-27. - Confidentiality. 
    Consistent with Florida Statutes and in the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered through the alarm permit application process, no response records, and any other alarm records created under this article are confidential and exempt from public disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 4027, § 2, 7-7-13) 
Sec. 17-28. - Limitation of liability. 
    The city shall be under no obligation or duty to an alarm user or to any other person under this article by reason of this article. The city specifically disclaims liability for any damages which may be caused by failure to respond to an alarm. The police chief or his or her designee may without notice cancel any alarm dispatch caused by power or weather related causes or other emergencies based upon priority, or alarms considered to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 4027, § 2, 7-7-13) 
Secs. 17-29-17-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 

Sec. 17-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm user means any person occupying or controlling the premises of an occupancy which is protected by an automatic fire detection system. 
    Automatic fire detection system means any system employing heat detectors, smoke detectors, flame detectors, pull stations or waterflow alarm elements for the purpose of detecting or reporting and automatically transmitting an alarm of fire. 
    Central station system means a system or group of systems in which the operation of circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in, maintained and supervised from an approved central station having competent and experienced observers and operators who, upon receipt of a signal, notify the fire department and take such other action as is required by the fire prevention code of the city. 
    Central station systems contractor means a person whose principal business is the furnishing and maintaining of a supervised signaling service known as a central station system. 
    False alarm signal means the transmission of a fire alarm signal indicating a fire emergency requiring the immediate response of a fire department, engine company or companies when a fire emergency does not exist and no evidence thereof is apparent to the senior fire department officer arriving on the scene. 
    Occupancy means any building or complex of buildings which because of the nature of the occupancy or size of the building is regulated by the fire prevention code of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 9-33(a); Ord. No. 2609, § 1(17-51), 12-1-93) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 17-52. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to burglar alarms or to any alarms attached to motor vehicles or attached to any publicly owned property. 
(Code 1957, § 9-33(a); Ord. No. 2609, § 1(17-52), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 17-53. - Excessive false alarm signals declared a public nuisance. 
    The transmission of more than three false alarm signals by an automatic fire detection system protecting any occupancy within any 12-month period of time is excessive and constitutes a serious public nuisance and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a violation of this section. No person shall allow, permit, cause or fail to prevent the transmission, for any reason, by an automatic fire detection system used by him, or any such system serving a premises or a building occupied and controlled by such a person, of more than three false alarm signals within any 12-month period of time. 
(Code 1957, § 9-33(b); Ord. No. 2609, § 1(17-53), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 17-54. - False alarm signal service charge; collection. 
(a)  For response to excessive false alarm signals by the fire department, the alarm user shall be charged a service fee by the city of $100.00 for each false alarm up to and including eight in number in excess of three in any 12-month period. The 12-month period is from January 1 of the calendar year to December 31 of the same year. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the ninth false alarm, the service fee shall be $250.00, up to and including the 11th false call in excess of three in any 12-month period. 
(c)  Upon the receipt of the 12th and 13th false alarm, the service fee shall be $500.00 in excess of three in any 12-month period. 
(d)  If after the 13th false call the fire alarm company shall meet with the fire officials for suspension of all new work for 90 days and if the corrections are not made on the system within the designated time, such company will have its license revoked in the city. 
(e)  For response to any false alarm signals by the fire department to alarms caused by or erroneously reported by the central systems contractor or his agents or sprinkler system contractors in the performance of their work, the contractors shall be charged a service fee by the city of $100.00 for each and every such false alarm signal, as he is a licensed professional in this field and procedures have been set up to avoid this problem. 
(f)  If the central station does not respond by promptly dispatching a runner on fire alarms as required by NFPA #72, such station shall be fined $250.00 for each and every incident, as he is a professional in this field and procedures have been set up to avoid this problem. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not apply for a period of three months from the date a permit is issued by the city for the installation of an automatic fire detection system. 
(h)  The senior fire official present shall determine whether a false alarm signal has been transmitted and whether the alarm user or the central station system contractor is responsible. The fire marshal or his designee shall keep up-to-date and current records of all violations. 
(i)  The city shall notify the parties involved of amounts owed to the city and shall make demand thereof, pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(j)  The city attorney may proceed by a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect such charge after demand therefor has been made by the city and payment is refused. 
(Code 1957, § 9-33(c); Ord. No. 2609, § 1(17-54), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 17-55. - Enforcement. 
    The city prosecutor may initiate action to obtain compliance with this article and payment of service charges assessed by the city as provided in section 17-54. 
(Ord. No. 2609, § 1(17-55), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 17-56. - Lien. 
    The city shall have the authority to place a lien against the central station contractors, fire alarm companies, and fire sprinkler companies in the amount of all assessed service charges. In addition, if the aforementioned entities do not pay the city's assessed service charges after 30 days, the city shall authorize the building department to suspend or hold up any work performed or to be performed in this city until all prior service charges are satisfied. 
(Code 1957, § 9-33(f); Ord. No. 2609, § 1(17-56), 12-1-93; Ord. No. 2739, 5-7-97) 
Sec. 17-57. - Responsibility of central station system contractor to report fire alarm signals. 
    Nothing in this article shall be deemed to relieve a central station systems contractor of the responsibility of promptly reporting all automatic fire detection signals signaling a fire alarm from an occupancy supervised by them to the city fire department. 
(Code 1957, § 9-33(d); Ord. No. 2609, § 1(17-57), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 17-58. - Disposition of signals. 
    Alarm signals initiated by manual fire alarm boxes, automatic fire detectors, waterflow from automatic sprinkler systems or actuation of other fire extinguishing systems or equipment shall be treated as fire alarms. The central station shall: 
(1)  Immediately retransmit the alarm signal to the fire department communications center. 
(2)  Promptly dispatch a runner or technician (travel time not to exceed one hour) to the protected premises when equipment must be manually reset. 
(3)  Notify the subscriber by the quickest available method. 
(4)  Provide written notice to the subscriber and the authority having jurisdiction. 
(5)  Notify such other parties as the authority having jurisdiction may require. 
(Ord. No. 2609, § 1(17-58), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 17-59. - Automatic fire detection system to be supervised as required by the fire department. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to supervise an automatic fire detection system in a manner other than that manner prescribed for a central station system and in a manner approved by the fire department. 
(Code 1957, § 9-33(e); Ord. No. 2609, § 1(17-59), 12-1-93) 
Chapter 17.5 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2699, adopted Jan. 15, 1997, repealed chapter 7, "Garbage and Refuse," and created a new chapter 7, "Solid Waste Management," which the editor has included herein as a new chapter 17.5, in order to maintain consistency in this Code. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17.5-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be titled "Solid Waste Management." 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-2. - Municipal responsibility. 
    The city is responsible for collection and transportation of solid waste from the city to a solid waste facility operated by a county or operated under a contract with a county pursuant to F.S. § 403.706, "Local Government Solid Waste Responsibilities." 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-3. - Use of private services in solid waste management. 
    The city shall use the most cost-effective means for provision of solid waste services. The city may contract with private persons for any or all services or programs in order to assure that such services are provided on the most cost-effective basis pursuant to F.S. § 403.706(3). These contracts for private services for collection and disposal of solid waste will be on file with the city clerk's office for public records review. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-4. - Solid waste collection requirements. 
    The city will provide for solid waste collection and disposal requirements which may be stricter or more extensive than those imposed by state solid waste management programs, rules, regulations and orders pursuant to F.S. § 403.706(14), "Local Government Solid Waste Responsibilities." 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-5. - Definitions. 
    The words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulations means the collection, piling, heaping and storage of waste, garbage, trash or other material that may create a nuisance affecting the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
    Biological waste means solid waste that causes or has the capability of causing disease or infection and includes, but not limited to, biomedical waste, diseased or dead animals, and other wastes capable of transmitting pathogens to humans or animals. The term does not include human remains that are disposed of by persons licensed under F.S. ch. 470, "Funeral Directing, Embalming and Direct Disposition". 
    Biomedical waste means any solid waste or liquid waste which may present a threat of infection to humans. The term includes, but is not limited to, nonliquid human tissue and body parts; laboratory and veterinary waste which contain human disease causing agents; discarded disposable sharps; human blood and human blood products and body fluids and other materials which in the opinion of the department of health represent a significant risk of infection to persons outside the generating facility. The term does not include human remains that are disposed of by persons licensed under F.S. ch. 470, "Funeral Directing, Embalming and Direct Disposition." 
    Bulk trash means any nonvegetative item which cannot be containerized, bagged, or bundled; including, but not limited to, inoperative and discarded white goods, furniture, and similar domestic goods. 
    City means the City of Riviera Beach. 
    Clean debris means any solid waste which is virtually inert and which is not a pollution threat to ground water or surface waters and is not a fire hazard and which is likely to retain its physical and chemical structure under expected conditions of disposal or use. The term includes uncontaminated concrete, including embedded pipe or steel, brick, glass, ceramic and other wastes designated by the state department of environmental protection. 
    Collection specifications means those items which are outlined in the normal and uniform level of service of the solid waste contract or as noted in this chapter. 
    Commercial service means the service provided to business establishments, churches, schools, office buildings, hotels and other nonresidential establishments using either mechanical containers or other approved containers. 
    Commercial waste means any and all accumulations of paper, rags, excelsior or other packing materials, wood, paper, cardboard boxes or containers, sweepings and other accumulation not included under the definition of garbage, generated by the operation of stores, offices and other business places. Commercial trash will include furniture, appliances and all other accumulations not included within the definition of garbage, and shall be included in the uniform level of service if properly prepared, consistent with the contract for solid waste collection and this chapter. 
    Compactor means any container which has compaction mechanism(s), whether stationary or mobile, all inclusive. 
    Construction and demolition debris means materials generally considered to be not water soluble and nonhazardous in nature, including but not limited to, steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt roofing material, pipe, gypsum, wall board and lumber from the construction or demolition project, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees and other vegetative matter which normally results from land clearing or land development operations for a structure at a site remote from the construction or demolition project site. Mixing of construction and demolition debris with other types of solid waste, including material from a construction or demolition site, which is not from actual construction or destruction of a structure, will cause it to be classified as other than construction and demolition debris. 
    Container means a thing that contains and holds solid waste or recovered materials for collection such as carts, dumpsters, bins, boxes, crates and cans or a cart or dumpster designed or intended to be mechanically dumped or loaded. 
    Contractor means the contractor for the city who has a current solid waste, recycling and yard waste collection franchise or service agreement with the city. 
    Curbside means the designated physical location for the placement of solid waste accumulations and containers intended for residential service collection and disposal. This designated location shall be as near as possible to the traveled streets or alley within six feet of the curb or right-of-way. 
    Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, jumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or upon any land or water so that such solid waste or hazardous waste or any constituent thereof may enter other lands or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground water or otherwise enter the environment. 
    Dumpster means a detachable container used for commercial service and designed or intended to be mechanically dumped into a loader/packer type truck used by the compactor. Dumpster sizes shall range from two cubic yards to ten cubic yards. 
    Garbage means all putrescible waste which generally includes but is not limited to kitchen and table food waste, or any organic waste that is attendant with or results from the storage, preparation, cooking, or handling of food materials whether attributed to residential or commercial activities. All garbage shall be containerized and not commingled with yard waste. Garbage shall not include any material that falls within the definition of special waste. 
    Garbage container means the city issued heavy gauge plastic carts, which are designed for automated pick-up. 
    Generation means the act or process of producing solid or hazardous waste. 
    Hauler means any person collecting recyclable or other solid waste materials within the incorporated areas of the city or transporting solid waste materials collected within the incorporated areas of the city. 
    Hazardous substance means any substance which is defined as a hazardous substance in the United States Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, 94 stat. 2767. 
    Household trash means accumulations of paper, magazines packaging, containers, sweepings and all other accumulations of a nature, other than garbage or lawn trash, which are usual to housekeeping and to the operations of stores, offices and other business places. 
    Land disposal means any placement of any solid or hazardous waste in or on the land and includes, but is not limited to, placement in a landfill, surface impoundment, waste pile, injection well, land treatment facility, salt bed formation, salt dome formation, or underground mine or cave or placement in a concrete vault, or bunker intended for disposal purposes. 
    Mechanical container means any detachable metal container or other container designed or intended to be mechanically dumped into a loader or packer type solid waste collection vehicle. 
    Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, or association, any municipal or private corporations organized or existing under the laws of the State of Florida or any other state, any county of the State of Florida; and any governmental agency of the State of Florida or the United States Government. 
    Recovered material means metals, paper, glass, plastic, textile or rubber material that have known recycling potential, which can be feasibly recycled and have been diverted and source separated or have been removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use or reuse as raw materials, whether or not the materials require subsequent processing or separating from each other; but does not include materials destined for any use that constitutes disposal. Recovered materials as described above are not solid waste. 
    Recyclable material means those materials which are capable of being recycled and which would otherwise be processed or disposed of as solid waste. 
    Refuse means both garbage and trash or a combination or mixture of garbage and trash, excluding recyclable materials. 
    Residential service means and includes service to single-family residences, duplexes, triplexes, apartments, mobile home units, multiunits and condominiums; which shall be charged per living unit the designated per collection fee for residential services. 
    Sludge includes the accumulated solids, residues, and precipitates generated as a result of waste treatment or processing, including waste water treatment, water supply treatment, or operation of an air pollution control facility and mixed liquids and solids pumped from septic tanks, grease traps, privies or similar waste disposal appurtenances. 
    Solid waste means sludge unregulated under the Federal Clean Water Act or Clean Air Act, sludge from waste treatment works, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, or garbage, rubbish, refuse, special waste, or other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial mining, agricultural or governmental operations. Recovered materials as defined in this section, are not solid waste. 
    Solid waste disposal facility means any solid waste management facility which is the final resting place for solid waste, including landfill and incineration facilities that produce ash from the process of incinerating municipal solid waste. 
    Solid waste management means the process by which solid waste is collected, transported, stored, separated, processed or disposed of in any other way, according to an orderly, purposeful and planned program which includes closure and long-term maintenance. 
    Source separated means the recovered materials are separated from solid waste where the recovered materials and solid waste are generated. The term does not require that various types of recovered materials be separated from each other and recognizes that minimis solid waste, in accordance with industry standards and practices, may be included in recovered materials. 
    Special trash pickup means any collection or disposal service provided which exceeds the uniform level of service provided under the commercial or residential service systems and for which a special charge is applied. 
    Special wastes means solid wastes that can require special handling and management, including but not limited to, white goods, waste tires, used oil, lead acid batteries, construction and demolition debris, ash residue, yard trash and biological waste. 
    Trash means all accumulation of paper, glass, metal, excelsior, rags, wooden or paper boxes and containers, sweepings, broken toys, tools, utensils, and all other accumulations of a similar nature other than garbage, which are usual to residential housekeeping and to the operation of stores, offices and other business places, but shall not include yard waste. Trash shall be containerized. 
    Uniform level of service means any and all collection of garbage and trash, whether commercial or residential, which conforms to the preparation and storage requirements set by the city or its contractors' service agreement. 
    White goods includes inoperative and discarded refrigerators, ranges, water heaters, freezers and other similar domestic and commercial large appliances. 
    Yard waste means horticultural matter resulting from site specific landscape maintenance, including accumulation of lawn grass, shrubbery cuttings, or clippings and leaf rakings, palm fronds, tree branches which shall not exceed five feet in length and not weight more than 50 pounds, or other matter usually created in the care of lawns and yards. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-6. - Collection by city. 
    All solid waste, recovered materials and recyclable materials accumulated and generated in the city and placed out for collection, shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city or its designated agents, licensees, employees or contract representatives. No other person or entity shall collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city. 
(1)  Collections by other than the city or its authorized agents or contractors is a violation of this Code. The first offense will result in a written warning. The second violation shall result in a $250.00 fine for each incident and each day. The third and any subsequent violation shall constitute a penalty of $500.00 for each violation. Each incident and/or each day shall constitute a separate and new violation. 
(2)  Collections by other than the city is unauthorized; exemptions: 
a.  This chapter shall not be interpreted to prohibit collectors of trash and garbage from outside the city, from hauling such refuse over the city streets, provided such collectors comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any other governing laws or ordinances of the city, Palm Beach County or the state. 
b.  This chapter shall not be interpreted to prevent businesses or individuals to properly dispose of recyclable or recovered materials generated by them for sale or disposal. Licensed and permitted vendors may pickup recyclable or recovered materials from businesses or individuals where generated. 
c.  Refer to article II, Hauler Requirements. 
d.  Special wastes not collected by the city to be handled by properly equipped, licensed and permitted haulers and handlers. Refer to section 17.5-14, "Special waste collection and disposal." 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-7. - Collection. 
    Collection supervised by the city manager or his designated representative or agent. All solid waste and recovered materials accumulated in the city for collection, conveyance and disposal shall be under the supervision of the city manager or his designated agent, who shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of collections, type and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal as necessary or as may be required by contract approved by the city council within the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to F.S. § 403.706, "Local Government Solid Waste Responsibilities." 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-8. - Points of collection. 
(a)  Residential service. Trash and garbage will be collected at curbside, in front of property being serviced. Trash shall be within a distance of six feet from curbside. All residential garbage containers shall be at curbside accessible to the automated pickup equipment. 
(b)  Commercial service. Businesses, establishments, entities and persons receiving commercial service from the city shall have commercial waste picked up at locations designated by the city. Mechanical containers shall not be placed in a location different than that designated by city or approved site development plans. Mechanical containers shall not be in an area that would create a nuisance or in an area creating a pedestrian or vehicular traffic safety hazard. 
(c)  Collection at illegal location. 
(1)  Residential trash and garbage placed out for collection at locations other than on the property from which it is generated, is declared a violation of this chapter and considered illegal dumping. 
(2)  Community trash piles and accumulations are prohibited. 
(3)  Placing residential trash on vacant lots, city properties, public land, streets, sidewalks, right-of-ways, easements or property owned by other persons is prohibited. 
(4)  Residential trash or garbage illegally deposited, placed or dumped shall result in a special pickup in accordance with section 17.5-18, "Special pickup procedure." 
(5)  Residential trash shall not be placed within six feet of any water meter, utility measuring device or fire hydrant. 
(6)  Residential trash shall not be placed under any utility overhead wires or next to any fence, structure or vehicle which would prohibit collection equipment from safely operating, in the collection of trash. 
(7)  Residential trash shall not be placed in the roadway or traveled portion of any street, road or right-of-way creating a traffic safety hazard or restricting vehicular or pedestrian traffic in any way. 
(8)  All commercial waste shall be placed in provided commercial containers for collection. All other commercial collection shall be by special pickups. Any commercial waste placed at illegal locations shall be governed pursuant to F.S. ch. 403, "Florida Litter Law." 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-9. - Frequency of collection. 
(a)  Residential collection. 
(1)  Residential garbage will be collected twice a week. 
(2)  Bulk trash and yard waste will be collected once a week. 
(b)  Commercial collection. Commercial service will be a minimum of once a week with the option for more scheduled pickups as agreed on contracted service and service fee schedule. 
(c)  Roll off and other special service containers shall be removed and emptied immediately after the container is full. 
(d)  Food service establishments and other businesses generating garbage or other perishable refuse or material shall have a minimum of twice a week collection, for health and sanitation. 
(e)  The city shall have the authority to require and schedule the number and frequency of all solid waste material or substance collection and disposal within the corporate limits of the city, in order to maintain health and sanitation standards in the city pursuant to F.S. § 403.706, "Local Government Solid Waste Responsibilities." 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-10. - Responsibility of property owners and persons in possession of real properties. 
(a)  The owner(s) and occupants of the property being serviced shall be jointly and severally responsible for payment of fees, fines, charges and penalties incident to the collection of residential trash and garbage from such property and compliance with provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Each head of household, lessee, owner, manager occupant or agent of any dwelling unit, apartment, house, boarding house, motel, warehouse, factory, store, other building or premises shall: 
(1)  Provide for on-site management of trash and garbage to comply with the requirement of this chapter. Noncompliance of this subsection will generate the special pickup process and penalty, after notice. 
(2)  Not place any trash out earlier than 24 hours prior to 6:00 a.m. of the day for the designated, and scheduled collection of each location in the city. 
(3)  Place all garbage containers for residential service, including carts and recycling bins, out no earlier than 12 hours prior to 6:00 a.m. of the scheduled day of collection. The containers shall be removed from curbside and returned to a point at the side or rear of the residence, not later than 12:01 a.m. (midnight) of the day of collection. Any container not removed will be tagged by the city with a 24-hour warning. Failure to remove container after 24 hours will result in a $25.00 charge being placed on the customers utility bill for each violation. Each incident and 24-hour period that the container is not removed or out of schedule shall be considered a separate incident and offense which shall result in an additional $25.00 per offense. The charge being placed on the utility bill. 
(4)  Separate trash as required by laws and regulations. 
a.  Yard waste not mixed with other trash, with clippings being bagged. 
b.  Place recyclables as designated in provided bins and containers. 
c.  Like bulk items placed in same stacks with separation of white goods from other bulk items. 
d.  Loose small items such as, leaves, lawn clippings and other litter shall be bagged and shall not be mixed with bulk trash. 
e.  Garbage shall not be mixed with bulk trash and shall be containerized for twice a week collection. 
f.  Exemptions. Commercial accounts do not have bulk trash collection and shall place all solid waste in mechanical containers for collection. 
(5)  Follow the preparation of commercial waste and garbage as follows: 
a.  All garbage shall be bagged prior to placing in designated containers by commercial users. 
b.  All liquids will be drained from bottles, cans or cartons. 
c.  Tree trimmings, hedge clippings or similar material shall not exceed five feet in length nor be greater than 50 pounds per piece. 
(6)  Provide for container use and care as follows: 
a.  Keep containers clean and sanitary. 
b.  Property owner responsible for each issued container, cart or bin. 
c.  Report theft of any container, cart or bin to city police within 24 hours of loss. 
d.  Report any damaged containers to city or its contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-11. - Accumulations prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any solid waste material such as debris, trash, rubbish, materials, items or substances to accumulate or remain upon any property located in the city, when the accumulations are deemed a nuisance by the city, constituting a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(1)  Storage of any solid waste or recyclable accumulations must be under cover and out of view of public. Yard trash need not be covered. 
(2)  Commercial storage of solid waste is permitted only in accordance with zoning regulations. 
(3)  Commercial establishments may store recyclables used in the conduct of their businesses provided the items are screened from public view and comply with fire safety codes. Storage of such accumulations shall not result in ground pollution. 
(b)  It is the property owner's responsibility to clean the swale area in front of their property, as well as the sidewalk. The property owner is also responsible for cleaning one-half of any city easement, alley way, or right-of-way adjoining and next to the boundaries of their property. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-12. - Burial of trash, garbage prohibited; accumulations and storage. 
    No person shall deposit on or bury in, cause to be deposited on or buried in any land, public square, street, alley, vacant lot, unoccupied property or dump in the ocean, the waters of Lake Worth or any creek, canal or water course any noxious, filthy, malodorous or offensive liquid or solid material, garbage or trash. No person shall place or keep such materials, garbage or trash anywhere within the city in any vessel, vehicle or receptacle other than in standard, approved garbage or trash container from which regular collections are to be made. All containers used for storage and collection of trash and garbage shall be approved by the city manager or the city's designated agent or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-13. - Joint accumulations prohibited. 
(a)  The independent or unconnected combining of residential trash and garbage from living units or other sources for the purpose of circumventing provisions of this chapter shall be prohibited. Neighbors shall not combine trash to avoid payment of the service charges. 
(b)  Commercial containers are for the collection of solid waste from the site where located. Placing waste in dumpsters from locations other than where the waste is generated is prohibited. Any person found to have placed waste in another person's container is subject to a fine of $100.00 for first offense and up to $500.00 for each offense thereafter. Each incident being a separate and new offense. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-14. - Special wastes collection and disposal: Not included in uniform level of service. 
(a)  The following list of special waste requires special handling and management and shall not be placed out for regular collection: 
(1)  Biomedical waste. 
(2)  Biological waste. 
(3)  Hazardous waste. 
(4)  Construction and demolition debris. 
(5)  Flammable or explosive refuse. 
(6)  Waste tires, used oil, lead acid batteries, ash residue. 
(7)  Automobile or vehicle parts. 
(b)  It shall be the joint responsibility of owner, occupant and agent to legally dispose of special waste as provided in F.S. ch. 403 by contracting the services of special state registered and licensed contractors for transporting and disposing special waste from site where generated or from property where located. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-15. - Commercial contractors, building contractors, demolition contractors, tree trimmers, landscape maintenance and gardeners responsibility and requirements. 
(a)  Landscapers and yard maintenance service. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or to scatter or spread about or cause to be distributed any amount of matter such as lawn clippings, leaves, debris and trash resulting from ordinary trimming care and upkeep of lawns, yards, tree shrub and hedges. 
(b)  Any construction, demolition, or remodeling permit will require obtaining the service of a roll off container and/or special pickup from the city or its contractor. The removal and disposal of construction or demolition debris and materials shall be the condition of any permit for construction, demolition or remodeling as set forth by the building official. Demolition contractors may haul their debris directly to a legal dump site, approved by the state after obtaining a permit from the city. 
(c)  Land clearing debris will be disposed of separate from the uniform level service requiring contractor removal or special pickup and handling. 
(d)  Each apartment, boarding house, single-family, duplex or triplex is limited to one major house clearing of household trash and furniture once each year. Putting out whole housing quantities of furniture is limited to one each year under uniform level of service. The second and subsequent clearing out of units will result in a special pickup for the trash with five-yard minimum charge. 
(e)  Tree trimmers and professional yard maintenance responsibility. Professional tree trimmers shall be responsible for removal of the debris generated from their jobs and may not leave any piles of yard waste to be collected by the city's uniform level of service. Any landscaping company, yard maintenance company or tree trimming service will be charged a special pickup fee plus administrative fee for the removal of any waste left for city pickup at any location in the city. This does not prevent any property owner from contracting lawn service and placing vegetation out for that property at the designated time. 
(f)  It is prohibited to place, scatter, spread, blow or cause to be deposited any litter, leaves, clippings or vegetation of any kind on city streets and right-of-ways. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-16. - Recovered materials or recycling dealers. 
(a)  Any recovered material dealer desiring to operate in the city shall register and obtain written approval to operate in the city prior to conducting any business. 
(b)  Recovered materials dealers shall be licensed and approved for each location in the city. Each collection container location shall be a licensed location requiring an occupational license fee for first location and an additional license fee for the second and subsequent location of collection pursuant to chapter 10, "Licenses." 
(c)  Any recovered materials dealer operating in the city without prior approval and licensing shall pay a fine of $250.00 for first violation and $500.00 fine for subsequent violations. 
(d)  Any containers illegally placed in the city to collect recovered material or solid waste will be moved to a place of storage. After written warning, the owner shall pay any storage, transportation, disposal and handling fees to recover the moved container. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-17. - Trash fires prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to kindle or maintain any bonfire or outdoor rubbish fire or burn refuse, waste, trash or yard waste without obtaining a permit from: 
(1)  Fire department; or 
(2)  Department of environmental protection. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-18. - Special pickup procedure. 
(a)  Special pickup notices shall be issued to property owners, agent, tenants or adult occupants of a premises for: 
(1)  Trash out off schedule. 
(2)  Trash mixed. 
(3)  Special waste. 
(4)  Trash hazard in street or right-of-way. 
(5)  Trash improperly prepared. 
(6)  Trash placed on another person's property. 
(7)  Other code violations involving any type solid waste or litter materials. 
(8)  Health, safety and welfare concerns involving accumulations. 
(9)  Automobile and other vehicle parts or marine components. 
(10)  Paints, batteries, oil or propane cylinders. 
(11)  Land clearing, construction debris. 
(b)  Notice requirements. 
(1)  The city shall issue a written warning to any agent, tenant or adult occupant, or by posting the premises, if no one is present. Whenever any violation of this chapter is found, the city shall allow the violators 24 hours within which to correct all violations. The notice may state the possible consequences of noncompliance within the 24-hour period. If at the end of the 24 hours, inspection of the violation property reveals the violation to be continuing, then the property owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant shall be presumed to have requested a special pickup of such waste by the city. The city shall charge the special pickup charge on the site's utility bill or shall mail a bill for each special pickup to the owner of the property. If the bill for the special pickup is not paid when due, a lien for the special pickup charge shall be recorded in the county courthouse against the property. The cost of recording the lien shall be added to the lien and both liens and the recording cost shall accrue at eight percent interest compounded monthly until paid. An administrative fee of $75.00 shall be included with each special pickup completed and shall be added to the lien. 
(2)  Vacant lots will be noticed and follow the procedure as outlined in section 11-33, "Inspection, notice, failure to comply." 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-19. - Enforcement of chapter; Florida litter law. 
(a)  Law enforcement officers shall enforce the provision of this chapter and the Florida Litter Law pursuant to F.S. § 403.413(6)(1). 
(b)  Code enforcement inspectors shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and the Florida Litter Law pursuant to F.S. § 403.413(7) "Enforcement by municipal employees." This section does not provide inspectors with the right to bear arms or make arrests. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-20. - Service deposit. 
    A service deposit may be required of all applicants for refuse service in the amount equal up to three times the amount of monthly billing. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-21. - Delinquent accounts. 
(a)  All accounts become due and payable not later than ten days from date of mailing. If bills are not paid within 30 days of the due date, a delinquency fee will be charged in the same amount as other city utility rate payment fees, and service may be discontinued without notice. 
(b)  If a delinquent account shall not be paid for any residence or commercial establishment using city water within 30 days after the due date, the city water supply as well as garbage service to such residence or commercial establishment may be discontinued until such delinquent fee is paid, including penalties and the expense for reconnecting water service. If not reconnected within 15 days, then the fee may be deducted from the water, sewer and trash deposit for such premises; provided, there is sufficient balance of such deposit after deducting any unpaid water or sewer service charges. 
(c)  If a delinquent account shall remain unpaid for any residence or commercial establishment which has no current city water account, the fee for collection and disposal of refuse shall be billed to the title holder of record of such premises and all penalties herein provided shall begin to run against such recorded owner thereof and the city shall have the right to impose a lien against the title to such real property for the amount of such bill, interest and penalties, as provided by city ordinance. 
(d)  The stoppage of services authorized in this section for nonpayment of collection charges shall be in addition to the right of the city to proceed for the collection of such unpaid charges in the manner provided by law for the collection of a municipal claim. 
(e)  The above conditions and requirements are applicable to the city's services whether the billing is direct from city, its agent or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-22. - Billing and collection for solid waste services; properties that are commercial, vacant and without water utility accounts or solid waste service. 
(a)  All solid waste and refuse in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city. 
(b)  Any business, commercial account, vacant residential property or vacant lots shall be required to pay for services received by special trash pickup if the location does not have a current or nondelinquent account. 
(c)  Any account on stop service shall receive special pickup service to remove any solid waste prior to removal of a container or after the container is removed. 
(d)  Removal of container from any commercial location because of stop service shall require the business to cease its operation and suspension of occupational license until commercial collection service is resumed. 
(e)  Residential accounts without water or trash service shall require occupants to vacate premises due to health and sanitation requirement for minimum housing standards after 30 days from stop service of utilities. 
(f)  All fees for residential or commercial waste removal service shall be a part of any contract for such services provided by the city and may be reviewed at the city clerk's office from the files. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-23. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by enforcement of provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the city's code enforcement board. The aggrieved shall file a request for hearing ten days prior to the next scheduled code enforcement board hearing. The code enforcement board shall have the authority to confirm, modify or revoke any action after a finding of fact relative to the appeal with the powers pursuant to F.S. § 162.08, "Power of Enforcement Boards." 
(b)  Any code enforcement citation issued pursuant to F.S. § 162.21(3)(a), "Supplemental Code Procedure" shall be contested in the county court. 
(c)  Whenever this chapter is enforced under the general penalty pursuant to section 1-11 of the city's code by notice to appear or by arrest, the county court will hear the case. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Secs. 17.5-24-17.5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HAULER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 17.5-51. - Permits, license or franchise regulations. 
(a)  No person shall pickup or transport any solid waste, recovered material or recyclable material or debris, scrap metal or construction debris generated in the incorporated areas of the city without a permit, license or a franchise issued by the city. 
(1)  Permits required. 
a.  Persons collecting and transporting recovered materials generated by them or their business in this city. 
b.  Nonprofit groups, homeowner's organizations and service clubs operating in this city are eligible for permit for fund raising collections. 
c.  Permits shall be valid for one year renewable during September of each year. 
(2)  Occupational licenses required. Commercial collection or hauling of any solid waste, recovered materials recycling material, hazardous waste or waste of any kind requires a license if load was generated within the corporate limits of the city. 
(3)  License conditions. The city may place reasonable conditions on any permit, license or franchise to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Commercial hauler license requirements. 
a.  Provide a detailed description of equipment used to store and transport recovered materials, recyclable materials or solid waste. The description list will include type, year(age), model and make or any other information requested. 
b.  Proof of commercial drivers license for all employees driving equipment and compliance with Florida Statutes governing commercial drivers license. 
(5)  List requirements. List of disposal and processing facilities with copies of valid permits to satisfy all requirements of F.S. ch. 403. 
(6)  Performance bond. A performance bond in the amount of $100,000.00 by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. 
(7)  Application fee. A nonrefundable application license fee of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-52. - Collection. 
    Haulers shall not collect solid waste or recyclable materials from any location in the city prior to 6:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-53. - Vehicles. 
(a)  Vehicles used to collect or transport materials shall be clean and the exterior of the vehicles washed weekly. The areas inside the vehicle or payload area shall also be cleaned and sanitized with a disinfectant and a deodorant. Waste water resulting from washing collection vehicles shall meet all applicable local, state and federal treatment and discharge standards. 
(b)  Each vehicle shall clearly have visible the name and phone number of the hauler and vehicle number not less than six inches in height on each side of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-54. - Containers, residential, commercial, and mechanical. 
(a)  The size of containers and frequency of service shall be sufficient to ensure proper storage and disposal of all materials generated during the service period. 
(b)  Containers shall be maintained in good condition free of rust holes, broken hinges, broken lids, fasteners or broken wheels. Each container shall have solid bottoms with a removable drain plug for purposes of cleaning. 
(c)  All metal containers shall be kept painted at all times and shall be repainted every three years. 
(d)  Container lids shall remain closed and containers not overfilled. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the customers to keep area in and around the containers clean and free of debris and litter. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-55. - Littering. 
(a)  Haulers will not overload vehicles or release litter in violation of the "Florida Litter Law," F.S. § 403.413. All loads will be properly secured with a cover. 
(b)  Any spillage will be immediately picked up by a hauler and load secured. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-56. - Reports required. 
(a)  Reports will be submitted to the city on or before the 25th day of the month following the month of service. The reports shall contain all information to comply with the provisions of F.S. ch. 403, part IV, and any other applicable statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances and interlocal governmental agreements. All reports shall be submitted in a format approved and acceptable to the city. 
(b)  Minimum contents of report: 
(1)  List of all businesses and customers collected from. 
(2)  The amount of weight and type of solid waste material collected. 
(3)  Amount of solid waste disposed of in a land fill. 
(4)  Names of third party recyclers and required information for that party. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-57. - Insurance requirements. 
    The hauler shall obtain and maintain insurance throughout the term of the permit not less than the insurance coverage set forth. Insurance policies shall be carried with companies having a best rating of A or greater with a financial size category of five or better, authorized to transact business in the state. 
(1)  Worker compensation. Hauler shall fulfill all the requirements of the Workers Compensation Act of Florida. 
(2)  Comprehensive general liability. The hauler shall maintain comprehensive general liability insurance showing the city as additionally insured with regard to all damages in the minimum amounts of: 
a.  One million dollars for bodily injury or death to any one person and the sum of one million dollars for bodily injury or death from any one accident. 
b.  One million dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident. 
c.  The city will be named as additionally insured for comprehensive general liability or each certificate of insurance for all owned, leased or hired vehicles used in the connection of collection and transporting of recycling materials, solid waste or other materials. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-58. - Inspection. 
    Code enforcement inspectors and police officers shall be authorized to conduct compliance inspections of any vehicle or equipment used to store and transport, solid waste, recovered materials or other materials and any recovered materials processing facility during normal hours of operation, without prior notice. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 17.5-59. - Suspension, revocation of permit. 
    Permit or license may be suspended or revoked by the city if hauler fails to comply with requirements of this chapter or specific permits conditions or repeatedly and consistently violates any laws, ordinances, rules or regulations of the city, county, state or federal government. 
(Ord. No. 2699, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Secs. 17.5-60-17.5-100. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; charge for unpaid checks and drafts given in payment of obligations to the city, § 2-4; director of finance, § 2-211 et seq.; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; utilities, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Municipal finance and tax, F.S. § 166.201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Insurance premium taxes authorized, F.S. §§ 175.101, 185.08. 

Sec. 18-21. - Property insurance premium tax levied. 
    There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer engaging in the business of insuring with respect to property as shown by the records of the state insurance commissioner an excise tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city, which tax shall be in the amount of two percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policy holders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city. The license or excise tax herein levied shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1957, § 18-1) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; firefighters' pension fund, § 14-46 et seq. 
State Law reference- Property insurance premium tax authorized for municipal firefighters' pension trust fund, F.S. § 175.101. 
Sec. 18-22. - Casualty insurance premium tax levied. 
    There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer engaging in the business of insuring with respect to casualty risks as shown by the records of the state insurance commissioner an excise tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city which tax shall be in the amount of one percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies, covering property within the city. The excise tax herein levied shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1957, § 18-2) 
Cross reference- Police officers' pension fund, § 14-71 et seq.; police department, § 16-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Casualty insurance premium taxes authorized to be used for police officers pension, F.S. § 185.08. 
Secs. 18-23-18-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Public service tax authorized, F.S. §§ 166.231, 166.232. 

Sec. 18-36. - Tax levied; amount; how paid. 
(a)  There is hereby levied by the city on each and every purchase in the city of water, electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured) and fuel oil, a ten percent tax and on telecommunication services a seven percent tax on the charges made by the seller thereof, which tax shall in every case be paid by the purchaser, for the use of the city, to the seller of such water, electricity, telecommunication services or gas at the time of paying the charge thereof to the seller thereof, but not less often than monthly. 
(b)  This tax shall not be applied against any fuel adjustment charge, which means all increases in cost of utility services to the ultimate consumer, resulting from an increase in the cost of fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973. 
(c)  Fuel oil is hereby taxed at a rate of $0.04 per gallon. 
(Code 1957, § 18-29) 
State Law reference- Limitations on fuel oil and fuel adjustment charges, F.S. § 166.231. 
Sec. 18-37. - Collection, report, disposition of tax; failure of seller to collect tax; failure of purchaser to pay tax. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, telecommunication services, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured) and fuel oil to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax hereby levied, at the time of collecting the selling price charged for each transaction, and to report and pay over, on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, unto the city clerk all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any purchase of electricity, telecommunication services, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured) and fuel oil without at the same time collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such purchase or purchases, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the same from the purchaser. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any sale where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same had been actually paid to the seller, and the mayor of the city shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and to take all proceedings in the name of the city as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected bills. If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to the seller, the seller's charge, and the tax hereby imposed and as hereby required, on the amount of the purchase for which such charge is made, or either, the seller shall have and is hereby vested with the right, power and authority to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1957, § 18-30) 
Sec. 18-38. - Duty of seller to keep records; records to be kept open for inspection. 
    Each and every seller of electricity, telecommunication services, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured) and fuel oil shall keep complete records showing all sales in the city of such commodities or service, which records shall show the price charged upon each sale, the date thereof and the date of payment therefor, and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during business hours on all business days, and such duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Code 1957, § 18-31) 
Sec. 18-39. - Bottled gas and fuel oil; corporate limit purchases taxable; sales record. 
    The tax hereby levied on purchases of bottled gas and fuel oil shall apply only to charges for such gas purchases made for consumption within the city. The seller shall be required upon request of the city to furnish the sales records showing the names and addresses of all purchasers of such gas claimed to have made purchases within the city for consumption without the city. 
(Code 1957, § 18-32) 
Sec. 18-40. - Exemptions. 
    The purchases of the United States, this state, and political subdivisions and agencies thereof, as well as recognized churches in this state for use exclusively for church purposes, are hereby exempted from payment of the taxes by this article. 
(Code 1957, § 18-33) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, F.S. § 166.231. 
Sec. 18-41. - Computation where charges paid monthly. 
    In all cases where the seller of electricity, telecommunication services, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured) and fuel oil collects the price thereof at monthly periods, the tax hereby levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period, provided that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1957, § 18-34) 
Sec. 18-42. - Refusal to pay tax; penalty. 
    Any purchaser wilfully failing or refusing to pay the tax hereby imposed, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller violating the provisions hereof, or any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions hereof, shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 for each and every violation, in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court. 
(Code 1957, § 18-35) 
Secs. 18-43-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2901, § 1, adopted June 26, 2001, and Ord. No. 2900, § 1, adopted June 20, 2001, which pertained to establishment of a local communications services tax rate did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as Art. IV, §§ 18-61, 18-62, was at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference- Communications Services Tax Simplification Law, F.S. ch. 202. 

Sec. 18-61. - Rate established. 
(a)  For the period beginning October 1, 2001, and ending September 30, 2002, the city hereby invokes its authority, in accordance with the Florida Communications Services Tax Simplification Act (ACT), to impose a local communications services tax rate of 5.4 percent. This 5.4 percent local communications services tax is the sum of the rate set forth in F.S. § 202.19(2)(a), plus the difference between the conversion rates set forth in F.S. §§ 202.20(1)(a) and (1)(b). The ACT is designed to be revenue neutral. Consistent with this specific legislative intent of the ACT that the new tax structure provide revenue neutrality for local governments, the city hereby makes this adjustment. 
(b)  For the period beginning October 1, 2002, and continuing thereafter, the city hereby invokes its authority, in accordance with ACT, to impose the local communications services tax rate of 5.1 percent as set forth in F.S. § 202.19(2)(a). The ACT is designed to be revenue neutral. Consistent with this specific legislative intent of the ACT that the new tax structure provide revenue neutrality for local governments, the city hereby makes this adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2901, § 1, 6-20-01) 
Sec. 18-62. - Election to adjust tax rate. 
(a)  The city hereby invokes its authority, in accordance with F.S. § 337.401(3)(c)1., to adjust its local communications services tax rate by the addition of 0.12 percent in lieu of requiring and collecting permit fees from any provider of communications services. The ACT is designed to be revenue neutral. Consistent with this specific legislative intent of the ACT that the new tax structure provides revenue neutrality for local governments, the city hereby makes this adjustment. 
(b)  This adjustment shall be applied to the same communications services subject to the local communications services tax set forth in F.S. §§ 202.20(1)(a) and (1)(b), and 202.19(2)(a). 
(c)  The city hereby declares that this adjustment shall remain in effect until and unless otherwise expressly repealed by the city, irrespective of whether the city, in its discretion, maintains a local communications services tax rate under F.S. §§ 202.20(1)(a) and (1)(b) or § 202.19(2)(a). 
(Ord. No. 2900, § 1, 6-26-01) 
Chapter 19 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; junked, wrecked, abandoned motor vehicles, § 11-91 et seq.; noise regulations, § 11-141 et seq.; operating noise levels for motor vehicles, § 11-172; parks and recreation, ch. 13; boats, § 13-51 et seq.; police, ch. 16; vehicles for hire, ch. 21; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; off-street parking and loading regulations, § 31-566 et seq. 
State Law reference- Uniform traffic control law, F.S. ch. 316. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
    The words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in F.S. § 316.003, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Code 1957, § 20-1) 
State Law reference- Definitions in uniform traffic control law, F.S. § 316.003. 
Sec. 19-2. - Powers and duties of chief of police and police department to regulate traffic. 
(a)  The chief of police, with the consent of the city manager, except as otherwise directed by this chapter and except as otherwise directed by the city council and city manager and as approved by the engineering department, shall have power and he is hereby authorized to regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the city by requesting the erection or placing of signs, signals, markers, markings and other authorized traffic control devices in the following specified instances: 
(1)  Designation of areas where parking is prohibited or limited. 
(2)  Designation of one-way streets, through streets, stop streets, "U" turns, play streets, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, crosswalks, safety zones and truck routes. 
(3)  Installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices. 
(4)  Marking off of traffic lanes indicating the flow of traffic. 
(5)  Closing of streets to vehicular or pedestrian traffic for temporary period of time. 
(6)  Regulation of traffic during emergencies, notwithstanding other regulations. 
(b)  The police department, under direction of the city manager, shall have full power and be charged with all duties in relation to the management of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1957, §§ 20-3, 20-4) 
Cross reference- Police department, § 16-21 et seq. 
Sec. 19-3. - Obedience to police officers. 
    Drivers must at all times comply with any direction by voice or hand of any member of the police force as to stopping, starting, approaching or departing from any place, the manner of taking up or setting down passengers or loading or unloading goods in any place. No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer. 
(Code 1957, § 20-6) 
Sec. 19-4. - Hitchhiking; selling merchandise in streets. 
    No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle or for the purpose of selling any merchandise or agricultural products. 
(Code 1957, § 20-14) 
Sec. 19-5. - Combat auto theft program. 
(a)  The Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law authorizes counties and municipalities to enact ordinances to establish "Combat Auto Theft" (CAT) programs, whereby vehicle owners may enroll their vehicles, giving advance written consent to law enforcement officers to stop their enrolled vehicles if they are being operated between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided the CAT decal is properly displayed in the lower left corner of the vehicle's rear window. 
(b)  A "Combat Auto Theft (CAT)" program, as authorized under the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law, is hereby established in the city. The program shall include: 
(1)  Consent forms to be executed by motor vehicle owners who enroll vehicles in the program. 
(2)  CAT program decals which conform to the specifications, colors and design of the uniform CAT decal established by the department of law enforcement for use throughout the state. 
(3)  All other provisions of the "Combat Auto Theft" program as provided for in the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law. Administration of the program shall be conducted by the chief of police. 
(c)  In order to provide for the cost of administering the program, a fee of $2.00 for each decal is hereby established. The city clerk shall collect the decal fees and remit them to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2664, § 1(1.01), 4-19-95) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2664, § 1(1.01), adopted Apr. 19, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, its inclusion herein as § 19-5 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 19-6-19-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-21. - U-turns. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1957, § 20-26) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 29. 
Sec. 19-22. - Play streets. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon the street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 20-48) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 29. 
Sec. 19-23. - Driving through corner properties prohibited. 
(a)  When a filling station or other property provides for its use a driveway or other similar facility which is located on a corner in the city, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use such driveway or similar facility for the purpose of making any type of turn at such corner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of any vehicle to cut through such driveway or other similar facility as described in subsection (a) of this section to gain access to another street or alley. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of any vehicle to cut through such driveway or other similar facility as described in subsection (a) of this section to avoid a traffic light or traffic control sign at such corner. 
(Code 1957, § 20-55) 
Sec. 19-24. - Vehicles emitting smoke. 
    It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be operated upon the streets or avenues of the city which creates an unusual amount of smoke. 
(Code 1957, § 20-58) 
Sec. 19-25. - One-way streets. 
    Vehicular traffic on one-way streets shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1957, § 20-63) 
Sec. 19-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2896, § 1, adopted May 16, 2001, repealed the former § 19-26, derived from Code 1957, § 20-70.02, and enacted new provisions relating to similar subject matter designated as §§ 19-26.1-19-26.8. Such sections have been resdesignated by the editor as §§ 19-47-19-54 for purposes of classification. 
Sec. 19-27. - Quiet zone. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone for quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency. 
(Code 1957, § 20-47) 
Secs. 19-28-19-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BATHING BEACH AREAS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 13; beaches and certain other public property; rules of conduct, § 13-1. 

Sec. 19-36. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of city departments, or private ambulance companies, or such others as may be authorized by city authority. 
    Bathing beach or beach area means that area which is on the ocean front, and which is subject to high or low tides, and also that area lying adjacent thereto and westerly thereof commonly referred to as sand dunes and soft sand. It shall also include the area as above described which lies within the north and south boundary lines of the city limits and extended eastward to the low water mark of the Atlantic Ocean, and extended westward to the east boundary line of the coastal construction setback line. Such area is designated restricted area, excepting therefrom the municipal beach parking area. 
    Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Licensed person means persons holding special permits to carry on business in such areas. 
    Motor driven cycle means every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor and every bicycle with a motor attached. 
    Motor vehicle means all vehicles propelled by power, other than muscular power, trailers, semi-trailers, coaches or other similar devices, or vehicles. 
    Owner means any person, association of persons, firms or corporations in whose name the title to a motor vehicle is registered. 
    Pedestrian means any person on foot. 
    Police officer means every officer of the city police department or any such person authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests. 
    Possession includes and means the person in charge of, the caretaker of or sitting in such vehicle. 
(Code 1957, § 20-61.10) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-37. - Vehicular traffic prohibited in restricted area; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor driven cycle or motor vehicle on the beach area or bathing beach and herein defined as the restricted area at any time, except that authorized emergency vehicles are permitted thereon while attending to their duties. 
(Code 1957, § 20-61.11) 
Sec. 19-38. - Operators of vehicles prohibited in restricted area. 
    Neither the owner nor any person employing or otherwise directing the driver of any motor vehicle shall require or knowingly permit the operation of such vehicle upon or in such restricted area. 
(Code 1957, § 20-61.12) 
Sec. 19-39. - Seizure and impounding of vehicles-Redemption; payment of fines, costs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be in or on such restricted area at any time and shall be subject to seizure if found thereon and shall be impounded by the city. The owner may redeem the motor vehicle by paying any fine, if any, imposed upon the person in possession of the motor vehicle, when so seized, plus the costs incurred in such impounding. The costs shall include transportation, storage and care thereof and the recording of such seizure. Such costs shall not exceed $75.00. The fine is not included in such costs. 
(Code 1957, § 20-61.13) 
Cross reference- Junked, wrecked, abandoned motor vehicles, § 11-91 et seq. 
Sec. 19-40. - Same-Notice to owner. 
    Whenever a vehicle is impounded, as authorized by section 19-39, notice of such action shall be sent to the owner that the vehicle has been so impounded and the reasons why it was impounded. 
(Code 1957, § 20-61.14) 
Sec. 19-41. - Same-Removal of vehicle by police. 
    Members of the police department and all members of the city council are hereby authorized to remove any vehicle from the restricted area to a place of safety and there to be kept until the case is satisfactorily disposed of and all costs and fines connected therewith are paid. 
(Code 1957, § 20-61.15) 
Sec. 19-42. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to licensed persons who have been conducting a business and driving on the beach carrying on such business as of August 28, 1963, provided they abide by and comply with this section of this division and: 
(1)  They first obtain from the city manager a special permit authorizing such activity. 
(2)  That in the carrying on of such business, while moving on the beach, they do not drive more than 15 miles per hour, and provided further they drive as close to the edge of the water as the tides permit. It is intended by this subsection that driving on the soft sand is prohibited except in crossing back and forth to go onto or to come off the beach area. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person now carrying on such business to continue to carry on such business, after the expiration date above stated without first obtaining a special license. 
(Code 1957, § 20-61.16) 
Sec. 19-43. - Violation of provisions-Guilty party defined. 
    Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit or aids or abets in the committing of any act declared herein to be a violation of this division, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons, or as principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense, and every person who, fraudulently, forcibly or wilfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provisions of this division is likewise guilty of such offense. 
(Code 1957, § 20-61.17) 
Sec. 19-44. - Same-Prima facie evidence of vehicle ownership within restricted area; penalty. 
    Any person in possession of a motor vehicle within the restricted area shall be deemed to have driven such vehicle into or onto such restricted area and shall be subject to arrest for the violation hereof. 
(Code 1957, § 20-61.18) 
Sec. 19-45. - Same-Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle except emergency vehicles within or on the restricted area at any time. Any person found violating the terms of this division shall be subject to arrest and, if found guilty, may be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for a term not exceeding 60 days. 
(Code 1957, § 20-61.19) 
Sec. 19-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RAILROAD CROSSINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2896, § 1, adopted May 5, 2001, enacted provisions pertaining to railroad cars blocking crossings, designated as §§ 19-26.1-19-26.8. Such sections have been redesignated by the editor as Div. 3, §§ 19-47-19-54. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch.6; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29. 

Sec. 19-47. - Automatic electric signal devices and crossing gates. 
(a)  All railroad companies operating within the city shall build, construct, maintain, and keep in good condition all railroad crossings pursuant to F.S. chapters 357 and 338, and all rules and regulations of the department of transportation adopted thereto and by agreements with the city. 
(b)  At each street crossing where the streets of the city intersect at grade level, railroad tracks which are not main or passing tracks, such railroad companies shall either install automatic electric signal devices of the type herein specified or use a flagman to give warning to the approach of every train to such crossing. 
(Ord. No. 2896, § 1, 5-16-01) 
Sec. 19-48. - Speed of trains. 
(a)  CSX system. It shall be unlawful to operate within the city any locomotive, train, track motor car or other vehicle self-propelled or otherwise traveling along and upon the CSX system railroad tracks at a speed in excess of: 
Rate of Speed Area 45 miles per hour Between Silver Beach Road and Port Road  
(b)  Florida east coast. It shall be unlawful to operate within the city any locomotive, train, track motor car or other vehicle self-propelled or otherwise traveling along and upon the Florida east coast railroad tracks at a speed in excess of 45 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 2896, § 1, 5-16-2001) 
Sec. 19-49. - Track motor cars, handcars, etc., to stop at railroad crossings. 
    Every track motor car, handcar or other vehicle so constructed as to be incapable of activating automatic safety gates and automatic crossing signal devices operating upon railroad tracks shall stop at every railroad crossing within the city where a city street intersects a railroad track at grade level and shall yield the right-of-way to traffic traveling along such intersecting street and shall not proceed across such intersection until the movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Ord. No. 2896, § 1, 5-16-01) 
Sec. 19-50. - Blocking of railroad crossings. 
(a)  The following crossings where the streets of the city intersect a railroad track at grade level are hereby designated as "emergency crossings" and are to remain unblocked by railroad traffic at all times except by moving trains. 
(1)  Such streets which intersect the Florida east coast railroad tracks are as follows: 
Blue Heron Boulevard 
Silver Beach Road 
13 th Street 
Port Road 
Australian Avenue (north of 13 th Street or Avenue M) 
State Road 5 at the Port of Palm Beach 
State Road at the Port of Palm Beach 
State Road 710 east of Avenue S 
(2)  Such streets which intersect the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad Company tracks are as follows: 
Military Trail at State Road 710 
(b)  No public street or vehicular crossing in the city shall be blocked, closed, or obstructed by a train, locomotive or other railroad vehicle for a period of more than ten minutes except in emergencies and except for the following times as specifically stated: 
(1)  No railroad locomotive, railroad car, train or other railroad vehicle shall block, obstruct or close any public street or vehicular crossing in the city for longer than five minutes, between the hours of: 
5:45 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.; 2:20 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.; and 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
Monday through Friday, except as set forth in paragraph (2) herein below. 
(2)  The Port Road crossing at Port Road and the Old Dixie Highway crossing, because of its location immediately adjacent to the Port of Palm Beach and its railroad switching operations necessary to carry out its shipping operations, are exempted from the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) for blocking a crossing for a reasonable time for necessary switching operations during 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; for periods of up to ten minutes each between the hours of 8:30 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.; for reasonable periods of time; and for periods of up to ten minutes each between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. At no time will switching operations close the Blue Heron crossing or interfere with traffic flow at the Blue Heron crossing. 
(Ord. No. 2896, § 1, 6-16-01) 
Sec. 19-51. - Railroad crossings to be cleared for emergency vehicles. 
    Railroad trains or equipment shall be separated, cut or moved to clear the railroad track crossing any public road or street within the city upon the approach of an emergency vehicle upon notification or by the sounding of sirens, flashing of lights, waving of flags or any other warning sufficient to attract attention to such emergency vehicle defined as follows: 
(1)  An ambulance responding to an emergency call or transporting a person under emergency conditions; 
(2)  A fire engine or other emergency vehicle engaged in the saving of life, property or responding to any other public peril; 
(3)  Any other emergency vehicle or any other vehicle when operated as an emergency vehicle defined as a vehicle which is engaged in the saving of life, property or responding to a public peril. 
(Ord. No. 2896, § 1, 5-16-01) 
Sec. 19-52. - Railroad personnel or Port of Palm Beach personnel liable for violations of this division. 
    The personnel of any railroad company operating or in charge of the operation of any train, railroad car or railroad equipment in violation of this division except in cases of emergency, shall be liable when it is due to the sole fault of such personnel and at all other times the railroad or Port of Palm Beach shall be responsible. 
(Ord. No. 2896, § 1, 5-16-01) 
Sec. 19-53. - Liability of railroad company or Port of Palm Beach for violation of this division by its agents and employees. 
    The railroad company of Port of Palm Beach shall be responsible for the acts of its agents or employees for the violation of this division unless such agent's employees are acting beyond the scope of their authority. 
(Ord. No. 2896, § 1, 5-16-01) 
Sec. 19-54. - Sounding train horns and whistles at signalized railroad crossings prohibited; city to erect warning signs for motorists. 
    It shall be unlawful for a railroad train, approaching a public at-grade crossing having train-activated automatic traffic-control devices, including flashing lights, bells and crossing gates, to emit an audible warning signal in advance of said intersection between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This prohibition shall not apply to any such intersection where the city has failed to erect traffic signs in accordance with state law announcing to motorists that railroad train horns and whistles will not be sounded during the said hours. 
(Ord. No. 2896, § 1, 5-16-01) 
Sec. 19-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; off-street parking and loading regulations, § 31-566 et seq. 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, F.S. § 316.195. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-56. - Marked spaces. 
(a)  Yellow paint or markings on any street or curbing shall mean parking is prohibited in that area so marked. Areas marked with yellow paint and designated as a loading zone shall be permitted to be used for that purpose or for whatever purpose so designated. 
(b)  The existence of such signs, signals, markers or markings at any place within the city shall be prima facie evidence that such signs or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the chief of police and city manager and in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any person failing or refusing to comply with the directions indicated or any sign or marker erected or placed in accordance with the provisions of this section when so placed or erected shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 20-3) 
Sec. 19-57. - Standing or parking close to curb. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of the traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, except as provided in the following: 
(1)  Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such mark or sign. 
(2)  In places where and at hours when stopping for the loading or unloading of merchandise or material is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation of merchandise or materials may back into the curb to take on or discharge loads. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or station any automobile, truck or any other vehicle of any description whatsoever upon any public street or alley in the city in front of, or so as to interfere with, any driveway or entrance from the street upon private property, or to place any material of any description in such a manner as to obstruct such driveway. 
(Code 1957, § 20-71) 
Sec. 19-58. - Unlawful parking. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale; or 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1957, § 20-72) 
Sec. 19-59. - Restrictions on vehicles in excess of three-quarters ton. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or station any truck, bus or commercial vehicle in excess of three-quarters ton maximum load capacity in any public right-of-way or within the front yard lines, other than a driveway in any residential zoning district within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 20-72.1) 
Sec. 19-60. - Handicapped parking. 
(a)  It is prohibited for any person to park a vehicle in a properly designated handicapped parking space in violation of the provisions of F.S. § 316.1955 or F.S. § 316.1956. It shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle was parked and left in the space by the person in whose name the vehicle is registered and licensed according to the records of the division of motor vehicles. Persons violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, for which the fine shall be $250.00. 
(b)  In accordance with F.S. § 316.008(4)(a)(b), one-third of the fines collected shall be used to defray expenses for the administration of this section and the provisions of the Florida Statutes regarding disabled parking violations. Two-thirds of the fines collected shall be used to provide funds to improve accessibility and equal opportunity to qualified physically disabled persons in the city and to provide funds to conduct public awareness programs in the city concerning physically disabled persons. 
(Code 1957, § 20-73(c); Ord. No. 2758, § 1, 9-17-97) 
Sec. 19-61. - Parking on right side of street. 
    All motor vehicles parking on any street or highway within the city shall be parked on the driver's right hand side of the street. 
(Code 1957, § 20-75) 
Sec. 19-62. - Parking prohibited on west side of beach street. 
    The parking of motor vehicles is prohibited on the west side of the street extending from the north boundary of the municipal beach property southerly to the south boundary of the municipal beach property, the street being the most easterly street on the municipal beach property within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 20-74) 
Sec. 19-63. - Parking on state highway number five. 
(a)  Parking of motor vehicles shall be limited to the period of one hour on state highway number five between Blue Heron Boulevard and 23rd Street and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Parking of motor vehicles shall be limited to the period of one hour on state highway number five in the block between 11th and 12th Streets within the city. 
(b)  All vehicles parking on state highway number five within the city shall be parked parallel to the sidewalk. 
(c)  The parking of trucks is prohibited on the east side of state highway number five beginning at the southern limits of the city and extending a distance of 181 feet to the north, and on the west side of state highway number five beginning at the southern limits of the city and extending a distance of 211 feet to the north. 
(Code 1957, §§ 20-76-20-78) 
Sec. 19-64. - Stopping or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
    When signs are erected upon approach to hazardous or congested places, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1957, § 20-79) 
Sec. 19-65. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
    When signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of the street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1957, § 20-80) 
Sec. 19-66. - Standing for loading only. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger zone during the hours when the regulations applicable to such passenger zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1957, § 20-81) 
Sec. 19-67. - Allowance for free movement for vehicular traffic. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or a police officer. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley for over 15 minutes unless there is left available not less than eight feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1957, § 20-82) 
Sec. 19-68. - Bus and taxicab stands. 
(a)  The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1957, § 20-83) 
Sec. 19-69. - Moving cars from parked positions. 
    Cars parked shall move out in the direction headed, or if they are parked at an angle with the curb they shall back out on that angle until they have cleared the other cars and shall proceed in the direction they are most nearly headed. No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Code 1957, § 20-86) 
Sec. 19-70. - Maximum parking time. 
    No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle on any street or alley of this city for more than a consecutive period of 60 hours. 
(Code 1957, § 20-87) 
Sec. 19-71. - Backing to curb. 
    In no case shall any vehicle remain backed up to the curb, except when actually loading or unloading. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90) 
Sec. 19-72. - Failure to comply with notice or citation attached to vehicle; follow-up notice; prosecution in county court; penalty imposed. 
(a)  A user or owner who violates any of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking imposed by ordinance or code in response to such notice or citation affixed to such motor vehicle may pay to the city, the sum of $25.00 within five business days to avoid a late fee. 
(b)  If such user or owner shall fail to pay such citation within five business days excluding weekends and holidays, the following late fee shall be imposed: If payment is postmarked after 96 hours of due date, add $10.00, after 30 days, add $25.00, plus original payment affixed to citation. Such violator(s) shall have the right to appeal or request a court hearing and if such user or owner is found guilty of such violation in county court, such user or owner shall be fined a minimum of $50.00 per violation plus court costs. 
(c)  The violator, upon satisfactorily complying with the applicable code, shall be issued a parking violation payment verification by the City of Riviera Beach Parking Citation Division. 
(d)  If persons fail to pay three or more fines in accordance with the aforementioned sections, or in accordance with section 19-60, the city will report such failure to the clerk of the court who will furnish the department of motor vehicles a list of violators for the purpose of withholding license plates or revalidation stickers until all fines have been paid. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90.2; Ord. No. 2759, § 1, 9-17-97; Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 3-5-03) 
Sec. 19-72.1. - Failure to comply with section 19-72 or 19-60. 
    The clerk of the court shall supply the department of highway safety and motor vehicles with a computer tape or cartridge which is machine readable by the computer system installed at the DHSMV listing persons who have three or more outstanding parking violations, including violations of F.S. § 316.1955 or 316.1956. 
(Ord. No. 2757, § 1, 9-17-97; Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 3-5-03) 
Secs. 19-73-19-85. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2936, § 1, adopted Mar. 5, 2003 deleted § 19-73, which pertained to fines for a violation of F.S. §§ 316.1955 and 316.1956 and derived from Code 1957, § 20-90.4(n)). 
DIVISION 2. - HAZARDOUS TRAFFIC AREAS 

Sec. 19-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hazardous traffic areas means: 
(1)  The adjacent road right-of-way on the west side of State Road A1A-703 between Cabana Road and the northern city limits. 
(2)  The adjacent road right-of-way on the east side of State Road A1A-703 between Ocean Avenue and the northern city limits. 
    Prohibited areas means publicly or privately owned vacant lands lying on the east side of State Road A1A-703 between Ocean Avenue and the northern city limits. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90.4(b), (c)) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-87. - Intent and purpose. 
    This division is enacted as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations and for the protection of the public rights in the use of city streets and thoroughfares. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90.4(a)) 
Sec. 19-88. - Parking prohibited. 
    Parking of any vehicle in the hazardous traffic area or prohibited area is prohibited. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90.4(d)) 
Sec. 19-89. - Enforcement by removal and impounding. 
    Any vehicle parked in the hazardous traffic area or in the prohibited area without lawful authority shall be deemed a public nuisance and the department of police or any other agent of the city granted power to enforce city ordinances is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed at the sole cost and expense of the owner or violator. Such police authority shall have the power and is hereby authorized to remove the vehicle by either private or governmental equipment to the city pound, or privately operated pound, or else as may be deemed advisable. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90.4(e)) 
Sec. 19-90. - Notice to owner. 
    Whenever the department of police has impounded a vehicle as described in section 19-89, a notice of such removal and the storage place of such vehicle shall be mailed to the last registered owner of such vehicle if the name and address of such owner can be ascertained with reasonable diligence. Such notice shall state that if the owner fails to reclaim such vehicle within 60 days from the date of mailing, title to such vehicle will vest in the city and such vehicle will be sold at public auction to be held not sooner than 30 days after the expiration of the 60-day period contained in the notice. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90.4(f)) 
State Law reference- Notice requirement for certain towed vehicles, F.S. § 715.05. 
Sec. 19-91. - Owner responsibility. 
    The registered owner of a vehicle shall be presumed to be the owner at the time of violation and shall be severally responsible for the offenses and the impoundment, except where the use of the vehicle was secured by the operator without the owner's consent. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90.4(g)) 
Sec. 19-92. - Records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police department to safely keep any impounded vehicle until such vehicle shall have been repossessed by the owner or person legally entitled to possession thereof or otherwise disposed of as provided in this section. The police department shall cause to be kept an accurate record of the description of such vehicle including: 
(1)  The name of the police officer from whom such a vehicle was received. 
(2)  The police officer employed to tow or have delivered the same to the pound or authorized garage. 
(3)  The date and time when received. 
(4)  The place where found, seized or taken possession of. 
(5)  The make and color of car, style or body, kind or power, motor number, serial number, number of cylinders, year built, state license number, if any, equipment and general description. 
(6)  The name and address of the person redeeming the vehicle and the date of redemption. 
(7)  The manner and date of disposal of the vehicle in case it shall not be redeemed. 
(8)  The cost of outstanding summonses and the towing and storage charges. 
(b)  This record shall be in the form prescribed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90.4(h)) 
Sec. 19-93. - Release of vehicle. 
(a)  Vehicles impounded pursuant to this division will be released to their lawful owners or person entitled to possession upon showing adequate evidence of a right to its possession and paying the payment of all accrued fines and costs, any outstanding unpaid summons or each violation for which there is an outstanding or otherwise unsettled traffic violation notice or warrant and the charges for towing and storage. The release should be signed by an authorized officer. 
(b)  No vehicle impounded pursuant to this division will be released if there is a certification from a court or administrative bureau that the vehicle has outstanding unpaid summonses charging such vehicle was parked, stopped or standing in violation of any law or ordinance of the city until the owner or person entitled to possession provides proof from the court or administrative bureau that such summonses have been disposed of in accordance with law. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90.4(i), (j)) 
Sec. 19-94. - Sale of vehicle. 
(a)  Whenever any vehicle impounded shall remain unclaimed by the owner or other person legally entitled to possession for a period of 60 days from the day notice was mailed, it shall be the duty of the police department to sell such vehicle at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. The time and place of such sale shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, not less than ten nor more than 15 days from expiration of the 60 days. The notice shall contain a full description of the vehicle to be sold and at the time and place of sale. Any vehicle not sold at the first sale may be offered for sale and sold at any subsequent sale without further notice or publication. 
(b)  The proceeds of such sale after paying all liens and deducting all reasonable charges and expenses incurred by such officer charged with the keeping of the pound, including the fees and charges herein specified in receiving, towing, keeping, preparing and giving notices, advertising for sale or selling or otherwise disposing of such vehicle, shall be paid to the director of finance. 
(c)  Whenever any such vehicle shall remain unsold for a period of 180 days from and including the day when it shall have been delivered to any vehicle pound as provided in this division, any such vehicle may be given to the use of any department of the city or other governmental agency desiring it or may be removed for dismantling. No member of the department of police, nor any other employee of the city, directly or indirectly, shall purchase or participate in the bidding for or purchase of any vehicle offered for sale. 
(d)  Notice to owners of vehicles deemed by the chief of police to be of no value or of insufficient value to warrant storage and sale shall provide that: 
(1)  The owner shall appear to redeem such valueless vehicle within 60 days after the mailing of notice of its removal. 
(2)  The vehicle is deemed to be of no value or of insufficient value to warrant storage and sale; and if such owner does not appear, it is the intention of the city to dispose or destroy such vehicle. 
The notice shall be sent to any owner whose name and address can be ascertained with reasonable diligence or by publishing such notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once at least five days before its destruction or other disposition. Such vehicle as above provided shall be conclusively deemed of no value and to be abandoned property, and there shall be no claim against the city, chief of police nor any of their agents or employees by reason of any such destruction or disposition. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90.4(k)) 
Sec. 19-95. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city council may promulgate such regulations by resolution, as are necessary to effectuate the provisions of this division, including provisions for the recovery of the administrative costs of the program by the city. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90.4(l)) 
Sec. 19-96. - Posting of signs. 
    The city manager is authorized and directed to post appropriate signs designating the hazardous traffic area and the prohibited area at the north and south entrances to the hazardous traffic area and the prohibited area, giving notice to the public at large, and upon the posting of such signs this division shall be enforced. 
(Code 1957, § 20-90.4(m)) 
Secs. 19-97-19-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKING METERS 

Sec. 19-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parking meter means and includes any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this division placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this division. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by the city and when operated shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time, and at the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. 
    Parking meter space means any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface in the area adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters. 
    Parking meter zone means and includes any area upon which parking meters are installed and in operation. 
(Code 1957, § 20-91) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-117. - Authority to designate zones and spaces and install meters. 
    The city council is hereby authorized and directed to establish as it may deem best, and from time to time hereafter as traffic conditions require, zones to be known as parking meter zones upon such streets or other areas in the city as are selected for the location of such zones. In such parking meter zones the city council shall cause parking meters to be installed when necessary and shall cause parking meter spaces to be designated as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1957, § 20-92) 
Sec. 19-118. - Installation, location, condition, violation legend of meters. 
    The city council shall provide for installation of meters, including curb, street or other area marking lines, regulation and operation thereof, and shall cause such meters to be maintained in good workable condition. Meters shall be placed upon the curb or other areas chosen next to individual parking places. Meters shall be so constructed as to display a signal showing legal parking upon deposit of the proper coin of the United States as indicated by instructions of such meter, and for a period of time conforming to the parking limits of the city, as indicated on such meter. Such signal shall remain in evidence until expiration of such parking period so designated, at which time a change of signal or some other mechanical operation shall indicate expiration of the parking period. 
(Code 1957, § 20-93) 
Sec. 19-119. - Agreements for installation and payment. 
    The city is hereby vested with the authority to enter into contracts for the purchase and installation of parking meters and to provide payment therefor exclusively from the receipts obtained by the city from their operation. Such means of payment shall be in addition to any other purchasing powers heretofore granted the city by its charter or by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1957, § 20-94) 
Sec. 19-120. - Manner of parking, depositing coins. 
(a)  When any vehicle shall be parked next to a parking meter, the owner or operator of such vehicle shall park within the area designated by the curb, streets or other area marking lines as indicated for parallel or diagonal parking. Upon entering such parking space, the owner or operator shall immediately deposit in the meter the proper coin or coins, as indicated by instructions on such meter. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to park within such designated area or fail or neglect to so deposit the proper coin or coins as aforesaid. 
(b)  Such parking space may then be used by such vehicle during the legal parking limit provided by the ordinances of the city. Such vehicle shall be considered as unlawfully parked if it remains in such space beyond the legal parking limit and/or when such parking meter displays a signal showing such illegal parking. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this section. 
(Code 1957, § 20-96) 
Sec. 19-121. - Evidence of ownership of vehicle. 
    Proof of registration of a motor vehicle and proof of a violation of this division shall be construed as prima facie proof that the registered owner of such motor vehicle was the user or operator at the time of the violation charged. 
(Code 1957, § 20-97) 
Sec. 19-122. - Extending time beyond limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter more coins for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond the maximum time fixed by the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 20-98) 
Sec. 19-123. - Depositing slugs. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter, any slug, device or a metallic substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Code 1957, § 20-99) 
Sec. 19-124. - Tampering with, injuring. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, open, wilfully break or destroy any parking meter. 
(Code 1957, § 20-100) 
Sec. 19-125. - Duties of police as to violators-Collecting fines. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of police officers or other persons acting in accordance with instructions issued by the chief of police, to report: 
(1)  The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(2)  The state license number of such vehicle. 
(3)  The length of time during which such vehicle is known to have been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(4)  Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(b)  Each such police officer or person shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the provisions of this division and instructing such owner to report at the police station in regard to such violations. 
(c)  Each such owner may pay to the desk sergeant at the police station, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of $10.00 if paid within ten days of the time when such notice was attached to such vehicle. The failure of the owner to make such payments within such ten-day period shall render the owner guilty of a violation of this division. 
(d)  Moneys paid to and received by the police department shall be transferred and paid over by the department to the director of finance on the first weekday next succeeding the collection thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 20-101) 
Sec. 19-126. - Same-Complaint against violators. 
    It shall be the duty of traffic officers so instructed to take the parking meter number and the state vehicle tag number of all persons violating the provisions of this division and make complaint therefor in court when settlement is not made. 
(Code 1957, § 20-102) 
Sec. 19-127. - Use of proceeds. 
    The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided herein are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets and to cover the cost of the supervision, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking spaces and parking meters described herein and also the cost of supervising and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones created hereby. 
(Code 1957, § 20-103) 
Sec. 19-128. - Maximum time on Ocean Drive at municipal beach. 
    The maximum time limit for parking meters on Ocean Drive fronting on the municipal beach shall be three hours. 
(Code 1957, § 20-95) 
Sec. 19-129. - Division cumulative. 
    This division shall be deemed to be in addition and supplementary to, and not in conflict with nor a repeal of prior or existing ordinances, but shall be an additional provision for the regulation of traffic and parking in those zones provided for herein. 
(Code 1957, § 20-104) 
Secs. 19-130-19-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - IMPOUNDING VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 11-71 et seq. 

Sec. 19-146. - When impoundment authorized. 
    Police officers of the city are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or public right-of-way to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or impoundment area maintained by the police department or city when: 
(1)  Any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, causeway or tunnel, where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  A vehicle upon a street is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody and removal. 
(3)  A vehicle is found being operated upon the streets and is not in proper condition. 
(4)  Any vehicle is parked continuously upon a street for more than 72 hours. 
(5)  Any vehicle is left unattended upon a street or public right-of-way and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(6)  The driver of such vehicle is taken into custody by the police department and such vehicle would thereby be left unattended upon a street. 
(7)  Removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because of fire, flood, storm or other emergency reason. 
(Code 1957, § 20-108.1(a)-(g)) 
Sec. 19-147. - Notice to owner. 
(a)  Whenever a police officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized by section 19-146 and when the police officer knows or is able to ascertain the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In the event of such vehicle being stored in a commercial garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(b)  Whenever a police officer removes a vehicle from a street under this division and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner, and if the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three days, then the police officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal by mail to the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any commercial garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
(Code 1957, § 20-108.2) 
State Law reference- Notice of unclaimed vehicles, F.S. § 715.05. 
Sec. 19-148. - Charges and fees. 
    No vehicle impounded shall be released until the charges for towing such vehicle and storage charges have been paid. The charge for towing or removal of any such vehicle and storage charges will be reasonable and customary charges prevailing in the city for such services. 
(Code 1957, § 20-108.1(h)) 
Sec. 19-149. - Right of owner to take possession of vehicle prior to sale; reimbursement of expenses. 
    The owner or any person having a lien upon an impounded vehicle may take possession of the same at any time prior to the sale provided for in section 19-150, but such person shall reimburse the city for all reasonable expenses for removal, storage, advertising or other expense incurred in connection therewith. 
(Code 1957, § 20-108.5) 
Sec. 19-150. - Sale; certificate of sale. 
(a)  If the residence or address of the owner or any person holding a lien upon an impounded vehicle cannot be ascertained, or if the owner or person holding a lien upon the vehicle fails to take possession of the vehicle within ten days after the mailing of the notice provided in section 19-147, such vehicle shall be sold at public outcry by the police department at some place within the city. A notice shall be published prior to the sale in a newspaper published in the county and circulated in the city. Publication shall be at least ten days prior to the date of sale. Such notice shall give the time and place of sale and describe the motor vehicle to be sold. 
(b)  A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the owner and each person holding a lien on such motor vehicle, if their addresses are known, at least ten days before the date of such sale. 
(c)  The city shall not guarantee title to such vehicle or to deliver a title of ownership, but shall furnish the purchaser a certificate in substantially the following form: 
Certificate No. 
CERTIFICATE OF SALE 
Riviera Beach Police Department, Riviera Beach, Florida. 
THIS IS TO CERTIFY that the following described motor vehicle was abandoned on the public highway of Riviera Beach, Florida, and was placed in the custody of the police department, where it was held for 20 days, after which time, having been impossible to find the owner of the same, or if found, such owner failed to repossess same, this motor vehicle was sold to the highest bidder after legal advertisement. 
This certificate of sale is therefore issued to: 
___________ residing at _____ 
_____
Make: _____ 
Year: _____ 
Engine No. _____ 
Identification No. _____ 
Chassis No. _____ 
Dated at Riviera Beach, Florida, this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
_____
Title of Police Officer and Name  
(d)  This form shall be in duplicate. The original shall be given to the purchaser and the duplicate bound in a book of record. 
(Code 1957, § 20-108.3) 
Sec. 19-151. - Proceeds of sale to be deposited in the fines and forfeitures account. 
    If any motor vehicle shall be sold as provided in this division, the proceeds of such sale, after paying all the costs actually expended for advertising or otherwise in such sale, shall be deposited in the fine and forfeitures account. 
(Code 1957, § 20-108.4) 
Sec. 19-152. - Proceeds not to be expended for 90 days; right of owner to proceeds upon proof of ownership. 
    The proceeds of any sale of an impounded vehicle paid to the fines and forfeitures account shall not be expended or disbursed for 90 days after the date of such sale. At any time during such period, the owner or any person having an interest in the motor vehicle evidenced by documentary written evidence may, upon making proof of such ownership or interest, recover back from the fines and forfeitures account the proceeds of the sale, less all the expenses incurred including removal, storage, advertising and a commission of five percent on the gross sales price of such vehicle for the cost of making such sale. 
(Code 1957, § 20-108.6) 
Secs. 19-153-19-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BICYCLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-166. - Riding on sidewalk. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to ride a bicycle or other nonself-propelled vehicle upon the public sidewalks located within the territorial limits of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 20-130) 
Sec. 19-167. - Weekly reports by vendors. 
    Each person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand bicycles within the city shall make a report to the chief of police each week of every bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of such bicycle by name or make, the frame number thereof and the number of license plate, if any, found thereon. 
(Code 1957, § 20-130.6) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10. 
Secs. 19-168-19-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 19-176. - Required. 
    No person who resides within this city shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided herein. 
(Code 1957, § 20-130.1) 
Sec. 19-177. - Application; fee. 
    Application for a bicycle license and license plate shall be made upon a form provided by the city and shall be made to the chief of police. A fee of $0.25 shall be paid to the city before each license or license plate is granted. 
(Code 1957, § 20-130.2) 
Sec. 19-178. - Issuance; records. 
(a)  The chief of police upon receiving proper application therefor is authorized to issue a bicycle license which shall be permanently effective. 
(b)  The chief of police shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle. 
(c)  The chief of police shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued and the number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued, and a record of all bicycle license fees collected by him. 
(Code 1957, § 20-130.3) 
Sec. 19-179. - Issuance; attachment; removal of license plate. 
(a)  The chief of police upon issuing a bicycle license shall also issue a license plate bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle and other appropriate information. 
(b)  Such license plate shall be firmly attached to the rear mudguard or frame of the bicycle for which issued in such position as to be plainly visible from the rear. 
(c)  No person shall remove a license plate from a bicycle during the period for which issued except upon a transfer of ownership or if the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in this city. 
(Code 1957, § 20-130.4) 
Sec. 19-180. - Surrender on sale or transfer of bicycle; assignment to another bicycle. 
    Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall remove the license plate and shall either surrender it to the chief of police or may upon proper application, but without payment of additional fee, have the plate assigned to another bicycle owned by the applicant. 
(Code 1957, § 20-130.5) 
Secs. 19-181-19-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 29. 

Sec. 19-201. - Permits required; exception. 
(a)  No funeral or procession or parade containing 200 or more persons or 50 or more vehicles excepting the forces of the United States Army, Navy or Air Force, the military forces of this state and the forces of the police and fire departments shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the city manager and such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. 
(b)  Whenever the city manager gives a permit for any parade, public gathering or celebration, he may order any street or portion of street to be cleared of all vehicles during the parade, public gathering or celebration. 
(Code 1957, § 20-17) 
Sec. 19-202. - Driving in processions. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and follow the vehicle ahead as close as practical and is safe. 
(Code 1957, § 20-41) 
Sec. 19-203. - Driving through processions. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. 
(Code 1957, § 20-40) 
Sec. 19-204. - Identification of funeral processions. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by lighted headlights or by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant of a type designated by the police department. 
(Code 1957, § 20-18) 
Chapter 20 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; assessment charge for liens imposed by city, § 2-3; charge for unpaid checks and drafts given in payment of obligations to the city, § 2-4; health and sanitation, ch. 8; nuisances, ch. 11; solid waste management, ch.17.5; taxation, ch. 18; public service tax levied on utilities, § 18-36 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; utility easements in subdivisions, § 30-67. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITIES ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, committees, commissions, § 2-41 et seq. 

Sec. 20-16. - Created; membership. 
    The city council hereby creates a utilities advisory board. The board consists of no more than five members with terms of one year commencing in May of each year. The membership shall include one city councilmember, one professional person who is technically oriented, such as an engineer, doctor or lawyer, and three persons who are citizens of the city. A member may be reappointed for successive terms. Members of the utilities advisory board shall be residents of the city. An appointment to fill any vacancy on the utilities advisory board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. If any member fails to attend two of three successive meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chairperson, the utilities advisory board shall declare the member's office vacant. The city council shall properly fill such vacancy. The members may be suspended and removed for cause by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.5(a)) 
Sec. 20-17. - Officers; meetings; etc. 
    The members of the utilities advisory board shall elect a chairperson from among the members of the board. The presence of three or more members shall constitute a quorum of the utilities advisory board. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for such travel, mileage and per diem expenses as may be authorized by city council. The utilities advisory board shall meet on the second Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.5(b), (c)) 
Sec. 20-18. - General purposes and power of the utilities advisory board. 
(a)  The general purpose of the utilities advisory board shall be to advise, promote, protect and improve water quality, customer service, account collections and other services provided by the utilities department. Furthermore, the utilities advisory board should advise the city council regarding the resolution of issues related to and arising out of the operation of utilities by the city. 
(b)  The utilities advisory board shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings. 
(2)  Take testimony under oath. 
(3)  Issue advisory opinions concerning utility accounts. 
(4)  Issue advisory opinions concerning actions that the water department should consider for maintaining high water quality. 
(5)  Make recommendations to the city council concerning the resolution of the disputes regarding meter readings. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.7) 
Sec. 20-19. - Informal hearings for uncollectible accounts. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of utilities to inform the utilities advisory board of accounts which have proved uncollectible after the utilities department has extended efforts to inform the accountholder of the arrearage. The utilities advisory board, through the clerical staff provided by the city, shall schedule an informal hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be hand-delivered or mailed to the utility accountholder whose account has been uncollectible. 
(b)  Upon request of the director of utilities, or at such other times which may be necessary, the chairperson of the utilities advisory board may call a hearing of the utilities advisory board. A hearing also may be called by written notice signed by at least three members of the utilities advisory board. Minutes shall be kept of all informal hearings by the utilities advisory board, and all informal hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. The city council shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by the utilities advisory board for the proper performance of its duties. 
(c)  Each case before the utilities advisory board shall be presented by a member of the administrative staff of the utilities department for the city. 
(d)  The utilities advisory board shall proceed to hear the cases for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The utilities advisory board shall take testimony from the personnel of the utilities department and the accountholder. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the utilities advisory board shall issue findings of fact based on evidence of record and an advisory conclusion recommending to the city council actions it should take. The findings shall be by motion approved by a majority of those members present and voting, except that at least three members of the utilities advisory board must vote in order for their action to be official. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.6) 
Sec. 20-20. - Advisory nature of board. 
    The services and proceedings of the utilities advisory board in handling disputed utility charges as contained in this article are advisory only subject to the approval of the city council in each instance. 
(Code 1957, § 2-12.8) 
Secs. 20-21-20-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Water supply system in subdivisions, § 30-36. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-36. - Application for service. 
(a)  Water and wastewater service shall be furnished only upon signed application accepted by the city and the conditions of such application shall be binding upon the customer. To obtain service, applications must be made at the place(s) designated by the city. 
(b)  The provisions of F.S. § 180.135, as amended from time to time, shall apply to rental properties. In the event that the occupant of a rental unit elects to be the customer of the city, customer will make application for service and provide a current original copy of a signed lease for the unit. The owner of a rental unit for which an occupant is the customer of the city shall be responsible for payment for utility service from the date that the occupant of the unit vacates the rental unit until a new occupant of the rental unit submits a completed application for service with the city. Each applicant for utility service shall provide the city the correct name and address, or other legal description where service is to be rendered. 
(c)  Application for service required by firms, partnerships, associations, corporations and other entities shall be tendered only by authorized representatives of the entities. All authorized representatives may be required to provide verification of their identity and authorization from their principal. 
(d)  The city may withold service from any customer who makes application for service from prior rates, fees, charges, and costs have not been paid in full to the date of the application. The city may withhold service from any customer who makes application for a location for which prior rates, fees, charges, and costs have not been paid in full to the date of the application. It is the responsibility of the applicant to make inquiry as to the delinquent status of the account and bring the account current as a condition precedent to continuation of service. 
(Code 1957, § 22-1; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02) 
Sec. 20-37. - Application constitutes agreement. 
    The provisions of this article and the rules and regulations concerning the city's water and wastewater facilities and rates shall be considered as part of the contract for services between the city and the property-owning customers as well as nonproperty-owning customers of the water and wastewater facilities. 
(Code 1957, § 22-2; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02) 
Sec. 20-38. - Minimum conditions for service. 
    The department of utilities reserves the right to establish the minimum conditions under which service may be installed, such as backflow preventers, etc. 
(Code 1957, § 22-2.1) 
Sec. 20-39. - Inspection of water systems. 
    Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon any premises connected with the water of the city for the purpose of inspecting and observation of water supply pipes and water meters thereon and for making testings and readings of the water meter or meters thereon, measuring the water which is or may be furnished through the water system of the city, and for performing their duties under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 22-6) 
Sec. 20-40. - Maintenance of meters. 
    The department of utilities shall maintain the proper operation of all meters. No repairs to meters shall be made other than by the department of utilities. 
(Code 1957, § 22-7) 
Sec. 20-41. - Water pressure not guaranteed; right of city to turn off water. 
(a)  The city shall not guarantee an uninterrupted supply of water at any particular pressure for any purpose and reserves and shall have the right to shut off the water in its mains at any time for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or for other purposes incidental to the public water supply, and will not be responsible for any damage resulting from a user leaving a faucet open or for other damage caused by low pressure. The city shall have the right to turn off water service at the main for the protection of the city or the user in cases where a private water system has been installed, or a building has been burned or torn down or where the consumer has been found to be using water illegally, and to assess the regular schedule of fees for restoration of service. 
(b)  Other grounds for discontinuance of water service include: 
(1)  Misrepresentation or concealment, in the application as to the premises, of fixtures to be furnished with water service or the use to be made of such service. 
(2)  Waste or excessive use of water through improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures or appliances, or in any other manner. 
(3)  Refusal or neglect to comply with any requirement of the department of utilities as to meter or service connection maintenance, alteration or renewal or other requirement relating to the water services of the city. 
(4)  The use of water services for or in connection with or for the benefit of any other user or purpose than that in the application. 
(5)  Any interference or tampering, whether by act of commission or omission, with the meter measuring the water supply, or with seals of any meter, or with any other portion of the water system which was or is required by the department of utilities for controlling or regulating the water services. 
(Code 1957, § 22-11) 
Sec. 20-42. - Emergency restrictions determined by city. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency situation means a situation determined by the city manager to exist due to an insufficient supply of water of necessary quality to meet the needs and demands of users of the city water supply system. 
    Water means water from the city potable water supply system and any well withdrawing water from the city's service area. 
(b)  Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons using water both inside and outside the city. 
(c)  Restrictions of certain uses. When an emergency situation is declared by the city manager, the city manager shall have the authority to order restrictions on the use of water for any or all nonessential purposes, as determined by the city manager, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Watering vegetation. The sprinkling, watering or irrigating of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground cover, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers or any other vegetation. 
(2)  Washing mobile equipment. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, campers, boats, railroad cars or any other type of mobile equipment. 
(3)  Cleaning equipment and machinery. The washing and cleaning of any business or industrial equipment or machinery. 
(4)  Ornamental fountains and swimming pools. The operation of any ornamental fountain, swimming pool, wading pool or other structures making similar uses of water unless such operation employs a recirculating system. 
(5)  Escape through defective plumbing. The escape of water through defective plumbing which is known to the user or owner. 
(d)  Exceptions to restriction or curtailment. Upon adequate determination of the need therefor, the city manager shall have the authority to permit reasonable use of water as an exception to a restriction imposed under subsection (c) of this section if necessary to maintain adequate health, safety and welfare standards for the users of the city water supply system. 
(e)  Enforcement. Any person in violation of the provisions of this section shall be penalized as follows: 
(1)  First violation. A written notice of violation will be issued by a police officer of the city. 
(2)  Second violation. A fine of not less than $50.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(3)  Third and subsequent violations. A fine of not less than $100.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both, and the city manager's designee shall have the authority to order the immediate discontinuance of water service. When water service is discontinued hereunder, the person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the decision of discontinuance to the city manager, who shall have the authority to reverse or modify the discontinuance. 
(f)  Mandatory water restrictions. Should the necessity arise to restrict water usage, a mandatory rate increase will go into effect to offset the restriction on usage. 
(Code 1957, § 22-12) 
Cross reference- Water shortages, § 20-101 et seq. 
Sec. 20-43. - Violations; penalty; discontinuance. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, when no other penalty is provided, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the provisions of the maximum penalty in section 1-11. 
(b)  The continued violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each day that such violation shall continue. In addition, water services shall be discontinued upon any premises upon which there is found to be a connection between the city water supply system and another source of water supply and upon any premises upon which there is found to be a connection between the city water supply system and any piping system transporting water from any source of supply whatsoever which has been subjected to contamination by storage in any insanitary container, such as uncovered and improperly constructed pools, reservoirs, storage tanks and standpipes. Such service shall not be restored until such cross-connection has been discontinued. 
(Code 1957, § 22-13) 
Secs. 20-44-20-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 20-61. - Established; applicability. 
(a)  There is hereby established a schedule of rates and provisions relating to connection charges, water consumption charges, billing deposits, a standby service, testing of meters, capital improvements charge, readiness-to-serve charge and other related charges and provisions. 
(b)  The schedules set out in this division are applicable to all water service within the territory served by the city. 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(a), (b)) 
Sec. 20-62. - Basis for schedule. 
    All water consumption will be charged on monthly metered water as per the following usage tables. Usage is represented in thousands of gallons. All usage is priced per 1,000 gallons. The total consumption for each unit in the multifamily classification will be divided by the number of units served by that connection. The billing will be computed on the average consumption per unit. 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(c)) 
Sec. 20-63. - Residential service charge schedule. 
    The charge schedule for residential use is maintained on file and may be reviewed at the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(d), (e); Ord. No. 2543, § 1, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 2639, § 1(22-3), 9-21-94; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-18-96; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02; Ord. No. 001UD, § 1, 7-15-09) 
Sec. 20-64. - Commercial service charge schedule. 
    The charge schedule for commercial, hotel, and motel use is maintained on file and may be reviewed at the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(f); Ord. No. 2543, § 1, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 2639, § 1(22-3), 9-21-94; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-18-96; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02; Ord. No. 001UD, § 1, 7-15-09) 
Sec. 20-65. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2931, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2002, repealed former § 20-65. Former § 20-65 pertained to motel and hotel service charge schedules and derived from Code 1957, § 22-3(g); Ord. No. 2543, § 1, adopted Oct. 16, 1991; Ord. No. 2639, § 1(22-3), adopted Sept. 21, 1994; and Ord. No. 2718, § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 1996. For motel and hotel service charge schedules see § 20-64. 
Sec. 20-66. - Irrigation meter service charge schedule. 
    The service charge schedule for residential irrigation meters use is maintained on file and may be reviewed at the office of the city clerk. 
    The service charge schedule for commercial irrigation meters use is maintained on file and may be reviewed at the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(h); Ord. No. 2543, § 1, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 2639, § 1(22-3), 9-21-94; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-18-96; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02; Ord. No. 001UD, § 1, 7-15-09) 
Sec. 20-67. - Hydrant rentals. 
    The hydrant rental rate will apply to all hydrants the city maintains. The rate will be $28.06 per hydrant per month. 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(m); Ord. No. 2543, § 1, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 2639, § 1(22-3), 9-21-94; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-18-96; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02) 
Cross reference- Fire hydrants, § 20-261. 
Sec. 20-68. - Standby private fire protection systems. 
    The standby private fire protection system rate will include service to private hydrants, sprinkler systems, hose cabinets, standpipes or any other device used exclusively for fire protection. The monthly charge for unmetered private fire protection shall be: 
Fire 
lines 
(sprinklers) Annual 
amount  
 2 ..... $  6.43 
 3 .....  13.78 
 4 .....  20.22 
 6 .....  26.65 
 8 .....  42.55 
10 .....  61.25 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(n); Ord. No. 2543, § 1, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 2639, § 1(22-3), 9-21-94; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-18-96; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02) 
Sec. 20-69. - Rates outside the city limits. 
    The outside-city rates shall be 11/4 the inside-city rates on all services, including hydrants and fire lines. 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(o); Ord. No. 2931, § 1; 11-20-02) 
Sec. 20-70. - Basis for schedule charges. 
(a)  Basis for commercial, hotel, and motel readiness-to-serve charge. The readiness-to-serve charge for commercial consumers is based on the demand each commercial consumer can place on the utility system. A minimum of one ERU shall be charged to each commercial consumer. The usage charges are adjusted based on each commercial user's demand characteristics. 
(b)  Mixed uses; multiple units. Each unit of any building having separate units which are used for the housing of two or more families or for commercial purposes, or for both such purposes, and each trailer space of any trailer park shall be considered a unit. As in the case of storage bays, the number of units will be based on the number of water closets required under the Standard Building Code in relation to the number of bays. One water closet equals one unit. Where more than one meter serves a property, the rate is computed on the basis of each meter. 
(c)  Responsibility for usage. The city will not be responsible for water usage after termination of service. All water that flows through the meter will be billed to the customer. The owner is responsible for the bill after a tenant's account is terminated by the city. The city can only guarantee no usage if a request in writing from the owner is made to the water department for the services to be removed. Upon requesting the services to be resumed, there will be a new connection charge. 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(i)-(l); Ord. No. 2543, § 1, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 2639, § 1(22-3), 9-21-94; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02; Ord. No. 001UD, § 1, 7-15-09) 
Sec. 20-71. - Billing deposits. 
(a)  For each residential unit and each commercial unit, the minimum billing security deposit shall be as follows: 
Meter Size 
(in inches) Minimum 
Residential Minimum 
Commercial  3/4 or smaller $   55.00 $  108.00  1 110.00 160.00  11/2 152.00 449.00  2 200.00 581.00  3 304.00 1,438.00  4 745.00 2,156.00  6 966.00 2,875.00  8 1,104.00 4,313.00 10 1,242.00 5,750.00  
(b)  Residential deposits and all commercial account deposits shall equal the applicable minimum as stated in subsection (a) of this section or the sum of the most recent three active billing months for the service site, whichever is greater. If the site use is changed, the applicable minimum deposit schedule shall be used to calculate the deposit. These deposit requirements shall apply to all new utility accounts opened after November 20, 2002. In the event that a customer is delinquent in the timely payment of any utility billings prior to the turn-off date, the city may require the customer to provide an additional deposit equal to a second minimum deposit as a condition to continued utility service. In the event that there is a substantial increase in the water usage, the city reserves the right to increase the customers deposit in an amount equal to the customer's last three month active billing. 
(c)  Agencies of the federal, state and local governments are exempt from the deposit requirements. 
(d)  Interest will be paid on deposits at an interest rate approximating the city's short-term investment rate. In computing the final bill for an account which is to be closed, the deposit will be credited to the account and the surplus will be returned to the customer. 
(e)  Deposits are transferable from one address to another based on certain city policy and procedures. 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(p); Ord. No. 2543, § 1, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 2627, § 1, 3-16-94; Ord. No. 2639, § 1(22-3), 9-21-94; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02) 
Cross reference- Sewer deposits to be same amount as water deposits, § 20-192. 
Sec. 20-72. - Service connection charges. 
    The service connection charges are as follows: 
Meter Size 
(inches) Charge  
 3/4 or smaller ..... $589.00 
 1 ..... 635.00 
 11/2 ..... 815.00 
 2 ..... 860.00 
 3 ..... cost 
 4 ..... cost 
 6 ..... cost 
 8 ..... cost 
10 ..... cost 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(q); Ord. No. 2543, § 1, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 2639, § 1(22-3), 9-21-94; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-18-96; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02) 
Sec. 20-73. - Capital improvements charges. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, every property owner or developer whose property receives water service and/or sewer service from systems owned, supplied or served by the city shall pay to the city a water and sewer capital improvement charge prior to the issuance of a service or a building permit on each dwelling unit or equivalent residential unit. The water service per equivalent residential unit charge is $1,571.00. 
(b)  The city will determine the initial number of equivalent residential units for each user. An equivalent residential unit (ERU) is defined as an individual residential user who uses an average of 7,340 U.S. gallons of water per month. The city will determine the number of ERUs for each user. Each residence shall be considered one ERU. 
(c)  There will be periodic reviews of users covered by this section for additional impact to compensate for the type of business or expansion of same. This review will be done each January 1 and will cover a minimum of 12 months preceding January 1. For purposes of periodic reviews of commercial and industrial users, and to establish an equitable base usage level for those commercial users operating prior to the establishment of these review requirements, equivalent residential units (units) credited due to past usage and payments (capacity utilization) shall be the greater of: 
(1)  The units paid; or 
(2)  The number of units calculated from the last five years' average monthly usage. 
(d)  Capital improvement fees run with the land and are not refundable. 
(e)  The capital improvement fee can be financed over a five-year period on single owner/building construction as approved by the planning director. In addition, the planning director may approve this financing for tax-exempt schools and for any housing for which a written commitment has been obtained from the city housing authority indicating that the intent of this building shall be for low-income housing under the approved HUD program. If, prior to the full payment of the capital fee, the use of the building or any portion thereof shall revert to a use other than that originally approved, the balance of the capital fee shall be due immediately. A down payment of 25 percent will be required and paid before the building permit will be issued. The remaining balance plus eight percent interest on the unpaid balance is to be paid annually. An agreement will be signed and a lien filed until final payment is made. If payments are not made as agreed, the water and sewer service will be terminated. This agreement is not transferable. 
(f)  All capital improvement fees derived from this source shall be used for capital improvements to the water and sewer systems. 
Additional impact fees due by the city from a change in use or expansion of use by a commercial user may be waived. 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(r); Ord. No. 2543, § 1, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 2586, art. I, 7-7-93; Ord. No. 2626, § 1, 3-2-94; Ord. No. 2628, § 1, 3-16-94; Ord. No. 2639, § 1(22-3), 9-21-94; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 9-18-96; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02) 
Sec. 20-74. - Standby service charges. 
    The regular minimum charge, readiness-to-serve, remains the same for water and sewer service while the water is turned off, plus a $12.50 turn-off charge. When service is resumed, there is a turn-on charge of $12.50. Standby charges for the full number of units are effective upon requesting water and/or sewer service. 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(s); Ord. No. 2543, § 1, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 2639, § 1(22-3), 9-21-94; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-18-96; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02 ) 
Sec. 20-75. - Testing of meters. 
    The department of utilities shall have the right to test meters to determine their accuracy whenever it deems such action advisable. In addition, a user may demand a field test or recheck when in the user's judgment the meter is not operating correctly. The user shall pay a fee of $30.00 for five-eighths-inch meter and for all other meters the charge is the actual cost incurred for such field test or recheck. If the accuracy or registration of the meter is found to be not more than 102 percent of the actual volume of water passing through the meter, this fee will not be refundable. 
(Code 1957, § 22-3(t); Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-18-96; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02) 
Sec. 20-76. - Construction meter deposits. 
    Construction meter deposits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two-inch fire hydrant meter ..... $250.00 
(2)  Three-inch fire hydrant meter ..... 500.00 
(Code 1957, § 22-4(j); Ord. No. 2543, § 2, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 2639, § 2(22-4), 9-21-94) 
Sec. 20-77. - Additional fees and charges. 
(a)  For processing of a returned or dishonored check in accordance with the state law, a fee shall be charged not to exceed $20.00 or five percent of the face value of the check, whichever is greater. 
(b)  For turn-on service, emergency/repair service, or investigation service, requested after regular working hours, a fee of $35.00 shall be charged. 
(c)  Charges for relocation or change in elevation of meter, meterbox and/or accessories when required by the actions of or requested by the customer shall be the current installation rates. 
(d)  For any audit requested by a customer dating back further than the last zero balance of his account, a fee of $0.00 per year audited (12 months) will be charged. 
(e)  For the reservation of capacity in the water treatment plant, a charge equal to the standby charge per month per dwelling unit will be in effect from the time water and/or sewer service is requested. 
(f)  For upgrading of meter size, the customer must pay the current connection, installation and deposit charges. 
(g)  For downgrading of meter size, the customer must pay the current installation charge. The account deposit fee differences will be credited to the customer's account. 
(h)  For a meter replacement at the customer's request, a meter only cost shall be charged. 
(i)  Any unauthorized connection, reconnection, bypass, reversal of meter or jumping shall be subject to a charge of $250.00 per incident. Where meter reversal or jumping has been discovered, in addition to the aforesaid unauthorized connection charge, the utilities department will also bill the customer based on estimated consumption. If the service is removed, a reconnection charge will be due upon request for service. The customer shall be subject to arrest and prosecution. 
(j)  Should a meter become inaccessible, the utilities department reserves the right to install remote meter reading devices and assess the customer at cost. 
(k)  All taps to the city water system require a permit and must be inspected. A fee of $25.00 for each connection is due upon acquiring the permit. Connections without a permit will be uncovered at the cost of the owner and inspected by the city. A charge of triple the normal permit fee will be charged. 
(Code 1957, § 22-4(a)-(i), (k), (l); Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-18-96; Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 11-20-02) 
Sec. 20-78. - Terms of payment; delinquency. 
(a)  All accounts are due and payable ten days from date of mailing. If accounts are not paid within 30 days, a $10.00 service charge will be applied, whether physically turned off or not. The service may then be discontinued without notice. It will not be resumed until full payment is made. 
(b)  If reconnection is not made within 15 days after service is discontinued for nonpayment, then the billing deposit shall be applied and eight percent interest shall be charged from the date of mailing until paid. Service will not be resumed until all unpaid balance plus interest, a new billing deposit and a new connection charge are paid. 
(c)  If the deposits do not satisfy the payment of a delinquent account, such account shall run against the recorded customer requesting water or sewer service from the dates the customer is billed. Standby charges plus all usage will be billed to the current account while there is service provided or a structure existing on the property. If no deposit is held by the city, the current account is the responsibility of the property owner. 
    The date a deposit is accepted is the date that the current account commences in the name of the customer placing the deposit. The customer placing the deposit is responsible for all charges on that account incurred from that date to the date that their account is closed, as well as any interest and penalty incurred until the account balance is satisfied. The customer shall close an account in writing with at least two working days notice to the city. The city may close an account for nonpayment as described herein, under terms of payment. 
    Following the closing of an account by the city or a customer other than the property owner, a new current account shall be established in the property owner's name and all charges incurred shall be the responsibility of the property owner until the date a new deposit is accepted on that account by a customer other than the property owner. 
    The property owner shall notify the city of any address change so that the city may forward invoices for any charges. 
(d)  All bills must be paid in full. Checks or money orders must be made payable to Riviera Beach Water and Sewer Department. 
(Code 1957, § 22-5; Ord. No. 2630, § 1, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 9-18-96) 
State Law reference- Limitation on utility bill liens, F.S. § 180.135. 
Sec. 20-79. - When city may estimate bill. 
    Should any meter become defective or obstructed so that it cannot be read, the city reserves the right to render an average or estimated bill for the period that the meter cannot be read. 
(Code 1957, § 22-8) 
Sec. 20-80. - Defective meters. 
    Should any meter installed and maintained by an owner, occupant or tenant upon which the charges imposed by this division are based be found to be defective for any reason whatsoever, the owner, occupant or tenant shall immediately correct the same and have it tested by the water and sewer division at his expense. In such cases, the city reserves the right to render an averaged or estimated bill for the period that the meter was defective based on previous readings of the meter. 
(Code 1957, § 22-9) 
Sec. 20-81. - Adjustment for certain leaks. 
    Where there is a leak on the user's side of a water system which is metered as a basis for such user's sewer service charges, other than an underground leak, and the water escaping does not enter into the city's sewage system, the user's sewer service charge shall be adjusted to a normal charge based on an average of the three previous months' consumption plus, where applicable, an adjustment for any unusual increase or decrease in consumption during the month in question based upon the prior year's experience. 
(Code 1957, § 22-10) 
Secs. 20-82-20-100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2931, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2002, repealed former § 20-82 which pertained to automatic rate increases and derived from Ord. No. 2639, § 3(22-14), adopted Sept. 21, 1994. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER SHORTAGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Certain emergency water restrictions determined by city, § 20-42. 

Sec. 20-101. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this division to protect the various water resources of the city from the harmful effects of overutilization during periods of water shortage and allocate available water supplies by assisting the South Florida Water Management District in the implementation of its water shortage plan. 
(Code 1957, § 22-111) 
Sec. 20-102. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    District means the South Florida Water Management District. 
    Water resource means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground, including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds or diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
    Water shortage condition means when sufficient water is not available to meet present or anticipated needs of persons using the water resource, or when conditions are such as to require temporary reduction in total water usage within a particular area to protect the water resource from serious harm. A water shortage usually occurs due to drought. 
    Water shortage emergency means that situation when the powers which can be exercised under part II of chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, are not sufficient to protect the public health, safety or welfare; the health of animals, fish, aquatic life or a public water supply; or commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other reasonable uses. 
(Code 1957, § 22-112) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-103. - Application of division. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to all persons using the water resource within the geographical areas subject to the district, whether from public or privately owned water utility systems, private wells or private connections with surface water bodies. This division shall not apply to persons using treated effluent or salt water. 
(Code 1957, § 22-113) 
Sec. 20-104. - Provisions of Florida Administrative Code incorporated by reference. 
    Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, is incorporated herein by reference as a part of the city code. 
(Code 1957, § 22-114) 
Sec. 20-105. - Declaration of water shortage or water shortage emergency. 
(a)  The declaration of water shortage or water shortage emergency within all or any part of the city by the governing board or the executive director of the district shall invoke the provisions of this division. Upon such declaration, all water use restrictions or other measures adopted by the district applicable to the city and its water service area, or any portions thereof, shall be subject to enforcement action pursuant to this division. Any violation of the provisions of chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, or any order issued pursuant thereto, shall be a violation of this division. 
(b)  In the event of a facility failure of circumstance outside the immediate jurisdiction of the South Florida Water Management District which would necessitate curtailment of water production, the city administrator or his designee may declare the existence of a water shortage condition or emergency which shall activate the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 22-115) 
Sec. 20-106. - Enforcement. 
    Every police office or sheriff having jurisdiction in the area governed by this division shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this division. In addition, the city administrator may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this division to agencies and departments of county/city government, or cities in the service areas governed by this division, in accordance with state and local law. 
(Code 1957, § 22-116) 
Sec. 20-107. - Penalties for violation of division. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this division shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First violation, $25.00. 
(2)  Second and subsequent violations, as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  Each day in violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. In the initial stages of a water shortage or water shortage emergency, law enforcement officials may provide violators with no more than one written warning. The city, in addition to the criminal sanctions contained in this section, may take any other appropriate legal action, including but not limited to emergency injunctive action, to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 22-117) 
Sec. 20-108. - Water users to accept provisions of this division. 
    No water service shall be furnished to any person by a public or private utility unless such person agrees to accept all the provisions of this division. The acceptance of water service shall be in itself the acceptance of the provisions thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 22-118) 
Secs. 20-109-20-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WATER CONSERVATION 

Sec. 20-121. - Intent and purpose. 
    The intent and purpose of this division is to establish water conservation measures intended to reduce the per capita usage of the city's valuable water resources by implementing date-time water restrictions and requiring the use of rain sensing devices on all new irrigation systems. 
(Ord. No. 3085, § 1, 11-17-10) 
Sec. 20-122. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context indicates a different meaning: 
    Irrigation means the application of water by means other than natural precipitation. 
    Irrigation systems means equipment and devices which deliver water to landscape being irrigated including, but not limited to, pumping stations, controls, main and sub-main pipelines, lateral pipelines, emitters, valves, fittings and safety devices. 
    Landscape means all residential, commercial, institutional, industrial or governmental areas which are ornamentally planted, including, but not limited to, turf, ground covers, flowers, shrubs, trees, mulch, hedges, and similar plant materials. 
    Low-volume irrigation means the use of equipment and devices specifically designed to allow the volume of water delivered to be limited to a level consistent with the water requirement of the plant being irrigated and to allow that water to be placed with a high degree of efficiency in the root zone of the plant, including, but not limited to, water use in mist houses and similar establishments for plant propagation. 
    Low volume hand watering means watering by one hose attended by one person, fitted with a self-cancelling or automatic shutoff nozzle. 
    Micro-irrigation means delivering small amounts of water on or below the soil surface. Drops or tiny streams of water spray through emitters or applicators placed along a water delivery line. This includes bubbler, drip, trickle, mist or microspray, and subsurface irrigation methods. 
    Rainwater harvesting means the collection and storing of rainwater for irrigation or other non-potable uses. In typical residential applications, roof catchment systems channel rainwater into onsite storage (usually cisterns or rain barrels) via the home's system of gutters and pipes. 
    Water resource means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground, including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 3085, § 1, 11-17-10) 
Sec. 20-123. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to all customers of the City of Riviera Beach's Utility District (Utility District), both within the corporate limits of the city and to customers outside the corporate limits of the city, to the extent permitted by law, including any inter-local agreement or contract. 
(Ord. No. 3085, § 1, 11-17-10) 
Sec. 20-124. - Water use restrictions. 
    The following provisions shall be observed, followed and enforced in the city, and on those customers of the utility district not subject to municipal regulation in this area: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to irrigate, or to cause, let, permit, allow or suffer the irrigation of any residential, commercial, institutional, governmental or industrial landscape areas between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. daily, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(2)  Irrigation of established lawns and landscaping shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  Residents and businesses with an odd-numbered street address may water lawns and landscapes on Mondays, Wednesdays and/or Saturdays; 
b.  Residents and businesses with an even-numbered street address, no street address or those that irrigate both even and odd addresses within the same zones, which may include multi-family units and homeowners associations, may water lawns and landscapes on Tuesdays, Thursdays and/or Sundays. 
(3)  Landscape irrigation for the purpose of watering newly planted grass and foliage for the first 90 days after initial installation shall be permitted, pursuant to the following conditions: 
a.  On the day new landscaping is installed, new plantings and the soil may be irrigated once without regard to the normally allowable watering days and times. Soil irrigation is also allowed immediately prior to planting. 
b.  New plantings that have been in place for 30 days or less may be watered on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays and/or Sundays, only before 10:00 a.m. and/or after 4:00 p.m. 
c.  New plantings that have been in place from 31 to 90 days may be watered on Mondays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and/or Saturdays, only before 10:00 a.m. and/or after 4:00 p.m. 
d.  Irrigation is limited to the areas containing new landscaping only. An entire irrigation zone may be watered only if new landscaping is planted on at least 50 percent of that zone. If new landscaping is planted on less than 50 percent of an irrigation zone, only the new plantings may be watered. 
(4)  Landscape irrigation for the purpose of water-in fertilizers, insecticides, pesticides, fungicides and herbicides, where such watering-in is recommended by the manufacturer, or by federal, state or local law, or best management practices, shall be allowed under the following conditions: 
a.  Such watering-in shall be limited to one application unless the need for more than one application is stated in the directions for application specified by the manufacturer; and 
b.  Such watering-in shall be accomplished during normally allowable watering days and times set forth in subsections (2)a. and b. unless a professional licensed applicator has posted a temporary sign containing the date of application and the date(s) of needed watering in activity. 
(5)  The following shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section: 
a.  Low volume irrigation, micro-irrigation, and irrigation with water from a rain barrel, cistern or other rain-harvesting device is allowed at any time; 
b.  Low volume hand watering of new and established landscaping shall not be restricted. Hand watering of lawn areas shall be with a hose fitted with an automatic shut-off nozzle and is restricted to the designated days and times for that address. However, a voluntary reduction in use is encouraged, and landscape irrigation conducted by hand watering should not produce water runoff. 
c.  The use of reclaimed water for irrigation is not restricted; however, its use must not be wasteful and unnecessary. 
d.  Irrigation with treated reclaimed wastewater effluent, in accordance with applicable federal, state, and local water quality standards, or the use of saltwater. 
e.  The operation of irrigation systems for installation, cleaning, repairs, and maintenance purposes by a licensed irrigation contractor or the property owner(s). 
f.  Agricultural irrigation where the use of water is permitted by a consumptive or water use permit issued by the South Florida Water Management District. 
(Ord. No. 3085, § 1, 11-17-10) 
Sec. 20-125. - Automatic water irrigation systems. 
    All new automatic water irrigation systems shall be equipped with a properly installed rain sensing device or switch. The rain sensing device or switch shall be maintained in fully operational condition at all times by the owner or operator of the irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 3085, § 1, 11-17-10) 
Sec. 20-126. - Maintenance of irrigation system. 
    Owners and operators of automatic water irrigation systems must properly maintain the irrigation system. This obligation includes the timely repair and replacement of any broken, missing or misdirected sprinkler heads within seven days. 
(Ord. No. 3085, § 1, 11-17-10) 
Sec. 20-127. - Administrative waiver. 
(a)  Any person affected by the provisions of this division may petition the utility district director, or designee, for a waiver if compliance would impose a unique, unnecessary and inequitable hardship on such person. Relief may be granted only upon a demonstration that such hardship is peculiar to the person or the affected property and is not self-imposed, and that the grant of the waiver will be consistent with the general intent and purpose of this article. The duration of the waiver shall be determined on a case-by-case basis and for as long as is reasonably necessary. Any application for waiver or appeal shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  Upon receiving a petition for administrative waiver, the utility district director, or designee, shall render a decision on the waiver within ten working days. Denials of an administrative waiver may be appealed to the utility district board within 20 days of such person's receipt of the notice of denial. The utility district board shall make all final decisions concerning waivers from the provisions of this division. 
(c)  A petition for a waiver, and/or the granting of a waiver, shall operate prospectively, and shall not affect any pending enforcement action against the property owner pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(d)  The city hereby recognizes any and all variances issued by the South Florida Water Management District to those users who operate and maintain smart irrigation systems which meet the requirements of F.S. § 373.62(7). 
(Ord. No. 3085, § 1, 11-17-10) 
Sec. 20-128. - Penalties. 
    Violations of any provision of this division shall be enforced under chapter 2, article VI, and with the following penalties: 
(1)  First violation: A written notice of violation will be issued. 
(2)  Second violation: A fine of $50.00. 
(3)  Third and subsequent violations: A fine of $100.00, and the utility district director designee, shall have the authority to order the immediate discontinuance of water service, if necessary. When water service is discontinued hereunder, the person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the decision of discontinuance to the utility district board, who shall have the authority to reverse or modify the discontinuance. 
(4)  Each day in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(5)  The provisions of this article are not the exclusive remedy or means for enforcement of the Code of the city and do not precluded any other remedies available by law. 
Upon determination by the City Code Enforcement Division that an owner/occupant is in violation of the provisions of this division, the City Code Enforcement Administrator shall notify, in writing, the owner/occupant of the nature of the violation and provide notice of a hearing before the special magistrate pursuant to section 2-335, enforcement procedures. The conduct of such hearing shall be in conformance with section 2-336, conduct of hearing. The special magistrate's findings and order shall constitute the final administrative action of the city for purposes of judicial review under state law. 
(Ord. No. 3085, § 1, 11-17-10) 
Secs. 20-129-20-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Sanitary sewage system in subdivisions, § 30-35; stormwater treatment in subdivisions, § 30-70. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter. 
    Building sewer means the conduit or pipe which conveys wastewater from the plumbing drain system of a building to public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of the oxygen equivalent of that portion of the organic matter in a water sample that is susceptible to oxidation by strong chemical oxidant. 
    Chlorine requirement means the amount of chlorine, in milligrams per liter (mg/l), which must be added to wastewater to produce a specified residual chlorine content or to meet some other standard. 
    City of Riviera Beach sewer system (CRBSS) means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater and wastewater sludge which are owned and controlled by the city. 
    Connected system means a publicly-owned or privately-owned wastewater collection system that connects to and discharges into a CRBSS for purposes of treatment and disposal. 
    Department of environmental protection (DEP) means the state department of environmental protection (chapter 75-22, Laws of Florida) or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the secretary or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
    Director means the director of utilities or his duly authorized representative. 
    Discharge means disposal of, deposit, place, emit, unload, release or cause or allow to be disposed of, deposited, placed, emitted, unloaded or released. 
    Domestic waste means any superfluous solid, liquid or gaseous material derived principally from the use of sanitary convenience of residences (including apartments and hotels), office buildings, industrial plants, institutions or commercial establishments. 
    Enforcement actions means those actions taken by the city in response to violations of this division. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, 5 USC 903 (1970), or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
    Food waste means any superfluous solid material produced either from the domestic or commercial preparation, cooking, consumption or dispensing of food, or from the handling, storage or sale of produce. 
    Industrial user means any user discharging industrial waste into the CRBSS or a connected system. 
    Industrial waste means food waste, other waste or any superfluous solid, liquid or gaseous material resulting from manufacturing or commercial processes, or from natural resource development, recovery or processing. 
    Industrial waste surcharge means an additional service charge assessed against CRBSS industrial users whose wastewater characteristics exceed established surcharge limits. 
    Industrial wastewater discharge permit (permit) means written authorization from the director of utilities to discharge industrial wastewater to the CRBSS or a connected system, setting certain conditions and/or restrictions on such discharge. 
    Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the CRBSS, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal which is a cause of or significantly contributes to either a violation of any requirement of the city's National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or to the prevention of sludge use or disposal by the CRBSS in accordance with any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act, Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), as amended (42 USC 3251 et seq.), the Clean Air Act, as amended (42 USC 7401 et seq.), the Toxic Substances Control Act, as amended (15 USC 2601 et seq.), or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in the state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of the Solid Waste Disposal Act) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the CRBSS. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (22 USC 1347) which applied to a specific category of industrial users. 
    New source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the adoption of the ordinance from which this division was derived. 
    Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
    NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1342). 
    Other waste means municipal refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, sand, ashes, offal, oil, tar, chemicals and all other substances as distinct from domestic waste, industrial waste or food waste. 
    Pass through means the discharge of pollutants through the CRBSS in quantities or concentrations which cause the effluent therefrom, or any other product from the plant, or the water or groundwater into which it is discharged, to violate applicable state or federal standards. An industrial user significantly contributes to such violation when it: 
(1)  Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed by permit with the CRBSS or by federal, state or local law; 
(2)  Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature and constituents from the user's average discharge; 
(3)  Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would result in a permit violation; or 
(4)  Knows or has reason to know that the CRBSS is, for any reason, violating its final effluent limitations in its permit and that such industrial user's discharge, either alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, increases the magnitude or duration of the CRBSS's violations. 
    Person means individual, corporation, firm, company, joint venture, partnership, sole proprietorship, association or any other business entity, any state or political subdivision therefor, any municipality, any interstate body and any department, agency or instrumentality of the United States and any officer, agent or employee thereof, and any organized group of persons whether incorporated or not. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter (g/l) of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10 -7 . 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, garbage, sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-included alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity into water. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the CRBSS. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment standards means, for any specified pollutant, the city prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in this division, the state's pretreatment standards or the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, whichever standard is the most stringent. 
    RCRA means the Recourse Conservation and Recovery Act. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer carrying domestic, commercial and industrial wastes, to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit designed for carrying wastewater. 
    Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  All dischargers subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; and 
(2)  All noncategorical dischargers that, in the opinion of the city, have a reasonable potential to adversely affect the POTW's operation, or that contribute a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather capacity of the treatment plant, or that discharge an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the CRBSS. However, the city need not designate as significant any noncategorical industrial user that, in the opinion of the city and with the agreement of the EPA, has no potential for adversely affecting the CRBSS operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. The agreement of the EPA is not necessary in cases where the noncategorical discharger would have been designated as significant only because of an average discharge of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater. 
Any noncategorical industrial user designated as significant may petition the city to be deleted from the list of significant industrial users on the grounds that it has no potential for adversely affecting the CRBSS's operation or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Significant noncompliance means: 
(1)  Violations of wastewater discharge limits, as follows: 
a.  Chronic violations. Sixty-six percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in a six-month period (any magnitude of exceedance). 
b.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations. Thirty-three percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit by more than the TRC in a six-month period. There are two groups of TRCs: 
1.  Group I for conventional pollutants (BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease): TRC=1.4. 
2.  Group II for all other pollutants: TRC=1.2. 
c.  Any other violation of an effluent limit (average or daily maximum) that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads) or pass-through; or endangered the health of the sewage treatment personnel or public. 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health and welfare or to the environment and has resulted in the CRBSS's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(2)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous wastes. 
a.  All significant industrial users shall also have provisions for notifying the director, the EPA regional waste management division director and state hazardous waste authorities of any discharge into the CRBSS of a substance which is a listed or characteristic waste under section 3001 of the RCRA. Such notification must include a description of any such wastes discharged, specifying the volume and concentration of such wastes and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other), identifying the hazardous constituents contained in the listed wastes and estimating the volume of hazardous wastes expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. This requirement shall not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements. 
b.  Dischargers are exempt from requirements during a calendar month in which they generate no more than 100 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes in any given month, which requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user generates more than 100 kilograms of hazardous waste do not require additional notification, except for the acute hazardous wastes specified in 40 CFR 261.5(e), (f), (g) and (j). 
(3)  Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the schedule date. 
(4)  Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring data or categorical standards (baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports and periodic reports) within 30 days from the due date. 
(5)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(6)  Any other violation or group of violations that the director considers to be significant. 
    Significant violation means a violation which remains uncorrected 45 days after notification of noncompliance; which is part of a pattern of noncompliance over a 12-month period; which involves a failure to accurately report noncompliance; or which resulted in the director exercising emergency authority under this division. 
    Sludge means any solid or semisolid waste generated from a municipal, commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, exclusive of the treated effluent from a wastewater treatment plant. 
    Slug means any discharge or water, wastewater or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, five times the average 24-hour concentration or flow during normal operation and which causes interference with the performance of the CRBSS. 
    Suspended solids means tiny particles of solids disbursed but undissolved in a solid, liquid or gas, which are removable by laboratory filtration. 
    User means any person who discharges, causes or allows the discharge of wastewater into the CRBSS or any connected system. 
    Wastewater means domestic or industrial waste, together with any other water that may be present. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-95), 12-1-93) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-142. - Use of sanitary sewers; treatment; connection to CRBSS required. 
(a)  Unsanitary disposal prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of untreated wastewater or allow untreated wastewater to be disposed of in any unsanitary manner on any property, public or private, in the city. 
(b)  Surface water/groundwater discharge regulated. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge into any watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this division or other applicable state and federal laws. 
(c)  Septic tanks regulated. Except as provided by state law or city ordinance or rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the treatment or disposal of wastewater. 
(d)  Sanitary facilities required. The owner or occupant of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, easement or right-of-way in which there are located available sanitary sewers is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the available sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division within 180 days after sewer service is available, provided that the available sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. In those cases where there is an available sewer within 100 feet of the property line but connection would cause undue hardship for such reasons as the topography of the property or length of pipe necessary to connect with the sewer, the city council of the city is authorized to grant exceptions to this requirement, provided that the property meets applicable federal, state and local regulations for the alternative wastewater disposal method to be used. 
(e)  Connection required; abandoned septic tanks. At such time as a sanitary sewer becomes available to a property served by a private individual wastewater disposal system (such as a septic tank or sand filter), a direct connection shall be made to the sewer in compliance with this division within 180 days and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be abandoned and their further use for any purposes prohibited. An abandoned septic tank, when declared to be a hazard by the city or the county shall be: 
(1)  Pumped out; 
(2)  The bottom suitably opened or ruptured so as to prevent the tank from retaining water; and 
(3)  Filled with clean sand or other suitable material, the actions being taken in the order listed. 
All lands, buildings and structures which can use the facilities and services of the city sewer system must connect with and use the facilities and services of such system. If the owners of the lands, buildings and structures do not connect with and use the system, they shall be required to pay the rates as set out in section 20-180 et seq. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or reconnect, or to cause a connection or reconnection to be made with the sewerage system of the city, without first having made application for same and obtained a permit from the water and sewer departments. Connections without a permit will be uncovered at the cost of the owner and inspected by the city. A charge of triple the normal permit fee will be charged. All taps to the city sewerage system require a permit and must be inspected. A fee of $10.00 shall be charged for each single-family and duplex connection, and others are $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-96), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-143. - Application, construction and connection to the CRBSS. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall construct a new wastewater collection system that is to be connected to the CRBSS or substantially alter or improve any wastewater collection system that is connected to the CRBSS until the CRBSS has first determined such construction to be in conformance with the CRBSS specifications, and the long-range CRBSS plans as approved by the city council of the city. 
(b)  Unauthorized usage prohibited. No unauthorized person shall disturb, use, alter or make connection to the CRBSS. Any unauthorized connection or reconnection shall be subject to a charge of $250.00 per incident. In addition to be aforesaid unauthorized connection charge, the utilities department will also bill the customer based on an estimated consumption. If the service is removed, a reconnection charge will be due upon request for service. At the discretion of the city manager, the customer may be arrested or prosecuted. 
(c)  Application and fees. The owner of any building or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by the city prior to making a connection to the CRBSS. The application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. A connection fee and plumbing permit fee shall be paid to the city before such connection is approved. 
(d)  Owner's responsibilities. All costs and expenses incident to the installations and connection of a building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(e)  Separate sewer required. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. In that case, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(f)  Design and construction. The size, slope, alignment and construction materials of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to the city specifications. 
(g)  Runoff connections prohibited. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to the CRBSS. 
(h)  Interceptors required. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing excessive amounts of grease, flammable substances, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for single-family residences, multifamily residences, travel trailers or mobile homes. All installation shall be of a type and capacity specified by the county building codes and shall be regularly cleaned and maintained for adequate performance. 
(i)  Connection requirements. The connection of the building sewer to the CRBSS shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations adopted by the city. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by director before installation. 
(j)  Public safety and property. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-97), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-144. - Prohibitions and limitations on discharge into the CRBSS. 
(a)  No user shall discharge any waste into the CRBSS or any connected system unless in accordance with this division. 
(b)  No user shall discharge into the CRBSS or any connected system any waste or wastewater which may interfere with the operation or performance of the CRBSS. No user shall discharge into the CRBSS or any connected system any waste or wastewater containing any of the following: 
(1)  Toxic or poisonous substances, chemical elements or compounds, taste or odor-producing substances or any other substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed by the CRBSS, or which are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the substance may interfere with the biological processes or efficiency of the CRBSS treatment plants, or that may pass through a CRBSS treatment plant and cause the effluent therefrom, or any other product from the plant, or the water or groundwater into which it is discharged, to fail to meet applicable state or federal standards. In no case shall a substance discharged to the CRBSS cause the CRBSS to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state or federal criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(2)  Toxic, noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases, which either singly or by interaction with other waste or wastewater: 
a.  Are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to human or animal life; 
b.  Are or may be sufficient to prevent entry into a sewer for its maintenance, inspection or repair; or 
c.  May create any hazard in the receiving waters of the CRBSS. 
(3)  Liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are sufficient to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the CRBSS or to its operation. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, pollutants with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius), as determined by a Pensky-Martens Closed Cup Tester, using the test method specified in ASTM Standard D-3278 and pollutants which cause an exceedance of ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) at any point in the CRBSS, gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, motor oil, naphtha, benzene, toluene, eylene, ethers, alcohol, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides or any other substance which the city, the state or any federal agency has determined is a fire hazard or a hazard to the CRBSS. All trucked or hauled pollutants are prohibited except at discharge points designed by the director. 
(4)  Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by regulations within the Florida Administrative Code issued by the state department of health and rehabilitative services and which will or may cause damage or hazards to the CRBSS or its operating personnel. 
(5)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool discharges. 
(6)  Domestic wastes from septic tanks, portable toilets or other similar facilities, unless approved by the director in writing. Such discharges shall only be made at a site approved by the director in writing. 
(7)  Mineral oil in excess of 50 mg/l or animal/vegetable fats, wax, grease or oils in excess of 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not; or substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures lower than or equal to 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(8)  Food waste that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. At no time shall the concentration of properly ground food waste exceed a level that would prevent the CRBSS treatment plants from maintaining the required efficiency or cause operational difficulties. 
(9)  Inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) in such concentrations as to pass through or interfere with the operations of the CRBSS. 
(10)  Any waste or wastewater having a pH lower than 5.5 exhibiting any corrosive property which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, processes, equipment or personnel of the CRBSS. 
(11)  Any waste or wastewater having a pH higher than 9.5 which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, processes, equipment or personnel of the CRBSS. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-98(a)), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-145. - Options regarding prohibited discharges. 
    If waters or wastes are discharged or proposed to be discharged into the CRBSS which contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 20-144, and which in the judgement of the director may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, the director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes or deny or condition the introduction of new sources of wastewater to the CRBSS; or 
(2)  Require the industrial user to demonstrate that in-plant improvements will modify the discharge to such a degree as to be acceptable; and/or 
(3)  Require pretreatment of the industrial user's discharge to ensure compliance with this division; and/or 
(4)  Require payment of an industrial waste surcharge to cover the added cost of handling and treating excess loads imposed on the CRBSS by such discharge. These special surcharges shall be approved by the city council of the city as stated in the existing schedule of rates and fees of the CRBSS. Approval of industrial waste surcharge for the recovery of treatment costs does not replace or supersede the requirements for pretreatment facilities, should they be found necessary by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-98(b)), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-146. - Revocation of authorization to discharge; appeal. 
    Authorization to discharge industrial waste in the CRBSS or any connected system shall continue in effect unless or until rescinded by the director in writing. If the director revokes the authorization of any user to discharge wastes into the CRBSS or any connected system, notification of such revocation shall be delivered to the user by certified mail or by hand delivery. Any system user whose authorization to discharge has been revoked may appeal the decision of the director to the city council. The appeal shall be sent in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city council within 14 days of receipt of the director's notification to cease discharge. Following receipt of the appeal, the city council will conduct a public hearing concerning the revocation order of the director after giving notice to the user of the time and place for such hearing. At the public hearing, the user, either individually or by counsel, shall have the opportunity to be heard, to present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The city council may affirm, reverse or modify the order of the director and shall issue its decision in writing. The director's order to cease discharge of wastes into the CRBSS or any connected system shall not become effective until the period for appeal to the city council has expired, or if an appeal has been filed, until the city council has rendered a decision, unless the director has made a finding that continued discharge by the user into the CRBSS or any connected system constitutes a clear and present danger to the operations of the CRBSS, to the health of the public or to the environment. Any such finding shall be included in the director's notification to cease discharge, and in such event, the revocation of authorization to discharge wastes shall become effective immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-98(c)), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-147. - Pretreatment requirements. 
(a)  If the director requires pretreatment prior to discharge into any part of the CRBSS or any connected system, the plans, specifications and other pertinent data or information relating to such wastewater pretreatment facilities, as prepared by a registered professional engineer, shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. Approval shall in no way exempt the discharge of such facilities from compliance with any applicable code, ordinance or law. Any subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall not be made without due notice to and approval of the director. 
(b)  Where preliminary treatment is required, such facilities shall be constructed and effectively operated and maintained by the owner at his expense, subject to the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-98(d)), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-148. - Industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
(a)  All prospective significant users shall apply for an industrial wastewater discharge permit, the cost of which is to be incurred by the industrial user, prior to discharge to the CRBSS. All significant industrial users who are discharging wastewater into the CRBSS prior to December 1, 1993, are hereby granted temporary authority to continue to discharge in compliance with the codes, regulations and policies of the CRBSS. This temporary authority shall expire 90 days after the date of notification through registered mail by the director of the requirement for the significant industrial user to make application for an industrial wastewater discharge permit. If, prior to the expiration date, the user has filed an industrial wastewater discharge permit pursuant to this section, then its temporary authority shall expire on the date the industrial wastewater discharge permit is issued or denied. 
(b)  Any person discharging pursuant to the temporary authority provided in this section is subject to all provisions of this division, and such authority may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the terms and procedures set forth in this division. No permit holder shall discharge industrial wastewaters in excess of the quantity, rate of discharge or quality conditions specified in the permit. Any person desiring to modify his discharge which would violate conditions of his permit shall apply for an amended permit. Issuance of a permit shall not relieve the industrial user from complying with all applicable laws, regulations and ordinances promulgated by other government authority, nor shall the issuance of a permit be construed as a representation by the city that the discharge permitted therein complies with all such laws, regulations and ordinances. Permits are issued solely to govern the discharge of industrial wastewater into the CRBSS and the applicable receiving waters, as between the industrial user and the city, and shall be not construed to benefit any third party. 
(1)  Self-monitoring requirements. All significant industrial users of the CRBSS or any connected system shall submit self-monitoring reports to the director identifying the constituents and describing the characteristics of the industrial wastewater being discharged into the CRBSS. The content and frequency of the reports shall be as specified in the permit but shall in no case be less frequent than twice per year. In order to ensure the integrity of the industrial waste reports submitted to the director, such significant industrial users of the CRBSS or any connected system shall: 
a.  Maintain records concerning volume, constituents and characteristics of the industrial waste discharge. All such records and equipment used to determine and record volume, constituents and characteristics of industrial waste discharges shall be made available for review, inspection and photocopying by the director, or his appointed representative, and by authorized representatives of the DEP and the EPA. 
b.  Install, use and maintain monitoring and sampling equipment approved by the director for determining volume, constituents and characteristics of the industrial waste discharge. 
All monitoring and analysis conducted shall be conducted and reported in accordance with EPA requirements found in 40 CFR 403.12(g). 
(2)  Compliance schedule. Industrial users subject to the categorical pretreatment standards must also comply with the requirements for submittal of a baseline monitoring report (BMR) found in 40 CFR 403.12. If additional pretreatment or other measures are required to meet the categorical pretreatment standards, a compliance schedule shall be provided which shows the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide necessary measures to comply with the pretreatment standards. In no case shall the completion date in this schedule be later than the compliance date for the applicable pretreatment standard. The industrial user shall submit to the director periodic reports on the progress of the compliance schedule. In addition, within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source, 90 days following the introduction of wastewater into the CRBSS, any industrial user subject to the categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the director a report indicating the concentration of pollutants in the discharge from the regulated processes and the average and maximum daily flow for those processes. 
(3)  Accepted methods. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastes and wastewater to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the rules and regulations of EPA and those within the Florida Administrative Code and shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods. 
(4)  Sampling points. All significant industrial users discharging industrial waste into the CRBSS or any connected system shall provide and maintain a suitable point or points of access together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances at an appropriate location to permit observation, flow measurement and sampling of such waste by the director. Plans for such sampling points and measuring equipment shall be subject to approval by the director prior to construction and installation of the facility. Sampling and measuring facilities shall be located in such a manner as to provide safe, unrestricted access for inspection and verification of the industrial user's operating conditions, and enabling collection of a sample that is representative of the user's typical discharge. All such facilities must be located and maintained so as to be accessible to the director or his representatives at all times including weekends, holidays and both day and night, without prior notice. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The director may require, at his discretion, a lockable facility to protect the city property against theft, vandalism and tampering. If such facility is required, the industrial user shall supply the director with a key to such facility. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-98(e)), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-149. - Accidental discharge protection plan. 
(a)  Generally. All significant industrial users shall be required to establish and submit to the director for approval in writing an accidental discharge protection plan, as follows: 
(1)  Each significant industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge or prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the CRBSS for review and shall be approved by the department before construction of the facility. 
(2)  The accidental discharge protection plan shall also include: 
a.  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges. 
b.  Description of stored chemicals. 
c.  Any necessary procedures to prevent accidental spills, including maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, and control of plant site runoff. 
d.  Any necessary measures for building containment structures or equipment. 
e.  Any necessary measures for controlling toxic organic pollutants, including solvents. 
f.  Any necessary procedures and equipment for emergency response. 
g.  Any necessary follow-up practices to limit the damage suffered by the treatment plant or the environment. 
(b)  Telephone notification. Any person causing or suffering any discharge, whether accidental or not, which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, to the environment or which is likely to cause interference with the CRBSS shall take the necessary measures to stop, limit or control the discharge and shall notify the director, or his previously designated representative, immediately by telephone. In absence or unavailability of the director or his representative, notification shall be given to the CRBSS employee then in charge of the treatment plant that accepts the industrial user's waste. 
(c)  Written report. Within five business days following such accidental discharge, the user shall provide the director with a detailed written report describing the cause of the dangerous discharge and measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the CRBSS, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. Furthermore, the industrial user shall control its production (or all its discharges) to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility, and until the facility is completely restored or an alternative and equally effective method of pretreatment is provided. This requirement applies in but is not limited to the situation where the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced or lost, or fails. 
(d)  Notice to employees. A notice by the CRBSS shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(1)  In the case of new regulations under section 3001 of the RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the director of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations, except for the exemption in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practicable and that it has selected the method of treatment, storage or disposal currently available, which minimizes the present and future threat to human health and the environment. 
(e)  Reporting change in discharge. All industrial users are required to report to the director any change in the characteristics, nature, or volume of the discharge to the CRBSS. 
(f)  Reports to be signed. Reports required under this division or specific industrial user permits must be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(g)  Records to be made available. Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements in this division is required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results and shall make such records available for inspection or photocopying by the director or state or federal officials. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-98(f)), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-150. - Damage to CRBSS. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the CRBSS. Costs of any damage to CRBSS caused by such acts or costs associated with additional treatment or alternative disposal methods required to meet effluent or sludge treatment and disposal requirements resulting from violations of this division shall be passed on to the entity responsible for the violations. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-99), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-151. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
    The director and authorized representatives of the city, the DEP and the EPA bearing proper credentials shall be permitted to enter upon any property without prior notification for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing review and/or photocopying of records, or investigation as may be necessary in the enforcement of this division. Entry shall be made during daylight or operating hours unless abnormal or emergency circumstances require otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-100), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-152. - Enforcement actions. 
    The following escalating enforcement strategy shall be used by the city when industrial users (IU) are out of compliance with this division. The various types of enforcement actions shall be used as determined by the director depending on the circumstances of the violation. 
(1)  Immediate threat to public health. The director may require the immediate halt of a discharge if it is deemed as an immediate threat to public health or the CRBSS. 
(2)  Self-monitoring. The IU will review its self-monitoring data to determine whether a violation of this division and/or of its permit limitations has occurred. If a violation has occurred, the IU must provide to the CRBSS: 
a.  Twenty-four-hour notification that a violation has occurred. 
b.  The magnitude and nature of the violation. 
c.  Details regarding analytical quality assurance. 
Failure to comply with the 24-hour notification requirement will result in administrative fines of $100.00 per occurrence. 
(3)  Resampling. Upon the determination that a violation has occurred, the IU must resample the final discharge for the offending parameter. The resampling data must be submitted to the city within 30 days of violation discovery. Failure to resample and report within 30 days is a violation of federal regulation 40 CFR 403.12(g). If the IU fails to resample and report within 30 days, CRBSS will issue a notice of violation (NOV) requiring the IU to resample and submit the report within 30 days. Failure to comply with the NOV will result in a single administrative fine of $150.00 per violation. Continued failure to comply within 60 days from the original violation thereafter will result in a monthly fine of $500.00 or one-half of the previous month's bill, whichever is greater. 
(4)  CRBSS monitoring. The city will conduct periodic independent compliance monitoring of IUs as appropriate. If the violation is not significant, as defined in this division, the city will issue a NOV and a 45-day compliance schedule including the requirement to resample in order to determine whether a violation is significant. The results of the resampling must be submitted to the city within 30 days of the receipt of the compliance schedule. Failure to comply will result in a single fine of $500.00 per violation. Continued failure to comply within 60 days after issuance of the NOV will result in a monthly fine of $1,000.00 or previous month's bill, whichever is greater. 
(5)  Significant violations. The city will review sampling data obtained to determine whether a significant violation as defined in this division has occurred. If a significant violation has occurred, the city will review the data to determine whether significant noncompliance as defined in this division has occurred; in which case a single fine of $500.00 or one-half the previous month's bill, whichever is greater, will be assessed per violation. 
(6)  Formal notice. If a significant violation is determined, the city will issue a notice of significant violation (NOSV), requiring the IU to submit within 15 days of the receipt of the notice a draft of a 90-day compliance schedule to determine the need to install or construct pretreatment facilities. Failure to respond within 15 days will result in a single fine of $500.00 per violation. Upon receipt of the draft compliance schedule, the city will issue the compliance schedule as a condition of continued operation. A demonstration of compliance (DOC) will be included as the final item in the compliance schedule. If at any time during the 90-day schedule, the IU determines that pretreatment facilities are required, the IU will inform the city of such and submit a draft construction schedule. 
(7)  DOC. Upon completion of the 90-day compliance schedule, the city will review the DOC data to determine whether compliance has been achieved. Failure to demonstrate compliance during the 90-day schedule will result in the city issuing a NOSV requiring the IU to submit within 15 days of receipt of the NOSV a draft compliance schedule for the construction of new pretreatment facilities or the improvement, modification or expansion of existing facilities. Failure to respond within 15 days will result in a single fine of $500.00 per violation. Continued failure to comply within 60 days of the NOSV thereafter will result in a monthly fine of $1,000.00 or previous month's bill, whichever is greater. Upon receipt of the draft compliance schedule, the city will issue the compliance schedule as a condition of continued operation. Approval of the facility design engineer by the city is required prior to design of the pretreatment facility. A DOC will be included as the final item in the compliance schedule. Upon completion of the construction compliance schedule, the city will review the DOC data to determine whether compliance has been achieved. 
(8)  Final schedule of compliance. If the construction of pretreatment facilities does not achieve compliance, the city will assess a fine of $2,000.00 or twice the previous month's bill, whichever is greater, and will issue a notice of monthly fine (NMF). Fines of the same amount will continue to be assessed on a monthly basis until compliance is achieved or service is terminated. The NMF will require that the IU submit a draft final compliance schedule within 15 days or receipt of the NMF. Upon receipt of the draft compliance schedule, the city will issue the final schedule of compliance as a condition of continued operation. A DOC period will be included as the final item in the compliance schedule. Upon completion of the compliance schedule, the city will review the DOC data to determine whether compliance has been achieved. 
(9)  Show cause hearing. If the final compliance schedule does not achieve compliance, the city will issue a notice to show cause (NSC) why the discharge permit should not be revoked and service terminated, in accordance with law. The CRBSS will hold the show cause hearing to determine whether the permit should be revoked and sewer services terminated. 
a.  If the IU shows cause for its failure to comply, service shall not be terminated nor the permit revoked. The monthly fine will increase to an amount up to $1,000.00 per day, and a new final compliance schedule will be issued. 
b.  If the IU fails to show cause why its permit should not be revoked and service terminated, the IU's permit shall be revoked and its sewer service will be terminated by the city. 
(10)  Violations not addressed. Penalties for violations of this division and/or the IU's wastewater discharge permit not addressed in this section will be assessed at the discretion of the director. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-101), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-153. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates a provision of this division shall be prosecuted in the name of the state in a court having jurisdiction of misdemeanors by the prosecuting attorney thereof, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for each offense or by imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. If a violation is continued, each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any record or other document submitted under this division of industrial user permits shall be subject to fines of up to $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-102), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-154. - Areas embraced. 
    All territory within the legal boundaries of the city, including all incorporated and all unincorporated areas, shall be embraced by the provisions of this division. The areas which are not included within the legal boundaries of the city, but deliver wastewater to the CRBSS, shall be embraced by interlocal agreements between the city and the local jurisdiction providing wastewater collection in those areas. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-103), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-155. - Confidentiality. 
    Information and data concerning individual industrial users obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public to the extent permitted by state law, upon written request without restriction, unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that such release would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-104), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 20-156. - Public notice of violators. 
    The city shall publish annually in the largest daily newspaper published within the county, a list of industrial users which during the previous 12 months were significantly violating applicable pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 2615, § 2(20-105), 12-1-93) 
Secs. 20-157-20-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 001UD, § 2, adopted July 15, 2009, deleted Div. 2, §§ 20-180-20-195, which pertained to wastewater disposal system rates and charges. Said rates and charges are maintained on file and may be reviewed at the office of the city clerk. See the Code Comparative table for full derivation. 

Secs. 20-180-20-182. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-183. - Residential single- and multiple-unit sewer service. 
(a)  Availability. The rates listed below are available to all residences, apartments, condominiums and mobile home parks within the territory served by the city. 
(b)  Rates. Rates are maintained on file and may be reviewed at the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Unit. Each unit of any building having separate units which are used for the housing of two or more families or for commercial purposes or for both such purposes, and each trailer space of any trailer park shall be considered a unit. As in the case of storage bays the number of units will be based on the number of water closets required under the Standard Building Code in relation to the number of bays. One water closet equals one unit. Where more than one meter serves a property, the rate is computed on the basis of each meter. 
(Ord. No. 001UD, § 2, 7-15-09) 
Sec. 20-184. - Commercial and hotel and motel sewer rates. 
    Commercial and hotel and motel sewer rates are maintained on file and may be reviewed at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 001UD, § 2, 7-15-09) 
Secs. 20-185-20-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER AND SEWER CONTAMINATION PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-216. - Connection with other source than city; siphonage back when stored. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a connection to be made or to allow one to exist for any purpose whatever between the city water supply system and any other source of supply, except that the city water supply system may be interconnected with any other water utility system which has been approved by the state or any other municipal water supply system which has the approval of the state and the municipal supply lines discharging into improperly constructed pools, reservoirs, storage tanks, standpipes and insanitary containers of any kind, in which water therein is stored and is subjected to contamination, must discharge into such pools, reservoirs, storage tanks, standpipes in a manner to prevent siphoning back of the water therein stored into the municipal supply line system in case of the development of a negative pressure in the municipal supply line system. 
(Code 1957, § 22-71) 
Sec. 20-217. - Storage of water; approval of board of health. 
    The pools, reservoirs, storage tanks, standpipes or any containers in which water from the water supply system is stored and from which the water therein stored is circulated through pipes connected to the city supply line system must be approved by the state as to the sanitary conditions and ability to adequately protect the water therein stored from contamination before final approval of their use is given by the city. 
(Code 1957, § 22-72) 
Sec. 20-218. - Separate source; storage; statement of no cross-connections. 
    Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the city water supply system and who also has on such premises a separate source of supply or who stores water in insanitary pools, storage tanks, standpipes or other insanitary containers, from which the water therein stored is circulated through a piping system shall file with the city clerk a statement of nonexistence of cross-connection. 
(Code 1957, § 22-73) 
Secs. 20-219-20-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 20-231. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air-gap separation means a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch. 
    Approved check valve means a check valve that seats readily and completely. It must be carefully machined to have free-moving parts and assured watertightness. The face of the closure element and valve seat must be bronze, composition or other noncorrosible material which will seat tightly under all prevailing conditions of field use. Pins and bushings shall be of bronze, composition or other noncorrosible, nonsticking material machined for easy, dependable operation. The closure element (e.g., clapper) shall be internally weighted or otherwise internally equipped to promote rapid and positive closure in all sizes where this feature is obtainable. 
    Approved double-check valve assembly means an assembly of at least two independently acting approved check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valve assembly and suitable leak detector drains plus connections available for testing the watertightness of each check valve. 
    Approved reduced-pressure-principle backflow prevention device means a device incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief located between the two checks, two shutoff valves and equipped with necessary appurtenances for testing. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone and two check valves, less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the check valves shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain this reduced pressure by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall be open to the atmosphere thereby providing an air gap in the device. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for maintenance and testing and installed in a location where no part of the valve will be submerged. 
    Approved water supply means any water supply approved by, or under the public health supervision of, a public health agency of the state or its political subdivisions. In determining what constitutes an approved water supply, the state department of public health reserves final judgment as to its safety and potability. 
    Auxiliary supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the public water supply. 
    Cross-connection means any unprotected connection between any part of a water system used or intended to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing water or substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome and potable for human consumption. 
(Code 1957, § 22-74) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-232. - Derivation. 
    This division is a modified version of the California Administrative Code, Title 17, Public Health; Chapter 5, Sanitation (Environmental); Subchapter 1, Engineering (Sanitary); Group 4, Drinking Water Supplies. 
(Code 1957, § 22-74) 
Sec. 20-233. - Purpose of regulations to safeguard drinking water supplies. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Protect the public water supply against actual or potential cross-connections by isolating within the premises contamination or pollution that may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises. 
(2)  Eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption. 
(3)  Eliminate cross connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water or process water used for any purpose whatsoever which jeopardize the safety of the drinking water supply. 
(4)  Prevent the making of cross connections in the future. 
(5)  Encourage the exclusive use of public sources of water supply. 
(6)  Protect the drinking water supply within the premises where plumbing defects or cross connections may endanger the drinking water supply available on the premises. 
(b)  The regulations are to be reasonably interpreted. It is the intent of these regulations to recognize that there are varying degrees of hazard and to apply the principle that the degree of protection should commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
(c)  These regulations are not to be construed as prohibiting other governmental authorities from establishing requirements regarding protection of water supply more rigid than herein indicated, where circumstances warrant. 
(d)  It is recognized that the control of cross connections requires cooperation between water purveyors and health agencies. The water purveyor has a primary responsibility to prevent water from unapproved sources, or any other substance, entering the public water supply system. The health agency has the overall responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources from entering either the potable water systems within water consumers' premises or the public water supply directly. 
(Code 1957, § 22-74) 
Sec. 20-234. - Protection of public water system at service connection. 
(a)  All commercial and industrial classifications that are served by the city water and sewer department are required to install and maintain an appropriate backflow prevention device. The type and size of the device will be determined by the water and sewer department. 
(b)  All multistory buildings regardless of intended use shall install and maintain all required backflow prevention devices. The type and size will be determined by the water and sewer department. All single-family units will be exempt from this requirement unless it is determined that a special health hazard exists. 
(c)  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service connection to any premises that have internal cross connections unless such cross connections are abated to the satisfaction of the water purveyor and approved by the state or local health department. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the water user to provide protective devices as required. 
(Code 1957, § 22-74; Ord. No. 2255, § 1(22-74), 11-7-84) 
Sec. 20-235. - Type of protection. 
    The protective device required shall depend on the degree of hazard as tabulated below: 
(1)  At the service connection to any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply handled in a separate piping system with no known cross connection, the public water supply shall be protected by an approved double-check valve assembly. 
(2)  At the service connection to any premises on which a substance that would be objectionable but not necessarily hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water supply, is handled so as to constitute a cross connection, the public water supply shall be protected by an approved doublecheck valve assembly. 
(3)  At the service connection on any premises on which there is an auxiliary water supply where cross connections are known to exist which cannot be presently eliminated, the public water supply system shall be protected by an approved reduced-pressure-principle backflow prevention device. A double-check valve assembly may be used in lieu of such device if local experience indicates that double-check valves are reliably operated and if approved by the water purveyor and local health agency. 
(4)  At the service connection to any premises on which any material dangerous to health or toxic substance in toxic concentration is or may be handled under pressure, the public water supply shall be protected by an air-gap separation. The air-gap shall be located as close as practicable to the service cock and all piping between the service cock and receiving tank shall be entirely visible. If these conditions cannot reasonably be met, the public water supply shall be protected with either an approved reduced-pressure-principle backflow prevention device, or an approved double-check valve assembly, providing the alternative is acceptable to both the water purveyor and the local health department. 
(5)  At the service connection to any sewage treatment plant or sewage pumping station, the public water supply shall be protected by an air-gap separation. The air-gap shall be located as close as practicable to the service cock and all piping between the service cock and receiving tank shall be entirely visible. If these conditions cannot be reasonably met, the public water supply shall be protected with an approved reduced-pressure-principle backflow prevention device, providing this alternative is acceptable to both the water purveyor and local health department. Final decision in this matter shall rest with the state department of public health. 
(Code 1957, § 22-74) 
Sec. 20-236. - Frequency of inspection of protective devices. 
    It shall be the duty of the water user on any premises on account of which backflow protective devices are installed to have competent inspections made at least once a year or more often in those instances where successive inspections indicate repeated failure. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the water user whenever they are found to be defective. It shall be the duty of the water purveyor and the health department to see that these tests are made in accordance with the responsibility designated. Records of such tests, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept and made available to the water purveyor and the local health department. 
(Code 1957, § 22-74) 
Sec. 20-237. - Protection of potable water system within premises. 
(a)  Separate drinking water systems. Whenever the health agency determines that it is not practical to protect drinking water systems on premises against entry of water from a source of piping system or equipment that cannot be approved as safe or potable for human use, an entirely separate drinking water system shall be installed to supply water at points convenient for consumers. 
(b)  Fire system. Water systems for fighting fire derived from a supply that cannot be approved as safe or potable for human use shall, wherever practicable, be kept wholly separate from drinking water pipelines and equipment. In cases in which the domestic water system is used for both drinking and firefighting purposes, approved backflow prevention devices shall be installed to protect such individual drinking water lines as are not used for firefighting purposes. It is hereby declared that it is the responsibility of the person causing the introduction of the unapproved or unsafe water into the pipelines to see that a procedure is developed and carried out to notify and protect users of this piping system during the emergency that special precautions are taken to disinfect thoroughly and flush out all pipelines which may have become contaminated before they are again used to furnish drinking water. If the means of protection of water consumers is by disinfection of the auxiliary firefighting supply, the installation and its use shall be thoroughly reliable. When disinfection of the auxiliary supply itself is depended upon to render the water safe, the means of applying the disinfectant under this regulation shall be automatic with operation of the pump or pumps employed with the dangerous water in question. Adequate supplies of chlorine or its compound must be kept on hand at all times. Chlorine dosing equipment shall be tested daily and kept in good operating condition. The public water supply must be protected against backflow from such dual domestic fire systems as detailed under type of protection section 20-235. 
(c)  Process waters. Potable water pipelines connected to equipment for industrial processes or operations shall be disconnected therefrom if practicable. Where disconnection is not practicable, a suitable backflow prevention device located beyond the last point from which drinking water may be taken shall be provided on the feed line to process piping or equipment. If the particular process liquid is especially corrosive or apt to prevent reliable action of the backflow prevention device, air-gap separation shall be provided. These devices shall be tested by the water user at least once a year or more often in these instances where successive inspections indicate repeated failure. The devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective. Records of tests, repairs and replacement shall be kept and made available to the local health department. 
(d)  Sewage treatment plants and pumping stations. Sewage pumps shall not have priming connections directly off any drinking water systems. No connections shall exist between the drinking water system and any other piping, equipment or tank in any sewage plant or sewage pumping station. 
(e)  Plumbing connections. Where the circumstances are such that there is special danger to health by the backflow of sewage as from sewers, toilets, hospital bedpans and the like into a drinking water system, a dependable device shall be installed to prevent such backflow. The purpose of these regulations is not to transcend local plumbing regulations but only to deal with those extraordinary situations in which sewage may be forced or drawn into the drinking water piping. These regulations do not attempt to eliminate at this time the hazards of backsiphonage through flushometer valves on all toilets but deal with those situations where the likelihood of vacuum conditions in the drinking water is definite and there is a special danger to health. Devices suited to the purpose of avoiding backsiphonage from plumbing fixtures are roof tanks or separate pressure systems separately piped to supply such fixtures, recognized approved vacuum or siphon breakers and other backflow protective devices which have been proved by appropriate tests to be dependable for destroying the vacuum. Inasmuch as many of the serious hazards of this kind are due to water supply piping which is too small, thereby causing vacuum conditions when fixtures are flushed or water is drawn from the system in other ways, it is recommended that the water supply piping that is too small be enlarged whenever possible. 
(f)  Pier and dock hydrants. Backflow protection by a suitable backflow prevention device shall be provided on each drinking water pier head outlet used for supply vessels at piers or waterfronts. These assemblies must be located where they will prevent the return of any water from the vessel into the drinking water pipeline or into another adjacent vessel. This will prevent such practices as connecting the ship fire pumping or sanitary pumping system with a dock hydrant and thereby pumping contaminated water into the drinking water system and thence to adjacent vessels or back into the public mains. 
(g)  Marking safe and unsafe water lines. Where the premises contain dual or multiple water systems and piping, the exposed portions of pipelines shall be painted, banded or marked at sufficient intervals to distinguish clearly which water is safe and which is not safe. All outlets from secondary or other potentially contaminated systems shall be posted as being contaminated and unsafe for drinking purposes. All outlets intended for drinking purposes shall be plainly marked to indicate that fact. 
(Code 1957, § 22-74) 
Sec. 20-238. - Water supervisor. 
(a)  The health department and the water purveyor shall be kept informed of the identity of the person responsible for the water piping on all premises concerned with these regulations. At each premises where it is necessary in the opinion of the health department, a water supervisor shall be designated. This water supervisor shall be responsible for the installation and use of pipelines and equipment and for the avoidance of cross connections. 
(b)  In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross connection on the premises, the local health officer and water purveyor shall be promptly advised by the person responsible for the water system so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. 
(Code 1957, § 22-74) 
Sec. 20-239. - Sanctions for noncompliance. 
    Failure of the consumer to install, maintain or permit the testing and inspection of backflow prevention devices by the city as required in this article shall be grounds for termination of the water service to the premises by the city as provided in this section. In the case of an immediate hazard to the public health, the water service may be terminated without notice to the consumer immediately, although a hearing before the director of utilities shall be immediately scheduled upon request of the consumer to determine the justness and fairness of the water service termination. Termination of water service will be done within 30 days of second notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2255, § 1(22-75), 11-7-84) 
Secs. 20-240-20-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXTENSIONS OF MAINS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 

Sec. 20-256. - Purpose of article. 
    This article establishes procedures to provide and facilitate orderly expansion of and additions to the water system and sewerage system of the city, both inside and outside the city limits, and includes provisions for funding such expansion by those benefitting thereby. 
(Code 1957, § 22-81) 
Sec. 20-257. - Scope. 
    The city has accepted the responsibility to provide water service and sewer service within its service area as a subregional agency as designated by the Palm Beach County Area Planning Board, including the city, the reserved annexation area of the city and the Town of Palm Beach Shores. 
(Code 1957, § 22-82) 
Sec. 20-258. - Design and construction of mains. 
(a)  The city will design and construct all water supply, treatment, transmission and storage facilities, and all sewage pumping, transmission and treatment facilities necessary to provide service to the property line of the property to be served. 
(b)  The city may design and construct all internal water distribution and sewage collection on the property to be served, or have the same designed and constructed by the property owner or developer in accordance with standards and specifications approved by the city. 
(c)  All construction shall be inspected by the city, at the expense of the property owner or developer, and neither water service or sewer service shall be provided by the city through the constructed facilities, until such construction is in conformance with the standards and specifications approved by the city. 
(Code 1957, § 22-83) 
Sec. 20-259. - Financing of facilities. 
(a)  Design and construction by the city. In all cases involving design and construction of facilities by the city, the property owner or developer shall convey to the city all monies necessary to pay all costs for planning, property, engineering, construction, inspections, legal, administrative and related costs. Such payment shall not be less than 130 percent of the estimated bare construction and real estate cost as determined by the city. 
(b)  Design and construction by property owner or property developer. In all cases involving design and construction of facilities by the property owner or developer, the property owner or developer shall post with the city a surety bond for performance and payment suitable to the city. Such bond shall be for not less than 100 percent of the total cost for construction of the project. In addition, the property owner or developer shall pay to the city a fee of five percent of the estimated construction cost for provision of periodic construction inspection service to be provided by the city. 
(c)  Method of payment to city for design and construction by city. In all cases involving design and construction by the city, the property owner or developer shall pay money to the city in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  At the time of requesting water and sewer service by the city, the property owner or developer shall enter into a written agreement with the city and shall pay to the city ten percent of the project construction and real estate cost as determined by the city for planning, legal and administrative work and for design of the required water and sewer facilities. 
(2)  Upon completion of planning, but prior to requesting the receipt of bids for construction of the project, the property owner or developer shall pay to the city an additional 120 percent of the project construction and real estate cost as determined by the city for construction expenses, real estate, inspection and contingencies. Such funds shall be escrowed in a special construction trust fund account in any state or national bank as determined by the city, and such funds shall be used solely to pay all costs related to the project. 
(3)  Following receipt of construction bills and determination of real estate cost by the city, funds escrowed in the special construction trust fund account shall be adjusted to an amount equal to 120 percent of the project cost as determined by actual real estate cost and actual bids received by the city from the lowest and most satisfactory bidder as determined by the city. If bids received by the city exceed the estimated cost of the work, the property owner or developer shall pay to the city for deposit in the special construction trust fund account the necessary additional monies to bring the funds deposited in such account up to 120 percent of the project cost as determined by real estate cost and by bids received by the city. If bids received by the city and real estate cost are less than the estimated cost of the work, the city shall reimburse the property owner or developer from the special construction trust fund account such funds as may be in excess of 120 percent of the project cost as determined by real estate cost and by bids received by the city. 
(4)  Following adjustment of funds in the special construction trust fund account and upon approval of the city council, the city shall acquire the real estate and award the construction contract and all costs incurred by the city shall be paid from the special construction trust fund account. If unforeseen circumstances relative to construction of the work arise, thereby necessitating additional funds, the city shall promptly notify the property owner or developer of such, describing the additional funds necessary and the reasons for such, and the property owner or developer shall within seven calendar days pay such additional funds with the city for deposit in the special construction trust fund account. If the property owner or developer fails to deposit such additional funds with the city, the city reserves the right to cancel the construction contract, pay expenses incurred by the city with funds available in the special construction trust fund account and refund any excess funds remaining in the special construction trust fund account to the property owner or developer. 
(5)  The city may provide without charge water and sewerage to property owners within the city limits, provided the property is located in a subdivision that was platted prior to January 1, 1970. 
(Code 1957, § 22-84) 
Sec. 20-260. - Ownership of facilities. 
    All portions of the water system and sewerage system, whether constructed by the property owner or developer, or by the city, which are located in public rights-of-way, city-owned property or utility easement as determined by the city shall, upon construction completion, become the property of the city, and filing of an application for construction by the property owner or developer shall be deemed to be consent for transfer of such ownership, including real estate. The property owner or developer shall execute and deliver to the city such deeds or other evidence of ownership as the city may require. 
(Code 1957, § 22-85) 
Sec. 20-261. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  In order to standardize and keep repair parts inventory to a reasonable size, the following types and makes of fire hydrants are allowed: 
(1)  Darling B62B traffic type with 51/4-inch seat, American Darling Valves, P.O. Box 2727, Birmingham, Alabama. 
(2)  Dresser No. 300 traffic type with 41/2-inch seat, Division of Dresser Industries, Inc., Anniston, Alabama. 
(3)  Mueller modern improved fire hydrant, traffic type with 41/2-inch seat, Mueller Company, Chattanooga, Tennessee. 
(b)  All hydrants are to be traffic model with 21/2-inch hose nozzles and one 41/2-inch steamer nozzle connection. The hydrant shoe is to be a mechanical joint. 
(c)  When installed, the steamer nozzle shall face the street. A valve shall be installed between the main and the hydrant. A 24-inch by 24-inch by five-inch concrete collar shall be poured around the fire hydrant barrel at least six inches below grade, and above the midlength of the barrel. This collar will have one five-eighths-inch diameter reinforcing rod centered within the concrete. Two wraps of 30-pound felt paper will be placed on the barrel before the concrete is poured, and left in place. Also, one of the concrete sides will be set parallel to the face of the steamer nozzle, and the concrete collar will be centered to the hydrant barrel within one-inch tolerance, in accordance with exhibit 2, a diagram of concrete collar required and made a part of this section which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(d)  Styles or variations of other makes may be installed if approved in advance by the director of utilities. 
(Code 1957, § 22-86) 
Cross reference- Hydrant rental rates, § 20-67. 
Sec. 20-262. - Connections beyond city territorial boundaries; moratorium, exceptions; penalty. 
(a)  The director of utilities, except for subsisting commitments, is hereby directed not to authorize or issue any permits for any water service connections beyond the territorial boundaries of the city, and all city officials and employees are prohibited from making such connections in conflict with this section. 
(b)  In accordance with the procedures as provided for in the Code, the city council, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the applications of any provision herein contained in this section to any particular case, when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the enactment of this section or public interest. 
(Code 1957, § 22-87) 
Secs. 20-263-20-285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2892, adopted Apr. 4, 2001, §§ 1-15, pertaining to industrial pretreatment of wastewater did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion as Art. VIII, §§ 20-286-20-450 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Wastewater disposal system, §§ 20-141-20-156. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-286. - Purpose and policy. 
    The purpose of this article is to set forth uniform requirements for users of the City of Riviera Beach wastewater system and the East Central Regional Wastewater Treatment Facility requirements for existing and other sources of pollution). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater facilities that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater facilities that will pass through the wastewater facilities without adequate treatment and receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the wastewater facilities; 
(3)  To protect wastewater facility personnel who may be affected by the wastewater in the course of their employment; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the wastewater facilities; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the wastewater facilities; and 
(6)  To enable the City of West Palm Beach, which holds the national pollutant discharge elimination system permit on behalf of the ECRWWTFB, to comply with the NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the wastewater facilities are subject. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-287. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this article: 
    Act ("the Act"). The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority. The DEP or its successor agencies. 
    Authorized representative of the user. Either: 
(1)  The president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the user; or 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively; or 
(3)  A director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his designee if the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility; or 
(4)  A duly authorized representative of the person designated in sections (1), (2), or (3) above if such authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge originates, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand ("BOD"). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter. 
    Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastewater streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    Categorical industrial user. An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, as amended. 
    CFR. Code of Federal Regulations. 
    Chemical oxygen demand ("COD"). A measure of the oxygen equivalent of that portion of the organic matter in a water sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant. 
    City. City of Riviera Beach. 
    Control authority. The ECRWWTFB or the City of West Palm Beach acting on behalf of and as agent for the ECRWWTFB. 
    Department of environmental protection ("DEP"). The Department of Environmental Protection of the State of Florida. 
    Discharge. To deposit, place, emit, unload, release, or cause or allow to be disposed of, deposited, placed, emitted, unloaded, or released. 
    Domestic waste. Any superfluous solid, liquid, or gaseous material derived principally from the use of sanitary conveniences of residences (including apartments); wastewater produced from a noncommercial or nonindustrial source. 
    ECRWWTF. The East Central Regional Wastewater Treatment Facility which treats and disposes of wastewater and wastewater sludge from the ECRWWTFB entities. 
    ECRWWTFB. The East Central Regional Wastewater Treatment Facilities Board. 
    Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA"). The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards. 
    F.A.C. Florida Administrative Code. 
    Grab samples. A sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    Indirect discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the WWF from any non-domestic source regulated under sections 307 (b), (c), and (d) of the Act and F.S. ch. 403. 
    Industrial user ("IU"). Any user discharging industrial wastewater into the WWF. 
    Industrial wastewater. Food waste, other waste, or any superfluous solid, liquid, or gaseous material resulting from manufacturing, industrial, or commercial processes, or from natural resource development, recovery, or processing. 
    Industrial wastewater surcharge. An additional service charge assessed against industrial users whose wastewater characteristics exceed established surcharge limits. 
    Industrial wastewater discharge permit ("Permit"). Written authorization from the city to discharge industrial wastewater to the WWF, setting certain conditions and/or restrictions on such discharge. 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interceptors (separators, grease traps). Any device designed and installed to separate and retain floatable deleterious, hazardous, and/or undesirable matter from sewage or liquid wastes, and to discharge into the WWF by gravity. 
    Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the WWF, its treatment processes or operations, or its domestic wastewater residuals processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the NPDES permit held by the City of West Palm Beach on behalf of the ECRWWTFB (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or prevents use or disposal of domestic wastewater residuals in compliance with local regulations or rules of DEP, F.S. ch. 403, and all applicable federal laws. 
    Medical waste. Wastes including, but not limited to, isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
    New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards prescribed under section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act which will be applicable to such source, if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, will be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraph (1) (b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program, 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Non-contact cooling water. Water usage for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product, to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
    Pass through. A discharge which exits the ECRWWTF into the waters of the state or of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any regulatory requirement of the ECRWWTFB's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Person. Individual, corporation, firm, company, joint venture, partnership, sole proprietorship, association, or any other legal business entity, any state or political [subdivision] thereof, any municipality, any interstate body and any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States and any officer, agent, or employee thereof, and any organized group of persons whether incorporated or not. 
    pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter (g/L) of solution. 
    Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, medical waste, solid waste, incinerator residue, garbage, sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the WWF. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by rule 62-625.410(5), F.A.C. Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities for protection against surges or slug discharges that might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the wastewater facilities. However, where wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with rule 62-625.410(6), F.A.C. 
    Pretreatment requirement. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
    Pretreatment standard. For any specified pollutant, the prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in this article, the State of Florida's Pretreatment Standards, or the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, whichever standard is the most stringent. 
    Prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. 
    RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
    Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
    Sewer. Means a pipe or conduit designed for carrying wastewater. 
    Significant industrial user. 
(1)  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under Rule 62-625.410 F.A.C. and 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N; and 
(2)  Any industrial user who has in its wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act, Florida Statutes or rules. 
(3)  All non-categorical users that, in the opinion of the city, have a reasonable potential to adversely affect the WWF operation, or that contribute a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the ECRWWTF, or that discharge an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the WWF. However, the city need not designate as significant any non-categorical industrial user that, in the opinion of the city and with the agreement of the EPA, has no potential for adversely affecting the WWF operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. The agreement of EPA is not necessary in cases where the non-categorical discharger would have been designated as significant only because of an average discharge of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater. 
(4)  Any non-categorical industrial user designated as significant may petition the city to be deleted from the list of significant industrial users on the grounds that it has no potential for adversely affecting WWF operation or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Significant noncompliance ("SNC"). Any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Violations of wastewater discharge limits: 
a.  Chronic violations. Sixty-six percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in a six-month period (any magnitude of excess). 
b.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations. Thirty-three percent or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit by more than the TRC in a six-month period. 
There are two groups of TRCS: 
Group I for conventional pollutants (BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease) 
TRC = 1.4 
Group II for all other pollutants TRC = 1.2 
c.  Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit (average or daily maximum) than the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads) or passthrough; or endangered the health of the sewage treatment personnel or the public. 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment and has resulted in the city exercising its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(2)  Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the schedule date. 
(3)  Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring data, or categorical standards (baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, and periodic reports) within 30 days from the due date. 
(4)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance within 30 days of its occurrence. 
(5)  Any other violation or group of violations that the city considers to be significant. 
    Significant violation. A violation which remains uncorrected 45 days after notification of noncompliance, which is part of a pattern of noncompliance over a 12-month period, which involves a failure to accurately report noncompliance, or which resulted in the city exercising emergency authority under section 20-346 of this article. 
    Sludge. Any solid or semisolid waste generated from a municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility exclusive of the treated effluent from a wastewater treatment plant. 
    Slug. Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in sections 20-311-20-318 of this article. 
    Standard industrial classification ("SIC") code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
    Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Upset. An exception incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. 
    User. Any person who discharges, causes, or allows the discharge of wastewater into the WWF. 
    Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are discharged into the WWF. 
    Wastewater facility ("WWF"). The structure, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic, industrial, medical, and other wastes and dispose of the effluent including facilities of the city wastewater system and ECRWWTF. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 2, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-288. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all users of the WWF. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 3, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-289. - Protection from damage. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the WWF. Costs of any damage to WWF caused by such acts or costs associated with additional treatment or alternative disposal method required to meet effluent or sludge treatment and disposal requirements resulting from violations of this article shall be paid by the user responsible for the violations. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 8, 4-4-01) 
Secs. 20-290-20-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE STANDARDS 

Sec. 20-311. - Discharges generally. 
    Users shall not discharge pollutants into the WWF unless in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 4, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-312. - Discharge prohibitions. 
    No user shall discharge into the WWF any waste or wastewater which may cause pass-through or interfere with the operation or performance of the WWF. No user shall discharge into the WWF or any waste or wastewater containing any of the following: 
(1)  Toxic or poisonous substances, chemical elements or compounds, taste or odor-producing substances, or any other substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed by the ECRWWTF. Toxic pollutants shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to 40 CFR Part 116 (4). 
(2)  Noxious, or malodorous solids, liquids, or gases or other wastewater which, either singly, or by interaction with other waste or wastewater (a) are capable of creating public nuisance or hazard to human or animal life (b) are or may be sufficient to prevent entry into a sewer for its maintenance, inspection, or repair or (c) may create any hazard in the receiving waters of the ECRWWTF. 
(3)  Liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the WWF or to its operation. Prohibited materials include but are not limited to, petroleum oil and non-biodegradable cutting oil, pollutants with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit [60 degrees centigrade], as determined by a Pensky-Martens Closed Cup Tester, using the test method specified in ASTM Standard D-93-79 or D-93-80k or a Setaflash Closed Cup Tester, using the test method specified in ASTM Standard D-3278 and pollutants which cause an excess of ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) at any point in the WWF. Specific products include, but are not limited to: gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, motor oil, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides or any other substance which the city, the State of Florida, or any federal agency has determined is a fire hazard or a hazard to the WWF. 
(4)  Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by regulations within the F.A.C. issued by the Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services and which will or may cause damage or hazards to the WWF or its operating personnel. 
(5)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool discharges, uncontaminated cooling water, unpolluted industrial process waters, airconditioning condensate, unless specifically authorized by the city in writing. 
(6)  Domestic wastes from septic tanks, portable toilets, or other similar facilities, unless approved by the control authority in writing. Such discharges shall only be made at a site approved by the control authority. 
(7)  Mineral oil in excess of 50 mg/L or animal/vegetable fats, wax, grease, or oils in excess of 100 mg/L, whether emulsified or not; or substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures lower than or equal to 150 degrees Fahrenheit (150° F). 
(8)  All trucked or hauled pollutants are prohibited except at discharge points designated by the city. 
(9)  Inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) in such concentrations as to pass through or cause interference with the operations of the WWF. 
(10)  Waste or wastewater having a pH lower than 5.5 exhibiting any corrosive property which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, processes, equipment, or personnel of the WWF. 
(11)  Waste or wastewater having a pH higher than 9.5 which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, processes, equipment or personnel of the WWF. 
(12)  BOD, COD, or chlorine in such concentration and/or flow as to constitute a significant load on or shock to the ECRWWTF or cause interference. 
(13)  Volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting slugs as defined herein. 
(14)  Liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (150° F) or that causes influent temperature to the ECRWWTF to exceed 104 Fahrenheit (104° F), except where higher temperatures are required by law. 
(15)  Solid or viscous substances in such quantities or of such size as to be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or other interference with the proper operation of any connected system, such as but not limited to: pordinances greater than one-half-inch in any dimension, grease, uncomminuted food wastes, animal entrails or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains or hops, waste paper, wood plastics, rubber stoppers, tar asphalt residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, gasoline, naphtha, and similar substances either whole or ground. 
(16)  Excessive discoloration which can not be removed by the treatment process, such as but not limited to dye, printing wastes, and vegetable tanning solutions which imparts color to the ECRWWTF effluent thereby violating the NPDES permit held by the city on behalf of ECRWWTFB. The discoloration (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the ECRWWTF effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent from the seasonally established norm for aquatic life. 
(17)  Medical wastes, except as authorized by the city in a permit. 
(18)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the WWF. 
(19)  Any sludges, screenings, or other residuals from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(20)  Toxic gases, vapors, or fumes in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 4, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-313. - Compliance with national and local standards. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any pollutant into the WWF except when the such discharge is in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the act, and any other more stringent state and local standards. Wastes containing concentrations in excess of the national categorical pretreatment standards are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 4, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-314. - Local pretreatment standards. 
    Any wastes containing concentrations in excess of the following local pretreatment standards are prohibited: 
Parameter Maximum Allowable Concentration During a 24-Hour Period (mg/L) Aluminum 16.00 Ammonia 50.00 Antimony 0.20 Arsenic 0.45 Barium 3.00 Beryllium 8.80 Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD 5 ) 400.00 Bismuth 0.05 Cadmium 0.32 Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand (CBOD)s 400.00 Chloride 600.00 Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) 800.00 Chromium -Total 30.00 Cobalt 1.00 Copper 11.00 Cyanide 1.80 Cyanide Amendable to Chlorination 0.50 Hydrogen Sulfide 5.00 Iron 10.00 Lead 1.90 Manganese 1.00 Mercury 0.07 Molybdenum 0.80 Nickel 2.99 Oil, and Grease 100.00 Petroleum Hydrocarbons 15.00 pH (Standard Units) 5.5 9.5 Phenol 5.00 Phenolic Compound 0.50 Selenium 1.25 Silver 4.10 Strontium 0.20 Temperature (F) 150.00 Tin 0.60 Total Suspended Solids 400.00 Zinc 2.70  
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the WWF. The control authority may impose mass limitations, instantaneous maximum limitations, maximum monthly average values, or maximum four-day average values, in addition to, or in place of, the limitations listed above. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 4, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-315. - Right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in permits, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the WWF if deemed necessary to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 4, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-316. - Dilution. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations unless expressly authorized by an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the state. The control authority may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 4, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-317. - Septic and industrial waste hauling. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the WWF only at the septic receiving station located at the ECRWWTF. 
(b)  Any industrial or septic waste haulers shall have a discharge permit issued under conditions specified in sections 20-346-20-350 of this article. 
(c)  No hauled load may be discharged without prior written consent from the city. Samples may be collected from each load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The industrial or septic waste hauler may be required to provide waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial and septic waste hauler must provide a waste tracking form for every load. The form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, volume and characteristics of waste. This form shall identify the type of industry known or suspected waste constituents and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 4, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-318. - Control of discharge. 
    If any wastes or wastewaters are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to the WWF which contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 20-312 as prohibited by this article, does not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, and/or which may have a deleterious effect upon the WWF, its processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes or deny or condition the introduction of new sources of wastewater to the WWF; or 
(2)  Require the industrial user to demonstrate that in-plant improvements will modify the discharge to such a degree as to be acceptable; and/or 
(3)  Require pretreatment of the industrial user's discharge to ensure compliance with this article; and/or 
(4)  Require payment of an industrial waste surcharge to cover the added cost of handling and treating excess loads imposed on the WWF by such discharge. These special surcharges shall be approved by the city as stated in the existing schedule of rates and fees of the WWF. Approval of industrial waste surcharges for the recovery of treatment costs does not replace or supersede the requirements for pretreatment facilities, should they be found necessary by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 4, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-319. - Pretreatment facilities. 
    Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State of Florida or the city, whichever is more stringent. Any pretreatment facility shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's sole cost and expense. Detailed plans prepared by a registered engineer in the State of Florida describing such facilities and operating procedures must be approved in writing by the city before such facilities are constructed. The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 5, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-320. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the city may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the WWF and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The city may require any person discharging into the WWF to install and maintain, on their property and at their sole cost and expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved in writing by the city and shall be installed at a location on the premises to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. Users shall provide all reports of interceptor maintenance as required by the city. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances shall be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 5, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-321. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
    At least once every two years, the city shall evaluate whether to require each significant industrial user to adopt an accidental discharge/slug control plan. Alternatively, the city may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of all stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the city of any accidental or slug discharge in accordance with section 20-381 of this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 5, 4-4-01) 
Secs. 20-322-20-345. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE PERMIT 

Sec. 20-346. - Application for discharge permit. 
(a)  It is unlawful to discharge industrial waste without a permit. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and shall subject the permittee to sanctions set out in sections 20-417 and 20-418 of this article. Obtaining a permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. The city may require other users, including liquid waste haulers and nondischarging users to obtain permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(b)  All prospective users must submit to the city the application fee and information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a permit application/wastewater survey at least 180 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin. The city is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update the survey. Information to be provided with the survey may include description of the industrial activity, specifications of the constituents inherent to the processes and wastes, identification of the wastewater characteristics, plumbing diagrams, location of sampling points, number of employees and hours of operation, and any other information deemed necessary by the city to evaluate the permit application. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the user and shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(c)  Within 90 days of receipt of a complete permit application, the city will determine whether or not to issue a permit. The city may deny any application for a permit. 
(d)  All users which discharge industrial waste into the WWF prior to the effective date of this article are granted temporary authority to continue to discharge in compliance with the existing codes, regulations, and policies of the city. Those users who wishes to continue such discharges, shall apply for a permit within 90 days after the effective date of this article. The user shall not cause or allow discharges to the WWF to continue after 180 days of the effective date of this article, except in accordance with a permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-347. - Application signatories and certification. 
    All permit applications and user reporting must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
    All categorical industrial users must comply with the signatory requirements of Rule 62-625.600(11) F.A.C. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-348. - Permit issuance process. 
(a)  Permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations. The cost of said permit shall be incurred by the user in accordance with the fee schedule as set forth in section 20-418 of this article. 
(b)  Permit duration shall not exceed five years from the date of issuance and upon expiration of same, a renewal permit may be issued which shall be effective for an additional five years provided that the conditions of the existing permit have not changed and the appropriate renewal fees have been paid. The permit shall be displayed by the user in a location at the permitted facility, so as to be seen and read by the general public. 
(c)  Permits shall contain at a minimum, the following conditions: 
(1)  A statement that indicates permit duration; 
(2)  A statement of non-transferability; 
(3)  Pretreatment standards and effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable standards in federal, state, and local law; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements; 
(5)  Statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(d)  Permits may contain the following additional conditions: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for management of the wastewater to be discharged to the WWF; 
(2)  Limits on the instantaneous, daily, monthly average and/or four day maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate and time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection facilities, and flow metering and sampling equipment; 
(5)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the WWF; 
(6)  Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges; 
(7)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the WWF; 
(8)  A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the permit; 
(9)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article, and federal and state laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-349. - Compliance schedules. 
    If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user shall submit to the city for approval and incorporation in the permit the shortest schedule by which the user is to provide additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standards. The compliance schedule shall meet the requirements set out in section 20-381 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-350. - Permit transfer. 
    Permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A permit may not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner or new user unless the permittee gives at least 90 days advance written notice to the city and the city approves the permit transfer. The notice to the city shall include a written certification by the new owner and/or user that: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or user has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
    Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the permit voidable on the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-351. - Permit appeal. 
(a)  The city shall provide public notice of the issuance of a permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the city code enforcement department to reconsider the terms of a permit within 15 days of its issuance. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(b)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge provisions objected to, the reasons for the objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the permit. 
(c)  The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(d)  If the code enforcement department fails to act within 15 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a permit, not to issue a permit, or not to modify a permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-352. - Permit modification. 
    Permits may be modified by the city for good cause including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the WWF that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the WWF, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violations of any terms or conditions of the permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13 and Rule 62-625.700, F.A.C.; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the permit; 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator; or 
(10)  Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and regulations. 
    User requests for permit modifications shall be made in writing and include facts or reasons which support the request. When modifying a permit, the city shall allow a reasonable time frame for the user to comply with the new or changed conditions if the user cannot meet them at the time of the modification and if permitted by law. If the new or changed conditions are the result of new or changed pretreatment regulations, those regulations will stipulate the compliance period. The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification does not stay any permit condition. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-353. - Permit revocation. 
    Permits may be revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge. 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed condition pursuant to section 20-385 of this article. 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the permit application. 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports. 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment. 
(6)  Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records. 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations. 
(8)  Failure to pay penalties. 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges. 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules. 
(11)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility. 
(12)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the permit or this article. 
(13)  Indication that the discharge presents a threat to the environment or threatens to interfere with the operation of the WWF. 
    Permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership (except as addressed herein). All permits are void upon the issuance of a new permit. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-354. - Appeal of permit revocation. 
(a)  Authorization to discharge industrial waste into the WWF shall continue in effect unless or until rescinded by the city in writing. In the event that the city revokes the authorization of any user to discharge wastes into the WWF, notification of such revocation shall be delivered to the user by certified mail or by hand delivery. 
(b)  Any system user whose authorization to discharge has been revoked may appeal the decision of the city. The appeal shall be sent in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city code enforcement department within 15 days of receipt of the city's notification to cease discharge. 
(c)  The code enforcement department may affirm, reverse, or modify the order of the city and shall issue its decision in writing. The city's order to cease discharge of wastes into the WWF shall not become effective until the period for appeal has expired, or in the event that an appeal has been filed, until the code enforcement department has rendered a decision, unless the city has made a finding that continued discharge by the user into the WWF constitutes a clear and present danger to the operations of the WWF or to the health of the public, or to the environment. Any such finding shall be included in the city's notification to cease discharge, and in such event, the revocation of authorization to discharge wastes shall become effective immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-355. - Permit renewal. 
    All permittees must apply for a permit renewal a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. The reapplication for a permit shall consist of a written request for reissuance of the permit. The request shall state if all terms and conditions of the existing permit and article are complied with and must be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-356. - Special agreements. 
    The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the WWF. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-357. - Regulation of discharge from other jurisdictions. 
    In the event another jurisdiction or municipality contributes all or a portion of its wastewater to the WWF, the city shall require the jurisdiction or municipality to enter into an multi-jurisdictional agreement with the city or the control authority. Prior to entering into a multi-jurisdictional agreement, the city may request the contributing jurisdiction provide the following information: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of the wastewater(s) at the point where it enters the WWF from the contributing jurisdiction. 
(2)  An inventory of all industrial users within the contributing jurisdiction. 
(3)  Such information as may be required by the city. 
A multi-jurisdictional agreement as required above, shall contain the following conditions: 
1.  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to adopt an ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 20-312 for those users that discharge in the WWF. The requirement shall specify that the ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to this article. 
2.  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to submit a revised industrial user inventory on at least an annual basis. 
3.  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to: 
a.  Conduct pretreatment implementation activities including industrial user permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement; or 
b.  Authorize the control authority to take or conduct the activities on its behalf. 
4.  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to provide the control authority with access to all information that the contributing jurisdiction user or municipal user obtains as part of its pretreatment activities associated with the WWF. 
5.  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing jurisdiction wastewater at the point where it discharges to the WWF. 
6.  Requirements for monitoring the discharge. 
7.  A provision ensuring the control authority access to the facilities of WWF users located within the contributing jurisdiction's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the control authority. 
8.  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the multi-jurisdictional agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 4-4-01) 
Secs. 20-358-20-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 20-381. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
    Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under Rule 62-625.410(2)(d), F.A.C., whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the WWF shall submit to the city a report which contains the information listed numerically below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the city a report which contains the information listed numerically below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the WWF from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the WWF from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in Rule 62-625.410(6), F.A.C. 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 20-390 of this article. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 20-391 of this article. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 20-382 of this article. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 20-382 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-382. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
    The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by sections 20-349 and 20-381 of this article: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the city no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-383. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of the new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the WWF, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing the information described in section 20-381 of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in rule 62-625.410(4), F.A.C., this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 20-347 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-384. - Periodic compliance reports 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the city but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 20-347 of this article. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city, using the procedures prescribed in section 20-391 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-385. - Reports of changed conditions. 
    Each user must notify the city of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. 
(1)  The city may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a permit application under section 20-346 of this article. 
(2)  The city may issue a permit under section 20-346 of this article or modify an existing permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 25 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-386. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the city, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the city, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the WWF, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-387. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
    All users not required to obtain a permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the city may require. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-388. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
    If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-389. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the city, the EPA Regional Waste Management Ordinance Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the WWF of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the WWF, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph needs be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 20-385 of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 20-381, 20-383 and 20-384 of this article. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (a) above during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the city, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Ordinance Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-390. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 62-625.600(1)(e), F.A.C., unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard; or the sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question is not given for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-391. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in paragraph (b) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-392. - Timing. 
    Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-393. - Records. 
    Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements in this ordinance is required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results, and shall make records available for inspection or photocopying by the city or state or federal officials. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analysis; the analytical techniques or methods used and the results of said analyses. The three year period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user, the city or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 7, 4-4-01) 
Secs. 20-394-20-415. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 20-416. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
    Authorized representatives of the city, the DEP, and the EPA bearing proper credentials shall be permitted to enter upon any property without prior notification for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing review and/or photocopying of records, or investigation as may be necessary in the enforcement of this article. Entry shall be made during daylight or operating hours unless abnormal or emergency circumstances require otherwise. 
    The city may seek issuance of a search warrant(s) from any court of competent jurisdiction for the following reasons: 
(1)  Refusal of access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof. 
(2)  If the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there maybe a violation of this article. 
(3)  If there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city. 
(4)  To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 9, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-417. - Enforcement actions. 
    The following escalating enforcement strategy shall be used by the city when industrial users are out of compliance with this article. The various types of enforcement actions, including the industrial discharger enforcement procedure (IDEP), shall be used as determined by the city depending on the circumstances of the violation. 
(1)  Immediate threat to public health. The city may require the immediate halt of a discharge if it is deemed as an immediate threat to public health or the WWF. 
(2)  Self-monitoring. The industrial user will review its self-monitoring data to determine whether a violation of this article and/or of its permit limitations has occurred. If a violation has occurred, the industrial user must provide to the city: 
a.  24-hour notification that a violation has occurred. 
b.  Magnitude and nature of the violation. 
c.  Details regarding analytical quality assurance. 
Failure to comply with the 24-hour notification requirement will result in administrative fines of $100.00 per occurrence. 
(3)  Resampling. Upon the determination that a violation has occurred, the industrial user must resample the final discharge for the violated parameter. The resampling data must be submitted to the city within 30 days of violation discovery. Failure to resample and report within 30 days is a violation of this article and Rule 62-625.600(6)(b), F.A.C. If the IU fails to resample and submit the report within 30 days, the city will issue a notice of violation (NOV). Failure to comply with the NOV will result in a single administrative fine of $150.00 per violation. Continued failure to comply within 60 days from original violation thereafter will result in a monthly fine of $500.00 or one-half of the previous month's bill, whichever is greater. 
(4)  WWF monitoring. The city will conduct periodic, independent compliance monitoring of industrial users as appropriate. If the violation is not significant, as defined in this article, the city will issue a NOV and a 45-day compliance schedule including the requirement to resample in order to determine whether a violation is significant. The results of the resampling must be submitted to the city within 30 days of receipt of the compliance schedule. Failure to comply will result in a single fine of $500.00 per violation. Continued failure to comply 60 days after issuance of the NOV will result in a monthly fine of $1,000.00 or the previous month's bill, whichever is greater. 
(5)  Significant noncompliance. The city will review sampling data obtained to determine whether significant noncompliance as defined in this article has occurred; in which case a single fine of $500.00 or one-half the previous month's bill, whichever is greater, will be assessed per violation. 
(6)  Formal notice. If significant noncompliance is determined to have occurred, the city will issue a notice of significant violation (NOSV), requiring the industrial user to submit within 15 days of the receipt of the notice, a 90-day compliance schedule to determine the need to install or construct pretreatment facilities. Failure to respond within 15 days will result in a single fine of $500.00 per violation. Upon receipt of the draft compliance schedule, the city will issue the compliance schedule as a condition of continued operation. A demonstration of compliance (DOC) will be included as the final item in the compliance schedule. If at any time during the 90-day schedule, the industrial user determines that pretreatment facilities are required, the industrial user will inform the city of such and submit a draft construction schedule. 
(7)  DOC. Upon completion of the 90-day compliance schedule, the city will review the DOC data to determine whether compliance has been achieved. Failure to demonstrate compliance during the 90-day schedule will result in the city issuing another NOSV requiring the industrial user to submit within 15 days of receipt of the NOSV a draft compliance schedule for the construction of new pretreatment facilities or the improvement, modification or expansion of existing facilities. Failure to respond within 15 days will result in a single fine of $500.00 per violation. Continued failure to comply within 60 days of the NOSV thereafter will result in a monthly fine of $1,000.00 or previous month's bill, whichever is greater. Upon receipt of the draft compliance schedule, the city will issue the compliance schedule as a condition of continued operation. Approval of the facility design engineer by the city is required prior to design of the pretreatment facility. A DOC will be included as the final item in the compliance schedule. Upon completion of the construction compliance schedule, the city will review the DOC data to determine whether compliance has been achieved. 
(8)  Final schedule of compliance. If the construction of pretreatment facilities does not achieve compliance, the city will assess a fine of $2,000.00 or twice the previous month's bill, whichever is greater, and will issue a notice of monthly fine (NMF). Fines of the same amount will continue to be assessed on a monthly basis until compliance is achieved or service is terminated. The NMF will require that the industrial user submit a draft final compliance schedule within 15 days or receipt of the NMF. Upon receipt of the draft compliance schedule, the city will issue the final schedule of compliance as a condition of continued operation. A DOC period will be included as the final item in the compliance schedule. Upon completion of the compliance schedule, the city will review the DOC data to determine whether compliance has been achieved. 
(9)  Show cause hearing. If the final compliance schedule does not achieve compliance, the city will issue a notice to show cause (NSC) why the discharge permit should not be revoked and service terminated, in accordance with law. The NSC will be served on the user specifying the time and place of the hearing, the proposed facts of the action, the reasons for such actions and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing on the user or posted at the location where the alleged violation is occurring or has occurred. Whether or not the user appears as notified, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing. The city will hold the show cause hearing to determine whether the permit should be revoked and sewer services terminated. 
a.  If the industrial user shows cause for its failure to comply, service shall not be terminated nor the permit revoked. The monthly fine will increase to an amount up to $1,000.00 per day and a new final compliance schedule will be issued. 
b.  If the industrial user fails to show cause why its permit should not be revoked and service terminated, the industrial user's permit shall be revoked and its sewer service will be terminated by the city. 
(10)  Violations not addressed. Penalties for violations of this article and/or the user's permit not addressed in this section will be assessed at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 10, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-418. - Permit fees and penalties. 
(a)  Permit application and renewal fee: 
Non-Categorical industry permit $200.00 per year Categorical industry permit $400.00 per year Analytical fees On a permit by 
permit basis  
(b)  Other fees and penalties are listed under section 20-417, enforcement actions. 
(c)  If the city implements a surcharge program, industrial waste surcharge rates shall be as listed below: 
BOD = $0.40/lb ( X ) 
TSS = $0.40/lb ( Y ) 
Oil & grease = $7.30/lb ( Z ) 
Monthly surcharges shall be calculated as follows: 
IWS = 8.34 (V) ($ X (BOD-400) = $ Y (TSS-400) + $ Z (OG-100) 
IWS = Monthly industrial surcharge rate. 
V = Volume of industrial flow in million gallons per month based on metered water. 
BOD = Biochemical oxygen demand in mg/L. 
TSS = Total suspended solids in mg/L. 
OG = Oil and grease in mg/L. 
X = Capital and operating costs per pound of BOD greater than 400 mg/L. 
Y = Capital and operating costs per pound of TSS greater than 400 mg/L. 
Z = Capital and operating costs per pound of oil and grease greater than 100 mg/L. 
(d)  Any person who violates a provision of this article shall be prosecuted in the name of the State of Florida in a court having jurisdiction of misdemeanors by the prosecuting attorney thereof, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for each offense or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or by both such, fine and imprisonment. If a violation continues, each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any record or other document submitted under this article of industrial user permits shall be subject to fines of up to $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 11, 4-4-01) 
Secs. 20-419-440. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - REMEDIES AND DEFENSES 

Sec. 20-441. - Civil and criminal remedies; generally. 
    In addition to the administrative fines provided in sections 20-417 and 20-418, the city is hereby authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding, including suit for injunctive relief and civil penalties up to $1,000.00 per day per violation, in order to prevent or abate violations of this article. The city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 12, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-442. - Injunctive relief. 
    When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may petition the circuit court for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 12, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-443. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this ordinance, a permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than the maximum fine allowed under state law per violation, per day, or imprisonment, or both. 
(b)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the WWF which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least the maximum fine allowable under state law, or be subject to imprisonment, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(c)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum fine allowable under state law per violation, per day, or imprisonment or both. 
(d)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum fine allowable under state law per violation, per day, or imprisonment, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 12, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-444. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city may take other action against any user when the when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 12, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-445. - Accidental discharge of substances. 
    A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions or the specific prohibitions in section 20-312 if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the ECRWWTFB was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 13, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 200-446. - Upset. 
    If there occurs an unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user, and the industrial user wishes to establish an affirmative defense of an upset, the user must demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause of the upset; and 
(2)  The industrial user's facility was, at the time of the upset, being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The industrial user properly notified the city of the upset in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 20-448. 
In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset has the burden of proof. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 13, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-447. - Bypass. 
(a)  An industrial user may allow bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. 
(b)  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit a notice to the city at least ten days before the date of the bypass. 
(c)  Bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards is prohibited, and the city shall take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or sever property damage. 
(2)  There were no technically feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance. 
(3)  The industrial user properly notifies the city of the bypass in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 20-448. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 13, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-448. - Notification of accidental discharge, upset or bypass. 
(a)  Immediate notification via telephone : in the event of an accidental discharge, slug load, upset or bypass, (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 20-312 of this article) the user shall take the necessary measures to stop, limit, or control the discharge. The discharger shall immediately notify the city within 24 hours about the incident by telephone. In the event the city is not available, the discharger shall notify the control authority by telephone. The notification shall include: 
(1)  Address of the discharge; 
(2)  Type of discharge; 
(3)  Concentration of pollutants in the discharge; 
(4)  Volume of discharge; and 
(5)  Corrective measures taken. 
(b)  Written notification : within five days of the accidental discharge, upset or bypass, the discharger shall submit a written report to the city. The report shall include, but not be limited to, type of discharge, concentrations, volume, cause of the event, duration of the event, corrective measures taken and measures to be employed to prevent future incidents. In the event further information is requested, the discharger shall provide the information within 48 hours of the request. If the event occurs during a holiday period or weekend, the written notification shall be the first working day following the holiday period or weekend. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the WWF, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(c)  Notice to employees : A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge, upset or bypass. Employers shall insure that all employees who could cause or suffer such an accidental discharges, upset or bypasses to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedures. Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges, upset or bypasses shall be deemed a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 13, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-449. - Confidentiality. 
    Information and data concerning individual industrial users obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs, and inspections shall be available to the public to the extent permitted by Florida law, upon written request without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that such release would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 14, 4-4-01) 
Sec. 20-450. - Public notice. 
    The city shall publish annually in the largest daily newspaper published within the service area, a list of industrial users, which during the previous 12 months were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 15, 4-4-01) 
Secs. 20-451-20-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY 

Sec. 20-461. - Authority. 
    The city is authorized by the Florida Constitution and the provisions of applicable Florida laws to create a stormwater management utility, and to construct, reconstruct, improve, and extend stormwater utility systems and to issue revenue bonds and other debts if needed to finance in whole or in part the cost of such utility and to establish just and equitable rates, fees, and charges for the services and facilities provided by the utility. 
(Ord. No. 2942, § 1, 6-18-03) 
Sec. 20-462. - Findings and determinations. 
    It is hereby found, determined, and declared as follows: 
(a)  Those elements of the stormwater management system which provide for the collection of and disposal of stormwater and regulation of groundwater are of benefit and provide services to all property within the incorporated city limits, including property not presently developed property. 
(b)  The costs of operating and maintaining the stormwater management system and financing necessary repairs, replacement, improvements, and extension thereof should, to the extent practicable, should be funded through user fees allocated in relationship to the benefits enjoyed and services received therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2942, § 2, 6-18-03) 
Sec. 20-463. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply: words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural, the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's dictionary. 
    Bonds means revenue bonds, notes, loans or any other debt obligations issued or incurred to finance the costs of construction. 
    Costs of construction means costs reasonably incurred in connection with providing capital improvements to the system or any portion thereof, including but not limited to the costs of: 
(1)  Acquisition of all property, real or personal, and all interests in connection therewith including all rights-of-way and easements therefore; 
(2)  Physical construction, installation and testing, including the costs of labor, services, materials, supplies and utility services used in connection therewith; 
(3)  Architectural, engineering, legal and other professional services; 
(4)  Insurance premiums taken out and maintained during construction, to the extent not paid for by a contractor for construction and installation; 
(5)  Any taxes or other charges which become due during construction; 
(6)  Expenses incurred by the city or on its behalf with its approval in seeking to enforce any remedy against any contractor or subcontractor in respect of any default under a contract relating to construction; 
(7)  Principal of and interest of any bonds; and 
(8)  Miscellaneous expenses incidental thereto, including, but not limited to, costs of issuance of any bonds. 
    Debt service means, with respect to any particular fiscal year and any particular series of bonds, an amount equal to the sum of: 
(1)  All interest payable on such bonds during such fiscal year; plus 
(2)  Any principal installments of such bonds during such fiscal year. 
    Developed property means real property which has been altered from "natural" state by the addition of any improvements such as a building, structure, or impervious surface. At a minimum, real property shall be considered altered from "natural" state pursuant to this article: 
(1)  Upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued; or 
(2)  If construction is at least 50 percent complete and construction is halted for a period of three months. 
    Director means the city manager or his designee. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit or apartment providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Equivalent residential unit or ERU means the average impervious area of residential developed property per dwelling unit located within the city and as established by council resolution as provided herein. 
    Extension costs means costs of extensions and additions to the utility and any related costs thereto, including the costs of construction reflecting the impact of new use of the stormwater management system from the conversion of vacant property to developed property. 
    Extension charge means a charge to an owner of vacant property that has requested a building permit from the city or to an owner of vacant property that has converted to developed property to recover extension costs related to such property. 
    Fiscal year means a 12-month period commencing on the first day of October of any year. 
    Impervious area means roofed and paved areas, including, but not limited to, areas covered by roofs, roof extensions, permitted awnings, patios, porches, driveway, sidewalks, parking areas and athletic courts. 
    Nonresidential developed property means developed property that is not primarily used for residential purposes that is classified by the property appraiser as land use types 10 through 99 using the Florida Department of Revenue Land Use Codes, as amended or supplemented. 
    Operating budget means the annual utility budget adopted by the city for the succeeding fiscal year. 
    Operations and maintenance means the current expenses, paid or accrued, of operation, maintenance, repair, renewal and replacement of the system and includes, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, insurance premiums, administrative expenses, labor, executive compensation, consultant expenses, legal expenses, auditing expenses, shared city services expenses, costs of construction, the costs of materials and supplies used for current operations, transfers to other funds, and charges for the accumulation of appropriate reserves. 
    Property appraiser means the office of the county property appraiser. 
    Residential developed property means developed property that is primarily used for residential purposes and is classified by the property appraiser as land use types 00 through 09 using the Florida Department of Revenue Land Use Codes, as amended or supplemented. 
    Revenues mean all rates, fees, assessments, rentals or other charges or other income received by the utility, in connection with the management and operating of the system, including amounts received from the investment or deposit of moneys in any fund or account and any amounts contributed by the city, all as calculated in accordance with sound accounting practice. 
    Stormwater management system or system means the existing stormwater management system of the city and all improvements thereto which by this article are constituted as the property and responsibility of the utility, to be operated as an enterprise fund to, among other things, conserve water, control discharges necessitated by rainfall events, incorporate methods to collect, convey, store, absorb, inhibit, treat, use or reuse water to prevent or reduce flooding, over-drainage, environmental degradation and water pollution or otherwise affect the quality and quantity of discharge from such system. 
    Stormwater management utility or utility means the enterprise fund utility created by this article to operate, maintain and improve the system pursuant to section 20-464 of this article. 
    Undisturbed parcel means a parcel which has not been altered from its natural state by dredging, filling, removal of trees and vegetation or other activities which have disturbed or altered the topography or soils on the property. 
    Vacant property means an undisturbed property or real property that is not developed property. 
(Ord. No. 2942, § 3, 6-18-03) 
Sec. 20-464. - Establishment of stormwater management utility. 
(a)  The stormwater management utility is hereby established by the city council to implement the purposes set forth in this article and to provide for the general health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents. The utility shall be operated as an enterprise fund of the city. As of the effective date of the ordinance, the stormwater management system shall be transferred to the utility and shall constitute the property and responsibility of the utility. 
(b)  The director shall be the city manager or his designee of the utility. 
(Ord. No. 2942, § 4, 6-18-03) 
Sec. 20-465. - Operating budget. 
    The city shall adopt an annual operating budget for the utility in conjunction with the city's general fund budget. 
(Ord. No. 2942, § 5, 6-18-03) 
Sec. 20-466. - Required levels of revenues. 
    The city council shall require that adequate revenues are generated to provide for a balanced operating budget. 
(Ord. No. 2942, § 6, 6-18-03) 
Sec. 20-467. - Imposition of utility fees and rate schedule. 
    The city council hereby authorizes the imposition of user charges and extension charges on all property owners within the city in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(a)  Property classification. For purposes of determining the amount and applicability of user charges and extension charges, all property within the city shall be classified into one of the following classes: 
(1)  Residential developed property; 
(2)  Nonresidential developed property; or 
(3)  Vacant property. 
(b)  Computation of user charge for residential developed property. The user charge for residential developed property shall be the ERU rate multiplied by the number of individual dwelling units existing on the property. 
(c)  Computation of user charge for nonresidential developed property. The user charge for nonresidential developed property shall be the ERU rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of a nonresidential developed property by one ERU. The minimum utility fee for any nonresidential developed property shall be equal to one times the ERU rate. 
(d)  Computation of user charge for vacant property. Vacant property shall be charged an extension charge upon the earlier of submittal of a request for a building permit to the city or conversion of the vacant property to developed property. Vacant property shall begin to accrue user charges at such time as the vacant property converts to developed property. 
(Ord. No. 2942, § 7, 6-18-03) 
Sec. 20-468. - Billing and payment penalties. 
    The user charge is to be paid by the owner, tenant, or occupant of each property within the city subject to the fee. All properties, except vacant parcels, shall be rendered invoices for utility service on a monthly basis by the city utility department. The invoices shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner and subject to the same discontinuance of service by the city utility as set forth under the terms and conditions of section 20-78 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Riviera Beach. A failure to pay stormwater management utility invoices shall be grounds for discontinuance of water or wastewater service by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2942, § 8, 6-18-03) 
Sec. 20-469. - Adjustment of fees. 
(a)  Request for adjustment of the user charge shall be submitted to the director, who is hereby given the authority to develop and administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of charges as established herein. All requests shall be judged on the basis of the amount of impervious area on the property. The following procedures shall apply to all adjustment requests of the user charge: 
(1)  Any person or entity that believes the user charge to be incorrect may, subject to the limitations set forth in this article, submit an adjustment request to the director. 
(2)  Adjustment requests shall be in writing and set forth, in detail, the grounds upon which relief is sought. 
(3)  Adjustment requests may only be made during the first calendar year that the user charge is imposed or within twelve calendar months of a change in the amount of impervious area on a developed property. Such adjustment requests will be reviewed by the director within a two month period from the date of filing of the adjustment request. Adjustments resulting from such request shall be retroactive to the beginning of billings, but retroactive adjustment shall not exceed one year. 
(4)  The person or entity requesting the adjustment may be required, at his/her own cost, to provide supplemental information to the director including, but not limited to, survey data approved by either a registered professional land surveyor (R.P.L.S.) and engineering reports approved by a professional engineer (P.E.). Failure to provide such information may result in the denial of the adjustment request. 
(5)  Adjustments to the user charge will be made upon the granting of the adjustment request, in writing, by the director. Denials of adjustment requests shall be made, in writing, by the director. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the written denial of the adjustment request, the person or entity who requested the adjustment may, within 30 days of receipt of such denial, appeal to the city council for review of the denial. 
(1)  The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within 90 days of receipt of said appeal. 
(2)  In reviewing appeals, the city council shall apply the standards and review criteria contained in section 20-469(a). 
(Ord. No. 2942, § 9, 6-18-03) 
Sec. 20-470. - Capital contributions. 
(a)  Where the city has constructed or plans to construct stormwater facilities which are proposed to be used for a developed property in lieu of a facility usually required to be constructed by the developed property owner, the city may accept a capital contribution from the developer and waive certain construction requirements. 
(b)  Procedures and standards developed by the city shall define appropriate means by which to determine a developed property's pro rata share of required capital contributions. Each situation will be analyzed by the city as follows, and a specific written decision will be developed. A developed property's capital contribution (quantity and quality) is assessed based on its share of the capital needs of the facilities required to serve the development in question. Each application shall be evaluated against the city's stormwater system master plan and against the cumulative stormwater impacts from the developed property. In the case that an owner of vacant property is required by the city as part of the city's land use development requirements to construct oversized stormwater management facilities in excess of the property's stormwater requirements, the city may enter into a refunding agreement with the property owner to refund a pro rata share of the cost of the oversized facilities to be charged by the city to other vacant property owners utilizing those oversized facilities within a period of time not exceeding seven years from the date of the refunding agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2942, § 10, 6-18-03) 
Sec. 20-471. - Program responsibility. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to designate the appropriate department of the city to administer the stormwater management utility. 
(Ord. No. 2942, § 11, 6-18-03) 
Sec. 20-472. - Stormwater management utility fund. 
    There shall be established a stormwater management utility fund for the deposit of all fees and charges collected by the utility, and such other funds as may be required by bond financing. 
(Ord. No. 2942, § 12, 6-18-03) 
Chapter 21 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Drinking alcoholic beverages on public conveyances prohibited, § 3-10; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; noise regulations, § 11-141 et seq.; operating noise levels for motor vehicles, § 11-172; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 19. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Call box stand means a place alongside a street or elsewhere where the police department with the concurrence of the building inspector has authorized a holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity to install a telephone or call box for the taking of calls and the dispatching of taxicabs, jitneys and other automobiles for hire. 
    Certificate means a certificate of public convenience issued by the city clerk authorizing the holder thereof to engage in the business of operating taxicabs, jitneys and other automobiles for hire. 
    Certificate, intercity jitney, means a certificate of convenience, issued by the city clerk authorizing the holder to engage in the business of operating intercity jitneys. 
    Jitney means any automobile engaged in the transportation of passengers for a consideration which does not operate at regular intervals over a designated route and for which fixed rates or fares are charged and which after taking one or more passengers into the vehicle for transportation may thereafter take into the vehicle other passengers before the original passenger has been carried to his destination. 
    Intercity jitney means a jitney operating from a city or town whose boundary adjoins this city, bringing passengers into this city from a point outside its boundaries or transporting passengers from within this city to a destination outside its boundaries, but transporting no passengers from points within this city to destinations within the city. 
    Manifest means a daily record prepared by taxicab drivers and intercity jitney drivers of all trips made by such drivers, showing the time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and the amount of fare of each trip. 
    Open stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the city which has been designated by the police department as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs or jitneys. 
    Rate card means a card to be displayed in each taxicab, jitney or other automobile for hire which shall contain the rates or fares then in force. 
    Taxicab means any automobile engaged in the transportation of persons, the distance or route of which is under the direction of the passenger and which does not operate regularly or at stated intervals over a designated route and which is fitted with a meter or device by which the charge for hire is mechanically calculated by measuring and recording the distance traveled, the waiting time or both. 
    Taximeter means a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time, upon which the fare is based. 
    Waiting time means the time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a passenger to the time of discharge, but does not include any time that the taxicab is not in motion if due to any cause other than the request, act or fault of a passenger. 
(Code 1957, § 21-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-2. - Violations. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this chapter other than sections 21-127 or 21-128 shall in the discretion of the city council constitute grounds for revocation and cancellation of the holder's certificate. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person either by himself or agent to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 21-43(b), (c)) 
Cross reference- Revocation of certificate for violation of sections 21-127 or 21-128, § 21-129. 
Secs. 21-3-21-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 21-21-21-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATES AND OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 10. 

Sec. 21-41. - Certificate of public convenience and necessity and permits prerequisite to operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating taxicabs, jitneys or other automobiles for hire on the streets of the city or from any stand or place of business within the city without having first obtained from the city clerk a certificate of public convenience and permits as provided for in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 21-2) 
Sec. 21-42. - Certificate application required; contents. 
    Applications for certificates shall be filed with the city clerk upon forms provided by the city clerk. Such applications shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, and if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its officers. 
(2)  The street address of the applicant's proposed place of business and of the terminals or stands where his vehicles are to be located. 
(3)  The number of taxicabs, jitneys or other automobiles for hire to be operated under such certificate. 
(4)  A brief and correct description of each vehicle which the applicant proposes to operate which shall include year, make and model. 
(5)  An agreement on the part of the applicant, as follows: 
a.  To comply with and abide by this Code and all other ordinances of the city applicable to the operation of motor vehicles for hire, whether such ordinances may have theretofore been enacted or may thereafter be enacted. 
b.  That if such certificate is granted, the applicant will operate his business with the number of vehicles provided for in his certificate. 
c.  That the applicant will keep his place of business open and will operate a sufficient number of vehicles to meet the convenience and necessity of the public (not to exceed, however, the number stated in the applicant's certificate, if granted) throughout the license period during which such certificate may be in force and effect. 
d.  To supply such further information to the proper city officials as may be required. 
(Code 1957, § 21-3) 
Sec. 21-43. - Intercity jitney certificate application required; contents. 
    Applications for intercity jitney certificates shall be filed with the city clerk upon forms provided by the clerk. Such applications shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant, and if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its officers. 
(2)  The address of the applicant's place of business. 
(3)  The number of jitneys to be operated under such certificate. 
(4)  A brief and correct description of each vehicle which the applicant proposes to operate which shall include year, make and model. 
(5)  A certified copy of the current certificate of convenience issued to the applicant by a municipality having a boundary adjoining a boundary of this city under a city ordinance imposing conditions on the operation of jitneys substantially identical to those imposed by this chapter. 
(6)  If required by the city clerk, a certified copy of the city ordinance of the city in which the applicant's place of business is located under which the applicant's certificate of convenience was issued. 
(Code 1957, § 21-3.1) 
Sec. 21-44. - Fee for certificates. 
    Each application for a certificate, including applications for intercity jitney certificates, shall be accompanied by a fee of $12.50 for each car, which fee shall be placed in the general fund of the city and applied to the administration of the provisions of this chapter. Such fee shall be in addition to the annual occupational license fee prescribed by chapter 10 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 21-4) 
Sec. 21-45. - Contents of certificates. 
    Every certificate issued under the provisions of this division shall contain among other things, the following: 
(1)  The name of the grantee. 
(2)  The street address or location of the terminals or stands at or from which the grantee is permitted to operate. 
(3)  A statement of the number of permits to be issued to such grantee under such certificate, and specifying whether such permits are to be used for taxicabs, jitneys, intercity jitneys or other automobiles for hire. 
(4)  A reservation of the right to revoke such certificate in the event of the violation by the holder or employee of such certificate of the agreement contained in his application or of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Such additional terms, conditions, provisions and limitations as the city council shall deem necessary or proper in the interest of the public or of transportation facilities already existing in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 21-9) 
Sec. 21-46. - Occupational license fee required. 
    No certificate or intercity jitney certificate shall be issued or continued in force unless and until the holder thereof has paid an annual occupational license fee in the amount prescribed in chapter 10 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 21-11) 
Sec. 21-47. - Purchase of occupational licenses. 
    All holders of permits to operate taxicabs, jitneys, intercity jitneys or other automobiles for hire within the city under duly issued certificates shall, notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, purchase or renew their occupational license as prescribed by chapter 10 of this Code on or before October 1 of each year. In the event of the failure, neglect or refusal to purchase or renew such occupational license by October 1, all permits of the offending certificate holder shall lapse and become null and void and be forfeited to the city. 
(Code 1957, § 21-12) 
Sec. 21-48. - Replacement and substitution of vehicles. 
    Holders of certificates, including intercity jitney certificates, may make replacements and substitutions of other vehicles. The number of taxicabs, jitneys or other automobiles for hire operating under such certificate shall not exceed the number of permits issued to such holders for such class of vehicles. Substitute vehicles shall bear a valid tag in accordance with F.S. § 320.08; however, before any substitution is made, the certificate holder shall notify the chief of police or his duly authorized representative of such proposed substitution. No vehicle shall be substituted until the same shall meet all other requirements for other vehicles so licensed. 
(Code 1957, § 21-13) 
Sec. 21-49. - Additional permits-Authorized application. 
    The holders of certificates, including intercity jitney certificates, may apply for additional permits over and above those which may have been theretofore issued by making application in writing, verified by the applicant and setting forth the following matters: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, and if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its officers. 
(2)  The number of additional permits desired by the applicant, specifying whether or not they are sought for taxicabs, jitneys or other automobiles for hire. 
(3)  A brief and correct description of each vehicle which the applicant proposes to operate which shall include year, make and model. 
(4)  A statement that the addition of such proposed taxicabs, jitneys or other automobiles for hire and the additional permits therefor is necessary to the business of the applicant and to the public, in order adequately and properly to serve the public. 
(Code 1957, § 21-15) 
Sec. 21-50. - Same-Fee to accompany application. 
    Each application for an additional permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00, which fee shall be placed in the general fund of the city and applied to the cost of the administration of the provisions of this chapter. Such fee shall be in addition to the annual occupational license fee prescribed by chapter 10 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 21-16) 
Sec. 21-51. - Yearly data to be furnished by holders of certificates. 
    As a prerequisite for the issuance of an occupational license to anyone engaged in the business of operating taxicabs, jitneys, intercity jitneys or other automobiles for hire, the applicant for such license shall present to the city tax collector a brief and correct description, including make, model and year, of the vehicle expected to be operated during the license year for each of the permits authorized by the certificate held by such applicant, and at the same time such applicant shall exhibit to the city tax collector auto registration certificates showing that legal or equitable title to each of such vehicles is vested in the applicant. 
(Code 1957, § 21-20) 
Secs. 21-52-21-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INDEMNITY BOND 

Sec. 21-71. - Required; sum. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause or allow another to drive or operate any taxicab, jitney, intercity jitney or other automobile for hire unless there is in full force and effect at all times while such vehicle is being operated an indemnity bond. Such bond shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be for each vehicle operated under a certificate and permit. Such indemnity bond shall be in the penal sum of $10,000.00 for injury to one person, the penal sum of $20,000.00 for injuries to more than one person which are received in the same accident and in the penal sum of $5,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. Where such vehicles are operated by a corporation, the operator shall furnish an indemnity bond in the penal sum of $20,000.00 for injury to any one person and the penal sum of $40,000.00 for injuries to more than one person received in the same accident, and in the penal sum of $10,000.00 for property damage received in any one accident. Such indemnity bond shall have as surety thereon a surety company authorized to do business in the state and shall be payable to the city and shall inure to the benefit of: 
(1)  Any person who shall receive bodily injuries by reason of the negligence or misconduct of the certificate holder or of the driver of such vehicle while such vehicle is being used under such certificate. 
(2)  The heirs or legal representatives of any person who shall die by reason of the negligence or misconduct of the certificate holder or the driver of such vehicle while such vehicle is being used under such certificate. 
(3)  Any person who shall sustain damages to his property through the negligence or misconduct of the certificate holder or the driver of such vehicle while such vehicle is being used under such certificate. 
(Code 1957, § 21-36(a)) 
Sec. 21-72. - Liability insurance in lieu of bond. 
    Any holder of a certificate may file in lieu of such indemnity bond a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state. Such liability insurance policy shall guarantee payments of the same amounts and to the same persons and under the same conditions as herein recited with respect to an indemnity bond. 
(Code 1957, § 21-36(b)) 
Sec. 21-73. - Deposit of cash or government bonds in lieu of bond or liability insurance. 
    Any holder of a certificate operating more than one but not more than five vehicles, in lieu of the indemnity bond or liability insurance policy, may for each such motor vehicle place and keep on deposit with the director of finance at all times a minimum of $10,000.00 either in cash or United States government bonds. If such holder of a certificate is a corporation, the amount to be deposited with the director of finance in cash or United States government bonds shall be $20,000.00. Such deposit, if and when made, shall constitute blanket security or indemnity for each vehicle for which the deposit shall have been made, and shall be subject to all the uses, terms, conditions and limitations hereinabove recited with respect to indemnity bonds and liability insurance policies. 
(Code 1957, § 21-36(c)) 
Sec. 21-74. - Deposit of cash for operators of more than five vehicles. 
    The holder of any certificate operating more than five vehicles and who shall have deposited $10,000.00 in cash or government bonds as a blanket security or indemnity for five vehicles shall be entitled to include in such blanket security or indemnity all motor vehicles in excess of five by depositing with the director of finance an additional amount of $2,000.00 in cash or government bonds for each such vehicle in excess of five, but the original deposit of $10,000.00 together with all additions made thereto shall constitute blanket security or indemnity for each vehicle occasioning any part of the entire deposit, and shall be subject to all of the uses, terms, conditions and limitations hereinabove recited with respect to indemnity bonds or liability insurance policies. If such holder of a certificate is a corporation and shall have deposited $20,000.00 in cash or government bonds as a blanket security or indemnity for five vehicles, the corporation shall be entitled to include in such blanket security or indemnity all motor vehicles in excess of five by depositing with the director of finance an additional amount of $4,000.00 in cash or government bonds for each such vehicle in excess of five, but the original deposit of $20,000.00, together with all additions made thereto, shall constitute blanket security or indemnity for each vehicle occasioning any part of the entire deposit and shall be subject to all of the uses, terms, conditions and limitations hereinabove recited with respect to indemnity bonds or liability insurance policies. 
(Code 1957, § 21-36(d)) 
Sec. 21-75. - Certificate not valid unless bond, insurance or cash or bond deposit made. 
    No certificate or permit shall be valid unless and until such indemnity bond, liability insurance policy, cash or United States government bonds shall have been filed and approved as provided in this division. No such indemnity bond or insurance policy so accepted shall be cancelled by the company issuing the same except upon 30 days' notice to the city clerk, and upon such notice being given by the company issuing such bond or insurance policy, the certificate or permit of the person giving such bond or insurance policy shall be revoked unless a new bond or insurance policy shall be filed and accepted before the date for the cancellation of such bond or insurance policy. In the event of the revocation of the certificate or permit, as provided in this chapter, such person shall not be permitted or allowed to operate any such vehicle in the city unless and until he shall have obtained a new certificate or permit. 
(Code 1957, § 21-36(e)) 
Secs. 21-76-21-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DRIVERS' LICENSES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 21-91. - State license required. 
    No person shall operate any taxicab, jitney, intercity jitney or other automobile for hire unless and until such person is in possession of a current and valid state chauffeur's license. 
(Code 1957, § 21-40(a)) 
Sec. 21-92. - Qualifications of drivers. 
    Applicants for a city chauffeur's permit shall also: 
(1)  Be 18 years of age or over. 
(2)  Be a person of good moral character. 
(3)  Be physically and mentally fit to drive and operate a taxicab, jitney or other automobile for hire within the city. 
(4)  Not be accident-prone under the point system of the state. 
(5)  Be familiar with the traffic rules, regulations and ordinances of the city, including this chapter. 
(6)  Not have been convicted of any felony within ten years next preceding the date of application, and shall not have been convicted of more than three moving traffic violations under state law or city ordinances within 12 months next preceding the date of application. 
(Code 1957, § 21-40(b)) 
Sec. 21-93. - Issuance of city chauffeur's permit. 
    If and when the applicant for a city chauffeur's permit shall have complied with the foregoing and shall have furnished the chief of police with his fingerprints and a photograph, as prescribed by the chief of police, and shall have paid a fee of $2.00 to be placed in the general fund of the city and applied to the administration of the provisions of this section, for such permit, the chief of police shall issue such applicant a chauffeur's permit, which shall bear the name, address, color, age, signature, photograph and fingerprints of such applicant. The chief of police shall also keep a file which shall contain the photograph and fingerprints, together with other descriptive information, of every person to whom a permit shall be issued. It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully alter, deface, obliterate or destroy any such chauffeur's permit or to cause the same to be altered, defaced, obliterated or destroyed. Chauffeur's permits issued hereunder shall be renewable annually on the anniversary date of the permit. 
(Code 1957, § 21-40(c)) 
Sec. 21-94. - City permit to be displayed. 
    Every driver or operator of any taxicab, jitney, intercity jitney or other automobile for hire within the city shall have his city chauffeur's permit displayed in a conspicuous place in such vehicle so that the same may be easily observed by any person occupying the same. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any such vehicle without having his chauffeur's permit so displayed. 
(Code 1957, § 21-40(d)) 
Sec. 21-95. - Revocation of city chauffeur's permit. 
    The city hereby reserves the right to suspend or revoke any chauffeur's permit issued by the chief of police if, upon investigation, the city council shall find that the holder of such permit has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or has been convicted of a felony, in which case the revocation shall be mandatory, or has been convicted of driving any motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotics, or if such person is suffering from a communicable disease or defect or impairment of vision or hearing or other physical impairment or if such person is not a person of good moral character and fitness. Such permit may be revoked or suspended by the city council. Before any such permit shall be revoked or suspended by the city council, notice of intention thereof shall be served upon such person, either by United States mail or personal service, and such person shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The revocation or suspension of any such permit by a court shall be made only in cases in which a person whose permit is to be suspended or revoked shall be before the court and shall have had an opportunity to be heard, unless such person fails to appear after notice to show cause has been sent to him at the address shown on his license, in which case such license may be so revoked. 
(Code 1957, § 21-40(e)) 
Secs. 21-96-21-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-111. - Taximeters required. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any taxicab within the city unless such taxicab is equipped with a taximeter of such a type and design as will properly and accurately compute and display on its face the charge for distance traveled and the waiting time. The operation of any taxicab with a taximeter which is defective or which does not properly and accurately compute and display on its face the charge for distance traveled or the charge for waiting time shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Such taximeter shall be inspected each time a periodic inspection is made under section 21-151 and at such other times as may be deemed necessary by the chief of police. All taximeters shall be placed in such a position in the taxicab that the face thereof and the fare numerals may be easily seen and read by a passenger sitting in any part of the taxicab. No taximeter shall be used between sunset and sunrise unless the face thereof shall be illuminated by a light so arranged as to throw a continuous light thereon. 
(Code 1957, § 21-22(a)) 
Sec. 21-112. - Schedule of maximum fares for taxicabs. 
(a)  Schedule. One dollar and twenty-five cents for the first one-seventh mile or any part thereof, and twenty-five cents for each additional one-seventh mile or any part thereof. 
(b)  Twenty-five cents for each minute, or any part thereof, of waiting time. 
(c)  Twenty-five cents per piece of hand luggage in excess of two pieces which are not carried in the passenger's lap. 
(d)  Said maximum fares shall be applicable to each trip made by such taxicab irrespective of the number of passengers and the point of origin or termination of such trip. 
(e)  Manifests required. Every driver of a taxicab or of an intercity jitney shall maintain a daily manifest upon which is recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare collected. All such complete manifests shall be returned to the certificate holder by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for such manifests shall be furnished to the driver by the certificate holder on the form prescribed by and approved by the chief of police. An intercity jitney driver must, at the time a passenger enters his vehicle, enter on his manifest the place and time of origin of the trip and the destination of such trip and the amount of fare to be collected. 
(f)  Preservation of manifests. Every holder of a certificate for the operation of a taxicab or intercity jitney shall retain and preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for at least the calendar year. Such manifests shall be available to the chief of police. 
(Code 1957, § 21-23; Ord. No. 2659, § 1, 3-15-95; Ord. No. 2877, § 1, 10-4-00) 
Sec. 21-113. - Maximum fares for jitneys. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any jitney, including any intercity jitney operator, to charge or collect or attempt to charge or collect any fare in excess of the current schedule of maximum fares on file in the office of the city clerk as now fixed and approved by the city council by resolution or as may hereafter be fixed and approved by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 21-24) 
Sec. 21-113.1. - Nonmetered cabs. 
(a)  Nonmetered vehicles shall be allowed to increase their fares by 15 percent. 
(b)  Nonmetered cabs shall be phased out within two years after the effective date of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2659, § 1(21-46), 3-15-95) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2659, § 1(21-46), adopted March 15, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, its inclusion herein as § 21-113.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 21-114. - Vehicle to be operated in class for which certificate is issued. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of one class of vehicle for hire to operate the same under or as any other type or class of vehicle for hire. 
(Code 1957, § 21-26) 
Sec. 21-115. - Schedule of rates and name of certificate holder to be painted or posted on taxicabs or jitney. 
    There shall be painted on each front door of each licensed taxicab, jitney, intercity jitney, and other vehicles for hire in letters at least three inches in height and one-fourth inch wide strokes, the name of the certificate holder under which such vehicle is operated, and intercity jitneys shall also have the words "Intercity Jitney" painted on each front door in letters of the size herein provided. In the case of taxicabs, jitneys and other automobiles for hire, the schedule of fares shall likewise be painted on the outside of the vehicle and such fare schedule shall be posted in the interior thereof. Such schedule of fares shall be visible at all times to passengers. 
(Code 1957, § 21-27; Ord. No. 2659, § 1(21-27), 3-15-95) 
Sec. 21-115.1. - Uniformity in colors and paint jobs. 
    Metered and nonmetered cabs owned by the same company are to be uniform in color(s) and paint jobs. 
(Ord. No. 2659, § 1(21-47), 3-15-95) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2659, § 1(21-47), adopted March 15, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, its inclusion herein as § 21-115.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 21-115.2. - City photo identification displayed. 
    A city-issued photo identification shall be prominently displayed in the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2659, § 1(21-48), 3-15-95) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2659, § 1(21-48), adopted March 15, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, its inclusion herein as § 21-115.2 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 21-116. - Observance of fare schedule. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any licensed taxicab, jitney, intercity jitney or other automobile for hire to refuse to convey a passenger at the fare specified on the schedule displayed upon or within the vehicle or to demand or receive an amount in excess of the fare schedule so displayed. 
(Code 1957, § 21-28) 
Sec. 21-117. - Passengers required to pay fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for the passenger of any taxicab, jitney or other automobile for hire to fail or refuse to pay the fare in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 21-29) 
Sec. 21-118. - Passenger pickups at bus stops prohibited. 
    No driver of a taxicab, jitney or other automobile for hire shall solicit or pick up passengers at any duly established bus stop so designated and marked. 
(Code 1957, § 21-30) 
Sec. 21-119. - Solicitation of passengers. 
    Solicitation of passengers or attraction of attention by calling or using a horn, bell, whistle or other signal device for calling out for passengers for a particular hotel or place is prohibited. 
(Code 1957, § 21-31) 
Sec. 21-120. - Manner of carrying passengers. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any taxicab, jitney or other automobile for hire while any person is standing or sitting on the running board, fender or hood of such vehicle or any part of such vehicle not designed for the transportation of persons. 
(Code 1957, § 21-32) 
Sec. 21-121. - Rated passenger seating capacity. 
    It shall be unlawful to accept transportation for or to transport in a licensed taxicab, jitney or other automobile for hire, more than six people including the operator unless such motor vehicle shall be designed, built and equipped for the purpose of safely carrying more than six people. 
(Code 1957, § 21-33) 
Sec. 21-122. - Transportation of articles and baggage. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any taxicab, jitney or other automobile for hire while any article is on, upon or attached to the running board, fender, hood or door thereof. All articles and baggage carried by vehicles under this chapter shall be wholly within such vehicle, except that transporting of baggage securely fastened in baggage racks safely attached to the top of any licensed vehicles shall be permissible practice. 
(Code 1957, § 21-34) 
Sec. 21-123. - Disposition of articles left in vehicles. 
    All drivers of taxicabs, jitneys, intercity jitneys and other automobiles for hire shall promptly deliver to the chief of police all property left in such vehicles by passengers. All drivers failing or neglecting to do so shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. When articles left in such vehicles are delivered to the chief of police, the police officer on duty shall make an entry of the fact in a book provided for that purpose and shall keep an adequate record to identify the date and the time of the receipt of such article and a description thereof, and shall issue a receipt thereof to the driver or person who has turned in such article to the chief of police. The chief of police shall keep such articles until claimed by the owner thereof upon satisfactory proof of ownership or for a minimum of 90 days. Thereafter, if such articles have not been claimed, the chief of police may dispose of the same pursuant to appropriate resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 21-35) 
Sec. 21-124. - Establishment and use of open stands. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered to establish open stands in such places upon the streets of the city as he shall deem necessary for the use of taxicabs or jitneys operated in the city. The chief of police shall not create an open stand without taking into consideration the need for such stands by the operators of such vehicles and the convenience to the general public. The chief of police shall prescribe the number of taxicabs or jitneys that shall occupy such open stands. 
(Code 1957, § 21-37) 
Sec. 21-125. - Call box stands. 
(a)  Establishment. The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered, with the concurrence of the building inspector of the city, to establish call box stands upon the streets of the city in such places as in their discretion shall be deemed proper. A holder desiring to establish a call box stand shall make written application to the chief of police, which application shall contain the written approval of the abutting property owners of such space, consenting to the creation of such stand. The chief of police and building inspector shall make an investigation of the traffic conditions at such place and shall then thereafter either grant or refuse the application. 
(b)  Indemnity bond required. The approval or granting of such application shall not be effective until an indemnity bond in the amount of $1,000.00 is posted with the city clerk to hold the city harmless from any claims, losses or damages that might arise as a result of such use of public property. 
(c)  Use by applicant. When a call box stand has been established, as provided in this section, it shall be used solely by the holder to whom the same was granted and his agents and servants, and no other holder shall be permitted to use the same. 
(d)  Use by other vehicles. Private or other vehicles for hire shall not at any time occupy the space upon the streets that has been established as either open stands or call box stands. 
(Code 1957, § 21-38) 
Sec. 21-126. - Limitation on operation of taxicabs and jitneys. 
    The operation, including the direction and supervision, of all taxicabs and jitneys shall be from a duly established open stand or call box station as provided in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for a certificate holder to operate or permit the operation of a taxicab or jitney from his own private home or other residential address. 
(Code 1957, § 21-39) 
Sec. 21-127. - Certain acts by drivers prohibited. 
    No driver of any vehicle for hire shall solicit business for any hotel, motel, lodginghouse, tourist court, rooming place or other business or attempt to divert patronage from one such business to another. No such driver shall operate a vehicle for hire under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or narcotic nor shall he solicit for or engage in selling, delivering or transporting of intoxicating beverages nor shall any driver solicit business for any house of ill repute or use his vehicle for any purpose other than transporting of passengers and their baggage. 
(Code 1957, § 21-41) 
Sec. 21-128. - Transporting criminals or other persons for unlawful or immoral purposes prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle for hire knowingly to transport any passenger to the abode of a prostitute or knowingly to transport any criminal, narcotic peddler, prostitute or bootlegger in the commission of a crime or infraction of the law in any manner or act in any manner as a panderer or pimp or prostitute or as a contact for unlawful establishments of any character. 
(Code 1957, § 21-42) 
Sec. 21-129. - Revocation of certificate for violations. 
(a)  Violations of any sections of this division are to be brought to the attention of the certificate holder in whose service the vehicle for hire is employed. Repeated occurrences by the same or other drivers of the same certificate holder shall be grounds for revocation and cancellation of the holder's certificate. 
(b)  Any person, either by himself or agent, who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500.00 or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1957, § 21-43(a); Ord. No. 2659, § 1(21-49), 3-15-95) 
Cross reference- Violation of other sections of chapter, § 21-2. 
Secs. 21-130-21-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLE INSPECTION SYSTEM 

Sec. 21-151. - Established. 
(a)  A vehicle inspection system for all vehicles operating under this chapter is hereby established. This inspection system shall be administered under the direction of the chief of police. Certificate holders operating vehicles under this chapter shall apply to the chief of police or his designated officer for a safety check sheet for each vehicle operated under the specific certificate. The safety check sheet shall contain the name of the certificate holder, description of the vehicle to be inspected, which shall include make, model, serial number and rated seating capacity, and a list of the safety features to be inspected. The safety check sheet covering each vehicle to be inspected shall be submitted with the appropriate vehicle to a private mechanic or garage, approved in accordance with section 21-152 for inspection. The safety inspector shall inspect all vehicles submitted and certify his findings to the chief of police or his designated officer or the check sheet submitted. The costs and expenses of all such examinations or inspections shall be the obligation of the certificate holder. 
(b)  If the chief of police or his designated officer determines from the certified report of the inspector that a vehicle has met the minimum safety requirements established, a certificate in the form of a sticker to be affixed to the vehicle shall be issued. This sticker shall also state the authorized seating capacity of the vehicle. 
(Code 1957, § 21-21(a)) 
Sec. 21-152. - Procedures for approving private mechanics or garages as safety inspectors. 
    The chief of police or his designated officer is authorized to review, inspect and prepare a list of approved private mechanics or garages lawfully doing business within the city, who shall thereafter be the safety inspectors authorized to make the inspections required under this chapter. Any licensed private mechanic or garage doing business within the city shall be entitled to apply to have his or its name included on the list of approved mechanics or garages. All such applicants who possess the requisite mechanical knowledge and who have the requisite equipment and garage facilities to perform the inspections required hereunder shall be placed on the list of approved inspectors. 
(Code 1957, § 21-21(b)) 
Sec. 21-153. - Equipment and maintenance of vehicles. 
    Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be periodically inspected every six months in accordance with the procedure herein established to insure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions. Such semi-annual inspections are to include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Proof of insurance for each vehicle. 
(2)  Mechanical and safety inspections. 
(3)  Inspection of driver's license and driving record. 
The exact dates for making the semi-annual inspections required by this subsection shall be established by the chief of police. Inspections from other regulatory agencies will be accepted if the date of inspection is within 60 days of the inspection date required by this section 
(Code 1957, § 21-21(c); Ord. No. 2659, § 1(21-21(c)), 3-15-95) 
Sec. 21-154. - Evidence of compliance. 
    Evidence of compliance with such periodic safety inspection shall be in the form of a sticker. Such stickers shall be of alternating colors and shall be signed by the chief of police or his authorized agent. Such stickers shall be displayed as directed by the chief of police and the expiration date shall be indicated thereon, as well as the date of the last inspection. 
(Code 1957, § 21-21(d)) 
Sec. 21-155. - Noncompliance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any vehicle operating under this chapter to be driven upon the streets of this city which does not have affixed thereto in the manner prescribed a valid and current safety inspection certificate or sticker. 
(Code 1957, § 21-21(e)) 
Sec. 21-156. - Inspection fee. 
    An inspection fee of $_____ for each vehicle inspected under the provisions of this section shall be required of the certificate holder. The inspection fee shall be paid into the general fund of the city and applied to the cost of administration of this section. 
(Code 1957, § 21-21(f); Ord. No. 2659, § 1(21-21(f)), 3-15-95) 
Sec. 21-157. - Age of vehicle. 
    No vehicle shall exceed seven years in age. 
(Ord. No. 2659, § 1(21-21(g)), 3-15-95) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2659, § 1(21-21(g)), adopted March 15, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, its inclusion herein as § 21-157 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Deposit of cost of notice must be made with application for permits, § 2-1; code enforcement, § 2-311 et seq.; adult entertainment code, ch. 2.5; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; restrictions on location of alcoholic beverage establishments, § 3-5; drinking alcoholic beverages on streets, public ways or places prohibited, § 3-10; fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; fire code adopted, § 6-31; nuisances, ch. 11; noise regulations, § 11-141 et seq.; application for special construction permit for excessive noise level required, § 11-149; measurement standards for control of noise, § 11-171 et seq.; security and fire warning systems, ch. 17; burglar alarms, § 17-21 et seq.; fire alarm systems, § 17-51 et seq.; utilities, ch. 20; extensions of water and sewer mains, § 20-256 et seq.; coastal construction, ch. 23; flood prevention and protection, ch. 25; minority employment and affordable housing opportunity plan, ch. 26; planning, ch. 27; signs, ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; construction requirements for streets and sidewalks, § 29-31 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 30; building repair permits issued for lands in unimproved and unrecorded plats, § 30-33; zoning, ch. 31; site plan review procedure, § 31-56 et seq.; landscaping regulations, § 31-596 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Numbering of property. 
(a)  Owner, tenant responsibility. Residential and business property owners and/or tenants shall be responsible for the proper display of the correct house or property address, by number, in a conspicuous place on the front of the building. 
(b)  Specifications. All numbers used to designate a house or property address shall be at least three inches in height and must contrast with any background material and be readily visible from the street. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Any person failing to comply with this section will be deemed to be in violation of this section and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-11. 
(Code 1957, §§ 12-10.1-12-10.3) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 29. 
Sec. 22-2. - On-site construction parking. 
(a)  During the course of any construction, off-street parking facilities shall be provided within the construction site to accommodate parking of any motor vehicles operated by any person employed by or transacting any business with or service to the site of construction. 
(b)  In addition to the criminal penalty imposed in section 1-11, the building official shall enforce this section by the suspension of any building permit when such official determines the existence of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1957, § 6-4; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(6-4), 12-15-93) 
Secs. 22-3-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING AND TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 22-31. - Building code adopted. 
(a)  The Florida Building Code, as adopted by the state legislature, is hereby incorporated by reference as the building code for the City of Riviera Beach, Florida, with the amendments set forth in this article. 
(b)  A copy of the above referenced code shall be kept on file in the building division's office of the city and shall be available for public inspection upon request. 
(Code 1957, § 6-1; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(6-1), 12-15-93; Ord. No. 2722, § 1, 11-20-96; Ord. No. 2876, § 1, 10-4-00; Ord. No. 1971, § 1, 6-16-04) 
Sec. 22-32. - Administrative amendments to Florida Building Code, Chapter 1, "Administration." 
(a)  The city hereby amends and supplements Chapter 1 of the Florida Building Code by the adoption or deletion of the following sections of said chapter. Chapter 1, as hereby amended and supplemented and as set forth below, shall be in full force and effect within the city: 
101.3.3 Permitting and Inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan by any jurisdiction, under the requirements of this code, shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system, or plan or their adequacy. No jurisdiction nor any involved employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
101.4.2.3.2 Unsafe buildings. Unsafe buildings shall be abated as set forth in section 22-36 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
101.4.2.5 Deleted. 
101.4.8 Appendices. Appendices A through E are hereby adopted and incorporated into this code. 
102 BUILDING DIVISION 
102.1 Establishment. There is hereby established a division to be called the building division and the person in charge to be known as the building official. 
102.2 Employee qualifications. 
102.2.1 Building official qualifications. The building official shall be licensed as a building code administrator by the State of Florida. The building official shall be appointed or hired by the city and shall be bound by the applicable personnel rules of the city, if an employee, or by the terms of the contract appointing him or her, if an independent contractor. 
102.2.2 Employee qualifications. The city may appoint or hire such number of officers, inspectors, plans examiners, assistants and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. A person shall not be appointed or hired as an inspector or plans examiner unless that person meets the qualifications for licensure as an inspector or plans examiner in the appropriate trades as established by the State of Florida. 
103 POWERS AND DUTIES OF 
BUILDING OFFICIAL 
103.1 General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code, and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. 
103.2 Right of entry. 
103.2.1 Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this code. If such building or premises are occupied, the building official shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
103.2.2 When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code. 
103.3 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
103.4 Revocation of permits. 
103.4.1 Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
103.4.2 Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this code. 
103.5 Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
104 PERMITS 
104.1.1 When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. Permit applicants shall be properly qualified under the laws regulating the certification and licensing of contractors, or be exempt therefrom. A permit shall be required for, but not limited to, the following as determined by the building official: 
Buildings/Structures - Construct, erect, enlarge, alter, move, remove, relocate, demolish or change the occupancy of any building, or portion thereof. 
Service Systems - Install, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system work or cause the same to be done. 
Roofing - Install, replace, or resurface roofing, or make repairs. 
Windows & Doors - Install or replace windows or doors including frames, shutters, awnings, canopies, or similar items. 
Barriers & Signs - Erect or replace fences, walls, signs, or sign structures. 
Antennas, Mast or Poles - Install or replace masts, towers for television or radio receiving-transmitting antenna extending more than 10 ft above the last anchorage, satellite dish antennas, flag poles, exterior lighting or similar items. 
Pools - Install swimming pool, wading pool, or spas, above or below ground, unless otherwise exempted. 
Fuel Tanks - Install or replace gasoline, fuel, oil, bottled gas, oxygen, nitrous oxide, or similar liquid or gaseous storage tanks, pumps, and related equipment, above or below ground in a capacity of more than 5 gallons. 
Surfaces - Construct, replace or resurface asphalt or concrete driveways, parking areas, hardstands, or sidewalks. 
Marine Facilities - Install or replace docking mooring facilities for private or commercial watercraft, groins, sea walls, jetties, revetments, or similar structures and facilities related thereto. 
Fire Prevention/Suppression - Install, replace, or relocate fire sprinkler, fire alarm, smoke detection, or similar fire prevention and protection systems and related equipment or appurtenances. 
EXCEPTIONS: 
Ordinary minor repairs, installation or replacement may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit. Installation shall be done in accordance with the manufacturer's specification when not in conflict with this or the technical Codes. 
Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or the technical codes or any other laws or ordinances of the applicable governing body. 
Building. Building permits may not be required for replacement or repair work having value of less than $1,000.00, providing, however, that such work will not effect the structural integrity, fire rating, exit access or egress requirements. In the case of roofing repairs a permit may not be required for work having a value of less than $500.00. 
Mechanical. Permits may not be required for the following mechanical work: 
1. any portable heating appliance. 
2. any portable ventilation equipment. 
3. any portable cooling unit. 
4. any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this Code. 
5. replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe. 
6. any portable evaporative cooler. 
7. any self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 lb or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower or less. 
8. Replacement components like originals upon approval of building official. 
Electrical, Gas & Plumbing. In a 1 & 2 Family Dwelling, a permit may not be required for the following: 
1. Repair, installation or replacement of common household fixtures to existing energy supply lines and outlets. Existing energy supply lines shall not be altered or extended. 
2. Repair or replacement of common household electrical switches and outlets on the load side of the electrical source. 
3. Repair, installation or replacement of common household plumbing fixtures to existing supply lines and outlets. Existing supply lines shall not be altered or extended. This does not include water heaters. 
4. Replacement components like originals upon approval of building official. 
104.2.1.2 Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
104.2.1.3 Quality Of Plans. Plans shall be drawn to a minimum 1/8 th inch scale upon substantial paper, cloth or other acceptable medium. The building official may establish, through city policy, standards for plans and specifications, in order to provide conformity to its record retention program. This policy may include such things as minimum size, shape, contrast, clarity, or other items related to records management. 
104.2.4 Site Drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey, or other survey, prepared by a qualified surveyor whenever the boundary lines cannot be determined in the field. 
104.4.5 Special Foundation Permit. When an application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his or her discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his or her own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted or that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
104.5.1 Permit Intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 6 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 6 months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing to the building official and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official if granted. 
104.5.2 Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations supervise such work. In addition, the architect and engineer shall be responsible for conformity to the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity to the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his or her stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. The building official shall ensure that any person not properly licensed as an engineer or architect conducting plans review is qualified as a plans examiner under part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes, and that any person not properly licensed as an engineer or architect conducting inspections is qualified as a building inspector under Part III of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes. 
104.6.2 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees, plus penalty fees up to 300 percent of the usual permit fee, as decided by the building official. 
104.6.4 Building Permit Valuation. If, in the opinion of the building official, the claimed valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates, and/or bona fide signed contracts (excluding land value) to meet the approval of the building official. For permitting purposes, valuation of buildings and systems shall be total replacement value to include structural, electric, plumbing, mechanical, interior finish, normal site work (excavation and backfill for buildings), architectural and design fees, overhead and profit. 
105 INSPECTIONS 
105.1 Existing Building Inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He or she shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He or she shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
105.2 Manufacturers And Fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
105.3 Resident Inspection Services. The building official may make, or cause to be made by others, the inspections required by this section 105. He or she may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. The building official may require the owner to employ an inspection service in the following instances: 
1. for buildings or additions of Type I or Type II construction 
2. for all major structural alterations 
3. where the concrete design is based on compressive strength (fc) in excess of 3,000 pounds per square inch 
4. for pile driving 
5. for buildings with area greater than 20,000 square foot 
6. for buildings more than 2 stories in height 
7. for buildings and structures of unusual design or methods of construction 
Such inspector shall be present at all times that work is in progress on the structural frame. Such inspector shall be a registered architect, or engineer, or other person licensed under Chapter 468, Florida Statutes. Such inspectors shall be responsible for compliance with this Code and shall submit weekly progress reports of the daily inspections to the building official. 
At the completion of the construction work or project, such inspector shall submit a certificate of compliance to the building official, stating that the work was done in compliance with this Code and in accordance with the permitted drawing. Final inspection shall be made by the building official before a Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion is issued. 
105.6 Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections, and such other inspections as deemed necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical codes. The building official shall determine the timing and sequencing of when inspections occur and what elements are inspected at each inspection. A survey may be required before inspection is approved. 
BUILDING 
2. Framing inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete and shall at a minimum include the following building components: 
 window/door framing 
 vertical cells/columns 
 lintel/tie beams (including truss layout) 
 framing/trusses/bracing/connectors 
 draft stopping/fire blocking 
 curtain wall framing 
 energy insulation 
 accessibility 
SITE DEBRIS 
1. The contractor and/or owner of any active or inactive construction project shall be responsible for the clean-up and removal of all construction debris or any other miscellaneous discarded articles prior to receiving final inspection approval. Construction job sites must be kept clean, such that accumulation of construction debris must not remain on the property for a period of time exceeding fourteen (14) days. 
2. All debris shall be kept in such a manner as to prevent it from being spread by any means. 
105.14 Failure To Obtain Required Inspections. The cost of investigations, testing, certification or additional fees shall be borne by the applicant. In addition, the building official may refuse to issue a building permit or issue a permit with specific conditions if the local authorized hearing board, through a public hearing which affords due process, has found the contractor guilty of a willful building code violation, fraud or disregard for inspection requirements, and limit permitting privileges. 
107 TESTS 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
108 SEVERABILITY 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this code. 
109 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, removed or demolished a building, structure, electrical, gas mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state law. 
(Code 1957, § 6-2; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(6-2), 12-15-93; Ord. No. 2722, § 1, 11-20-96; Ord. No. 2876, § 1, 10-4-00; Ord. No. 2971, § 2, 6-16-04) 
Sec. 22-33. - Schedule of permit fees. 
(a)  Permit fees shall be based on the valuation of work, as defined by the most current building valuation data provided by the International Code Council, as amended. The valuation of work shall be utilized with the fee schedule listed in subsection (b) of this section in order to determine the total fee due. Primary or master permits will include the cost of all sub-permits, provided the necessary information is completely detailed on the plans that are submitted for permit and the total cost of such improvements is included in the estimated value. 
(b)  Fee schedule. Base permit fees will utilize a tiered permit fee calculation, meaning that defined valuation of work thresholds carry specific fee percentages due. This tiered system is cumulative, so multiple tiers may apply to a single building permit as well as other applicable fees which are added together to calculate the total permit fee due. Fees are listed below in Table 1: Building Fee Schedule. 
_____
TABLE 1: BUILDING FEE SCHEDULE 
(1)  Base permit fees (tiered system): 
Minimum permit fee (up to $1,000.00 of work valuation): $75.00 -OR- Tier 1: For the First $2,500.00 (must be over $1,000): $100.00 And if the valuation of work is greater than $2,500.00, see tier 2; Tier 2: From $2,500.00 to $10,000.00 (total in addition to tier above): × 2.5% And if the valuation of work is greater than $10,000.00, see tier 3; Tier 3: From $10,000.00 to $100,000.00 (total in addition to tiers above): × 2.25% And if the valuation of work is greater than $100,000.00, see tier 4; Tier 4: From $100,000.00 to $500,000.00 (total in addition to tiers above): × 2% And if the valuation of work is greater than $500,000.00, see tier 5; Tier 5: From $500,000.00 to $1,000,000.00 (total in addition to tiers above): × 1.5% And if the valuation of work is greater than $1,000,000.00, see tier 6; Tier 6: From $1,000,000.00 to $10,000,000.00 (total in addition to tiers above): × 1.25% And if the valuation of work is greater than $1,000,000.00, see tier 7; Tier 7: Greater than $10,000,000.00 (total in addition to tiers above): × 1%  
Additional fees listed below are charged as applicable in addition to any base permit fees. 
(2)  Review fees: Applicable review fees (see below) are added to the above referenced permit fees. 
Fire rescue plan review and inspection: × .003 of the total valuation of work, (minimum fee of $30.00). 
Engineer plan review and inspection: × .0025 of the total valuation of work (minimum fee of $50.00). 
Training surcharge: × 1% of the total permit fee (minimum fee of $1.00). 
State surcharges: × 3% of the total base permit fee (minimum fee of $4.00). 
(3)  Various permit fees: Applicable various permit fees listed below are added to abovementioned review fees. 
Street excavation ..... $500.00 
Moving building ..... 500.00 
Building demolition ..... 200.00 
Interior demolition ..... 2% of valuation or $50.00, whatever is greater 
Construction trailers ..... 200.00 
Copies per page ..... 0.15 
Business tax receipt inspection ..... 50.00 
Certificate of use inspection ..... 50.00 
Failure to call for final inspection, each permit: ..... 50.00 
Reinspection fee ..... 50.00 
Plan revision fee ..... 50.00 
Plan digitizing fee: 
Residential single family ..... 25.00 
Commercial per million dollars of value ..... 50.00 
(Code 1957, § 6-3; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(6-3), 12-15-93; Ord. No. 2722, § 1, 11-20-96; Ord. No. 2876, § 1, 10-4-00; Ord. No. 2971, § 3, 6-16-04; Ord. No. 3063, § 1, 6-17-09; Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 9-5-12) 
_____
Sec. 22-34. - Construction not in compliance with codes prohibited. 
(a)  No construction shall be done within the corporate limits of the city except in accordance with the codes adopted in this article and all other applicable provisions of this Code. No construction of any type shall be commenced until the building division and any other appropriate agency with jurisdiction issues all required permits. Any person who commences construction without all required permits shall be subject to code enforcement proceedings in accordance with chapter 2 of this Code. 
(b)  Any person whose construction or building-related work and work practices do not conform with the provisions of this Code shall, upon written notice from the building official, make required changes or corrections for conformity with this Code. If such changes or corrections have not been made within ten calendar days after notice from the building official, no more building permits shall be issued to such person unless and until compliance with this Code occurs. 
(Code 1957, § 6-5; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(6-5), 12-15-93; Ord. No. 2876, § 1, 10-4-00; Ord. No. 2971, § 4, 6-16-04) 
Sec. 22-35. - Abatement of unsafe buildings. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is hereby declared to be remedial in nature. The purpose of this section is to secure the public health, safety and welfare by ensuring that all buildings and structures within the city are structurally sound and that such premises provide adequate egress, sanitation, light and ventilation for the protection of life and property and are free from fire and other hazards incidental to their construction, alteration, use and occupancy. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this Code shall apply to all unsafe buildings and structures, as herein defined, and shall apply equally to new and existing conditions. 
(c)  Unsafe buildings and structures. An unsafe building or structure means any building, structure or property that endangers the life, health, property or safety of the general public and has any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Any means of egress or portion thereof is not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Any means of egress or portion thereof, such as but not limited to fire doors, closing devices and fire resistive ratings, is in disrepair or in a dilapidated or non-working condition such that the means of egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  The stress in any material, member, or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads, including dead loads, exceeds the working stresses allowed in the city's building code for new buildings, which was in effect at the time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(4)  A building structure or portion thereof has been damaged to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to the damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the city's building code for new buildings, which was in effect at the time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Any exterior appendage or portion of a building or structure is not securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by the building code for new buildings, which was in effect at the time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(6)  Any building, structure or portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for any reason or is unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(7)  Any building, structure or portion thereof, as a result of decay, deterioration or dilapidation, is likely to fully or partially collapse. 
(8)  Any building, structure or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of the building code. 
(9)  Any building, structure, property or portion thereof is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(10)  Any building, structure, property or portion thereof is unsafe, unsanitary, or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life, or, which in relation to the existing use, constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment. 
(d)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the building official. 
(e)  Right of entry for inspection. 
(1)  The building official or his/her authorized designee, in accordance with the provisions of this subsection, may enter any building or premises at all reasonable times to make an inspection or enforce any of the provisions of this section. In cases of emergencies or exigent circumstances where extreme hazards are known to exist, the building official may enter the building, structure, or premises at any time. 
(2)  When attempting to enter a building, structure or premises that is occupied, the building official or his/her authorized designee shall first identify him or herself, display proper credentials and request entry. If the building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge of the building and request entry. If entry is refused, or if the owner or other persons having charge of an unoccupied building cannot be located, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including an inspection warrant. 
(3)  When the building official or his/her authorized designee shall have obtained permission to enter, secured an inspection warrant, or obtained another remedy provided by law to secure entry, no person shall fail, after proper credentials are displayed, to promptly permit entry into the building, structure or premises by the building official or his/her authorized designee for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this section. Any person violating this section may be prosecuted within the limits of the law. 
(f)  Inspection. The building official shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, any building, structure or portion thereof which is or may be unsafe. After the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected a building, structure or portion thereof, and has determined that such building, structure or portion thereof is unsafe, he/she shall initiate proceedings to cause the abatement of the unsafe condition by repair, vacation or demolition, or any combination thereof. 
(g)  Whenever the building official has determined that such structure, property or portion thereof is unsafe, the building official shall prepare a written notice of violation and notice of pending administrative action to the owner of record as identified by a search of the public records in and for the Palm Beach County. Should the building official and the city engineer or their designees jointly determine that the structure, property or portion thereof presents an immediate and genuine threat to the safety of individuals or the public at large, the city may take any action necessary to abate such threat, including, but not limited to, the demolition of the structure without providing the procedural safeguards set forth below. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  The street address and legal description or property control number of the building, structure, or property. 
b.  A statement indicating the building or structure has been declared unsafe by the building official, and a summary of the conditions that led to the building official's determination. 
c.  A statement advising that if the following required action as determined by the building official is not commenced within or completed by the time specified, the building will be ordered vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed. 
1.  If the building or structure is to be repaired, the notice shall require that all necessary permits be secured and the work commenced within 30 days and continued to completion within such time as the building official determines. 
2.  If the building or structure is to be vacated, the notice shall indicate the time within which vacation is to be completed. 
3.  If the building or structure is to be demolished, the notice shall require that all required permits for demolition be secured and that the demolition be completed within such time as determined reasonable by the building official. If the building is occupied, the notice shall require that the premises be vacated within 60 days. 
d.  State that the building official may cause the work to be done and after such repair, reconstruction, alteration, removal or demolition by or on behalf of the building official, the city may record a special assessment lien against the owner in accordance with this section to recover the costs incurred by the city in performing the work. 
e.  State that if the property owner or other interested party wishes to: (1) contest in whole or in part the material allegations in the notice; (2) assert that the time period as set forth in the notice poses an undue hardship; (3) assert that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued or misinterpreted; or (4) make any other argument, the parties have a right to a hearing. Any request for a hearing must be made in writing within fifteen (15) days of receipt of notice of violation or the right to hearing is waived. 
(2)  A notice of pending administrative action shall be recorded with the county clerk of court, served upon the property owner and other interested party as indicated below and contain the name of the property owner, the specific violations of the city code that are applicable to the property, the property address and legal description. 
(h)  Service of notice of violation and notice of pending administrative action. The notice shall be served either personally or by certified mail, postage pre-paid, return receipt requested, to each owner at the address as it appears in the official public records. If addresses are not available on any person required to be served the notice, the notice addressed to such person shall be mailed to the address of the building or structure involved in the proceedings. The failure of any person to receive notice, other than the owner of record, shall not invalidate any proceedings under this section. Service by certified or registered mail as herein described shall be effective on the date the notice was received as indicated on the return receipt. In the event the certified mail is unclaimed or refused, the notice shall be posted at the property for ten days and shall be re-sent by first class mail documented by a properly executed proof of mailing and posting or affidavit confirming the first class mailing and posting. For properties that are posted, the notice shall be deemed received at the expiration of the ten-day posting period. 
(i)  Placard posted. Every notice to vacate, in addition to complying with the above, shall be posted at each exit and entrance to the building or structure and shall essentially state: 
THIS BUILDING IS UNSAFE AND ITS USE OR OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY THE BUILDING OFFICIAL. 
Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or demotion is completed. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove such notice without written permission of the building official, or for any person to enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the same. 
(j)  Hearing. 
(1)  The city council shall appoint a special master to conduct all hearings contemplated by this section. The special master shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed by the city council at any time, with or without cause. 
(2)  A hearing before the special master shall offer the property owner and other legally interested parties a reasonable opportunity to be heard on any matter or issue that is relevant to the proceeding. The property owner or interested parties may appear at the hearing in person or through an attorney or other designated representative. Failure of any person to appear at any hearing scheduled in accordance with this section shall constitute a waiver of that person's right to a hearing. 
(3)  The special master may obtain the issuance and service of subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses or the production of evidence at the hearings. Subpoenas may be issued by the special master at the request of any party involved in the hearing. 
(4)  All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(k)  Implementation. 
(1)  If no hearing is requested in accordance with subsection (g)(1)e. above, the building official may take action to repair or reconstruct the building, structure or portion thereof or to cause the building or structure to be removed or demolished if required by the notice. 
(2)  If a hearing is requested, and the special master determines: 
a.  That the condition exists as set forth in the notice of violation, and that the remedial action required in the notice has not been voluntarily completed by the property owner, or other legally interested party, the special master shall issue a written order authorizing the building official to repair, reconstruct the building, structure or portion thereof or to cause the building or structure to be removed or demolished. 
b.  That the condition, as set forth in the notice of violation does not exist or has been corrected as required by the notice of violation, the notice of violation shall be dismissed by written order of the special master. 
(3)  The building official may, upon written request of the property owner, grant an extension of time as the building official may determine to be reasonable to complete the required remedial action. If the extensions of time, in total, exceed 120 days, the special master, without further public hearing, must also approve the extension. 
(l)  Appeal. An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final order of the special master by filing a petition for writ of certiorari with the circuit court. Said appeal must be filed within 30 days from the effective date of the special master's written order. 
(m)  Interference. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the implementation of any action required by the final notice of the building official or the special master. Any person found interfering or obstructing such actions shall be prosecuted to the extent provided for by law. 
(n)  Performance of work. The repair or demolition of an unsafe building or structure as required in the notice by the building official or the final decision by the special master shall be performed in an expeditious and workmanlike manner in accordance with the requirements of the City Code and all other applicable codes and accepted engineering practice standards. 
(o)  Recovery of costs. 
(1)  Whenever a building or structure is repaired or demolished in accordance with the provisions of this code and the cost of such repair or demolition is borne by the city, all costs incurred by the city, including the cost incurred in the searching of the public records to determine the record owners and interested parties in serving the notice as specified above, shall be assessed to the owner of the affected land or premises and shall become a lien against such land or premises as provided in this section. 
(2)  The building official shall certify the costs borne by the city, as described above, and shall serve such cost certification upon the property owner by certified mail return receipt requested. This cost certification is a demand for payment from the property owner. 
(p)  Right to challenge costs and charges. 
(1)  Within 15 days from the property owner's receipt of the building official's cost certification, provided in subsection (o) above, the property owner shall have the right to request a hearing before the special master to show cause, if any, why the costs and charges incurred by the city, under this section are excessive or unwarranted or why such costs should not constitute a lien against said land, provided that nothing contained in this section is to be construed to disturb or permit a review of the order by the special master issued under subsection (h) above. 
(q)  Lien created. 
(1)  If the owner fails to make payment within 15 days from the expiration of the appeal period provided for in subsection (p) above or from the date of any order entered by the special master under subsection (h) above, the amount of the certified costs shall be assessed by the special master against the affected land and such assessment shall create and constitute a lien against such land, payable to the city. 
(2)  Said assessment shall bear interest at the current legal rate of interest per annum as provided by law and shall constitute a lien upon the land from the date of the assessment and shall be collectible in the same manner as liens for taxes and special assessments and with the same attorney's fee, penalties for default in payment, and under the same provisions as to sale and forfeiture, provided, however, that no lien created pursuant to the provisions of this section may be foreclosed on property that is homestead under section 4, Article X of the State Constitution. 
(3)  Collection of such assessments, with such interest and with a reasonable attorney's fee, may also be made by the city council by proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to foreclose the lien of the assessment in the manner in which a lien for mortgages is foreclosed under the laws of the state and it shall be lawful to join in any complaint for foreclosure any one or more lots or parcels of land, by whomever owned, if assessed under the provisions of this section. 
(4)  Property subject to lien may be redeemed at any time prior to sale by its owner by paying the total amount due under the corresponding assessment lien including interest, court costs, advertising costs and reasonable attorney's fees. 
(r)  Authority to expend funds. Nothing contained herein shall require the city council to appropriate or expend any funds to carry out the purpose of this section. The authority granted herein is permissive and shall not be construed to impose an obligation on the building official or the city to condemn any building or structure. 
(s)  Emergency powers. Nothing herein precludes exercise of emergency powers otherwise available in the face of imminent threat to public safety. 
(t)  Provisions supplemental and in addition to other powers. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to repeal or modify any city ordinance or provision of the city code relating to the condemning of buildings and structures but the provisions herein shall be supplemental and in addition to the powers that may be exercised by the city council, its officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 2971, § 5, 6-16-04) 
Sec. 22-36. - Requirements for plumbing fixtures, fixture fittings and appliances. 
(a)  Intent. To require reduced flow rates and consumption for plumbing fixtures, fixture fittings, and appliances installed within the city. Such ultra-low volume plumbing fixtures, fixture fittings, and appliances shall comply with the specifications below or with the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) WaterSense Program, where applicable. 
(b)  Requirements for plumbing fixtures. 
(1)  The maximum water consumption flow rates and quantities for all new plumbing fixtures and fixture fittings shall be in accordance with Table A. Permit applications for new residential and commercial structures shall include ultra-low volume plumbing fixtures, fixture fittings and appliances as provided in Table A. Such ultra-low volume plumbing fixtures, fixture fittings and appliances shall comply with the specifications in Table A or have received the EPA WaterSense Label. 
(2)  Exceptions: 
1.  Blowout design water closets having a maximum water consumption of 3.5 gallons (13 L) per flushing cycle. 
2.  Vegetable sprays. 
3.  Clinical sinks having a maximum water consumption of 4.5 gallons (17 L) per flushing cycle. 
4.  Service sinks. 
5.  Emergency showers. 
TABLE - A 
    Maximum Flow Rates and Consumption for Plumbing Fixtures and Fixture Fittings 
Plumbing Fixture or Fixture Fitting Maximum Flow Rate or Quantity Toilet 1.28 gallons per flush with at least 350 gram waste removal Showerhead (a) 1.5 gpm at 80 psi Bathroom faucet 1.5 gpm at 60 psi Urinal Waterless or 0.5 gallon per flushing cycle or less Dishwasher, Residential (standard) 5.0 gallons per cycle or less (Energy Star/Water Sense Certified) Dishwasher, Residential (compact) 3.5 gallons per cycle or less (Energy Star/Water Sense Certified) Washing machine, Residential Water factor of 6 or lower (Energy Star/Water Sense Certified) (b) or 25.2 gallons per load  
gpm: gallons per minute 
psi: pounds per square inch 
(a) A handheld shower spray is a showerhead. 
(b) Water factor in gallons per cycle per cubic foot. 
(Ord. No. 3085, § 2, 11-17-10) 
Secs. 22-37-22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BULKHEAD LINES ON LAKE WORTH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Coastal construction, ch. 23. 

Sec. 22-61. - Area west of Intracoastal Waterway. 
(a)  There is hereby established a bulkhead line for that area of the body of water known as Lake Worth, which lies west of the Intracoastal Waterway and between the southern city limits and the centerline of State Road No. 703 (Blue Heron Boulevard), being parcel no. 1, such bulkhead line being more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the south corporate limits of the City of Riviera Beach on the west side of Lake Worth, as said south corporate limits are defined by section 1 of chapter 9894, Laws of Florida, Acts of 1923, and the northern end of the West Palm Beach bulkhead line Ordinance No. 614, said point being described as follows: Beginning at U.S. harbor line point no. 71 as said U.S. harbor line was approved by Secretary of War Dwight D. Davis on March 13, 1926, thence south 87°57'35? east, a distance of 120 feet to a point in the West Palm Beach bulkhead line; thence north 1°03'44? east along said bulkhead line, a distance of 75 feet to an intersection of said bulkhead line with the south line of section 33, township 42 south, range 43 east, said point being the point of beginning of the herein-described bulkhead line; thence north 11°39'28? east a distance of 183.51 feet; thence north 1°54'46? east a distance of 525.67 feet; thence north 3°32'51? west a distance of 1,576.32 feet to U.S. harbor line point no. 72 C as said U.S. harbor line was approved by Secretary of War Dwight D. Davis on March 13, 1926; thence north 19°01'36.5? west, along said U.S. harbor line, a distance of 481.96 feet to U.S. harbor line point no. 73; thence north 7°03'55.26? west, along said U.S. harbor line, a distance of 1,338.77 feet to U.S. harbor line point no. 75; thence north 3°56'02? west a distance of 461.85 feet; thence north 11°31'22? east a distance of 960.46 feet; thence north 24°12'00? east a distance of 576.35 feet; thence north 21°18'37? east a distance of 331.96 feet; thence north 29°18'48? east a distance of 476.89 feet; thence south 87°38'58? east a distance of 24.87 feet; thence north 50°35'56? east a distance of 101.39 feet; thence north 21°51'00? east a distance of 76.15 feet; thence north 44°37'23? east a distance of 161.05 feet; thence south 87°44'10? east a distance of 33.99 feet; thence north 2°15'50? east a distance of 27.50 feet; thence south 87°44'10? east a distance of 101.17 feet; thence north 2°23'55? east a distance of 61.00 feet; thence north 88°35'50? east a distance of 71.15 feet; thence north 7°33'35? east a distance of 175.26 feet, more or less, to an intersection with the centerline of the right-of-way of State Road No. 703 (Blue Heron Boulevard) according to the plat thereof recorded in Road Plat Book 1, pages 72 to 75 inclusive, public records of Palm Beach County, Florida, said point being also north 87°59'35? east a distance of 133.03 feet easterly of the point of tangency of a 1°00'00? curve as shown on said plat of State Road No. 703 (Blue Heron Boulevard) and the end of the hereinbefore described bulkhead line. 
(b)  There is hereby established a bulkhead line for that area of the body of water known as Lake Worth, which lies west of the Intracoastal Waterway and between the centerline of State Road No. 703 (Blue Heron Boulevard) and the northern city limits, being parcel no. 1-A, such bulkhead line being more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of Blue Heron Boulevard (State Road No. 703) with the southerly extension of the east line of lot 33 of Plat No. 1 of Inlet Shores according to plat of said Inlet Shores on file in the office of the clerk of the circuit court in and for Palm Beach County, Florida, in Book 13 of Plats at page 8; thence south 88°02'35? east along the centerline of said Blue Heron Boulevard (State Road No. 703), a distance of 130.96 feet to the beginning of a one degree curve (1°00') concave to the north; thence along the arc of said one degree curve (1°00') and the centerline of said Blue Heron Boulevard a distance of 427.09 feet to the end of said curve; thence north 87°41'10? east along the centerline of said Blue Heron Boulevard (State Road No. 703) and tangent to the said one degree curve (1°00') a distance of 120.66 feet to an intersection of said centerline with the west end of Memorial (Blue Heron) Bridge and the point of beginning of the bulkhead line hereinafter described; thence north 4°27'23? west along said bulkhead line, a distance of 714.60 feet to a point in the easterly extension of the north line of Barton Park, according to plat of said Barton Park on file in the office of the said clerk of the circuit court in Book 24 of Plats at page 38, said point being 620 feet east of the east right-of-way line of Avenue A, as said Avenue A is shown on said plat of Barton Park, when the above-mentioned distance of 620 feet is measured along the north line of said Barton Park; thence north 28°58'53? west along said bulkhead line a distance of 498.47 feet to a point in the easterly extension, on its same course, of the north line of Miramar Park, according to plat of said Miramar Park on file in the office of the said clerk of the circuit court in Book 24 of Plats at page 66 at a distance of 765.51 feet east of the east right-of-way line of said Avenue A, as said Avenue A is shown on said plat of Miramar Park, when said distance of 765.51 feet is measured along the said easterly extension of the north line of said Miramar Park, thence continue north 28°58'53? west along said bulkhead line a distance of 413.95 feet to the beginning of a curve concave to the east, said curve having a radius of 2,920.82 feet, and a central angle of 28°54'08?; thence around the arc of said curve and along said bulkhead line a distance of 1,473.38 feet to the end of said curve; thence tangent to said curve north 0°04'45? west along said bulkhead line a distance of 442.71 feet to a point in the north corporate limits line of the City of Riviera Beach (north line section 28, township 42 south, range 43 east) and the end of said bulkhead line, said point being 600.38 feet east of the east right-of-way line of said Avenue A when said distance of 600.38 feet is measured along the said north corporate limits line. 
(Code 1957, § 6-29) 
Sec. 22-62. - Area east of Intracoastal Waterway. 
    There is hereby established a bulkhead line for that area of the body of water known as Lake Worth which lies east of the Intracoastal Waterway and between the southern city limits and the northern city limits and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the southerly end of the herein described bulkhead line, said point of beginning being also the northwest corner of lot no. 248, as shown on a plat recorded in Plat Book 27, page 8, of the Public Records of Palm Beach County, said plat entitled, "Palm Beach Isles, Plat No. 3," and dated October 1960, and said point of beginning being also the northerly end of a bulkhead line, as shown on a plat, recorded in Plat Book 27, page 143, and entitled, "Plat of Bulkhead Line, East Side of Lake Worth, Riviera Beach, Florida," and dated October 1961, and from said point of beginning running: (for convenience, the north line of the said "Palm Beach Isles, Plat No. 3" is assumed to bear north 88°05'45? west, and all other bearings herein are relative thereto); thence north 27°00'00? east, said direction being a continuation of the existing bulkhead, a distance of 218.85 feet along western property lines of lots 26 and 25, Plat of Pine Point, Riviera Beach, Florida, as recorded in Plat Book 30 at page 163, to a point which is also the northwest corner of lot 25 of the said plat; thence east (the north line of said lot 25 is assumed to bear east and all other bearings are relative thereto) a distance of 210 feet more or less along northern boundary of the Plat of Pine Point to a point of intersection with the submerged land lines as recorded in Deed Book 205, page 82, in and for the records of Palm Beach County, Florida. 
(Code 1957, § 6-30) 
Sec. 22-63. - Filling prohibited. 
    From and after February 27, 1963, no fill or filling or other creation or extension of lands shall be made or maintained in the above-described areas of the city, east (easterly or channel-ward) of the bulkhead line established in section 22-61, nor west (westwardly or channel-ward) of the bulkhead line established in section 22-62. 
(Code 1957, § 6-31) 
Sec. 22-64. - Additional bulkhead lines. 
    Additional bulkhead lines are as follows: 
(1)  Bulkhead A. Commence at the intersection of the base line of survey for State Road A-1-A with the centerline of Lake Drive (north of A-1-A) extended southerly, which is station 144 + 99.55 in section 27, township 42 south, range 43 east; thence south 87°12'34? west along said base line of survey a distance of 2932.55 feet to the point of beginning of the herein described bulkhead line; as shown on the bulkhead line map as approved by the board of county commissioners of Palm Beach County dated the 21st day of March, 1972; thence south 02°47'26? east a distance of 155 feet; thence south 87°12'34? west a distance of 40 feet, more or less, to a point in the existing bulkhead along the west shore of Lake Worth and the end of the herein-described bulkhead line. 
(2)  Bulkhead B. Commence at the intersection of said Lake Drive with the aforesaid base line of survey of State Road A-1-A, run south 87°12'34? west a distance of 599.55 feet to the point of beginning; thence south 02°47'26? east a distance of 606.15 feet; thence north 88°30'26? west a distance of 256.08 feet along the corporate line of Palm Beach Shores; thence south 02°26'51? east a distance of 32.98 feet along said corporate limits; thence south 87°12'34? west a distance of 1044.44 feet; thence north 02°47'26? west a distance of 690 feet; thence north 87°12'34? east a distance of 221 feet, more or less, to a point in the existing seawall along the west shore of the Phil Foster Park and the end of the herein-described Bulkhead Line. 
(3)  Bulkhead C. Commence at the intersection of said Lake Drive with the aforesaid baseline of survey of State Road A-1-A, run south 87°12'34? west a distance of 309.55 feet to the point of beginning; thence north 02°47'26? west a distance of 50 feet; thence north 87°12'34? east a distance of 11 feet, more or less, to point "x," said point being in the existing bulkhead and the end of said described bulkhead line; thence from the aforesaid point of beginning, run south 02°47'26? a distance of 50 feet; thence north 87°12'34? east a distance of five feet, more or less, to point "y", said point being in the existing bulkhead and the end of the herein-described bulkhead line. 
(Code 1957, § 6-31.1) 
Sec. 22-65. - Permits for construction of islands, extension of lands-Application. 
    Any person desiring to construct islands or to add to or extend existing lands bordering on the waters of Lake Worth by pumping, dredging or dumping sand, rock or earth or by any other means shall first make application to the city council for permission to do so. Such written application shall be accompanied by a plan or drawing showing the proposed construction and shall also show the area from which any fill material is to be dredged if the proposed construction is intended to be created from dredged material. If such application is found by the city council not to be violative of any statute, zoning law, ordinance or other restriction which may be applicable thereto, that no harmful obstruction to or alteration of the natural flow of the adjacent navigable waters will arise from the proposed construction, that no harmful or increased erosion, shoalling of channels or stagnant areas of water will be created thereby, or that no material injury or monetary damage to adjoining land will accrue therefrom, the permit shall be granted to the applicant; provided, however, that the city engineer has approved such plans and subject further to the approval of the trustees of the internal improvement fund of the state. 
(Code 1957, § 6-32) 
Sec. 22-66. - Same-Duration; revocation. 
    All permits issued under section 22-65 shall be valid for a period of two years from the date thereof, but shall be automatically revoked if the proposed work is not completed within such period, except for good cause shown. Such permits shall also be subject to revocation for noncompliance therewith or a violation thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 6-33) 
Sec. 22-67. - Provisions construed. 
    Nothing contained in section 22-65 shall be construed as authorizing the extension of land or placing of any fill beyond the bulkhead lines established in sections 22-61 and 22-62, nor beyond any bulkhead line now or hereafter established by the city, the county, the state, the United States of America, or any of their authorized agencies. 
(Code 1957, § 6-34) 
Sec. 22-68. - Penalty for violations; continuing violations. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article or any provision hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  Each day any such unlawful fill or extension of land shall continue to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1957, §§ 6-35, 6-36) 
Secs. 22-69-22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE LIMITS AND FIRE HAZARDS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 6. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-101. - Fire limits established. 
    There is hereby established, in and for the city, an inner fire limit, a second fire limit and an outer fire limit. 
(Code 1957, § 6-47) 
Sec. 22-102. - Inner fire limit described. 
    The boundaries of the inner fire limit are shown upon the map designated as the fire limit map on file with the city clerk. An area shall be deemed to be within the inner fire limit if one-third or more of the lot area is located therein, except that in unplatted lands lying adjacent to Broadway, the inner fire limit shall extend 250 feet east and 250 feet west of the centerline of Broadway, and the requirements of this fire limit shall apply only to this portion of these properties. 
(Code 1957, § 6-48) 
Sec. 22-103. - Second fire limit described. 
    The boundaries of the second fire limit are shown upon the map which is on file with the city clerk, designated as the fire limit map. An area shall be deemed to be within the second fire limit if one-third or more of the lot area is located therein; except, however, whenever any lot area of the second fire limit lies within the inner fire limit as shown on the fire limit map, the entire lot area shall be deemed to be within the inner fire limit. 
(Code 1957, § 6-49) 
Sec. 22-104. - Outer fire limit described. 
    The outer fire limit shall include all of that territory not designated as inner and second fire limits; except, however, whenever any lot area of the outer fire limit lies within the second fire limit, as shown on the fire limit map, the entire lot area shall be deemed to be within the second fire limit. 
(Code 1957, § 6-50) 
Secs. 22-105-22-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ORDERS TO REMEDY OR REMOVE DANGEROUS CONDITIONS 

Sec. 22-131. - Duty of inspectors; compliance with order; appeal to city manager. 
    Whenever any officer or member of the fire department authorized by the chief to make inspections shall find in any building or upon any premises or other place combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulation of rubbish or oil waste, ashes in combustible receptacles, unnecessary accumulation of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any other highly inflammable materials especially liable to fire, and which are so situated as to endanger property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows liable to interfere with the operation of the fire department or egress of occupants, in case of fire, or fire doors or shutters obstructed or in poor repair or interior fire equipment not in serviceable condition, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or building, subject to appeal, within 24 hours to the city manager, who shall, within three days, review such order and file his written decision thereon. Unless the order is revoked or modified, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by such owner or occupant. 
(Code 1957, § 6-51) 
Sec. 22-132. - Service of order. 
    The service of any order under the provisions of section 22-131 shall be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed by either delivering a true copy of the order to such occupant personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or, in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a true copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance to the premises. Such order may be served by either delivery to and leaving with such person a true copy of such order; or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer serving the order, by sending such copy by registered mail to the owner's last-known post office address. 
(Code 1957, § 6-52) 
Sec. 22-133. - Failure to comply with order. 
    Any owner or occupant failing to comply with any order issued under the provisions of section 22-151 within three days after the appeal provided for in such section shall have been determined; or, if no appeal is taken, then within three days after the service of such order, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished upon conviction as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1957, § 6-53) 
Secs. 22-134-22-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDING OF VACANT BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 

Sec. 22-151. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings. The city finds, determines, and declares that buildings which remain vacant and unoccupied for any significant period of time become: 
(1)  An attractive nuisance or dangerous condition to children; 
(2)  A harborage for insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests; 
(3)  An invitation to criminals as a temporary abode and as a place to conduct illegal activities, frequently including illegal drug-related activities; and 
(4)  An increased fire hazard. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents and citizens of the city by establishing and enforcing a means by which such nuisance conditions may be prevented and abated. 
(Ord. No. 3084, § 1, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 22-152. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any structure that is enclosing a space used for sheltering any occupancy. The term "building" shall include commercial buildings, single or multi-family dwellings and vacant structures, whether occupied or not. 
    Owner means any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who, individually or jointly or severally with others, holds legal or beneficial title to any building or premises subject to the provisions of this article. 
    Vacant building or structure means any building or structure without a lawful tenant or lawful occupant or without a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3084, § 1, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 22-153. - Provisions supplemental. 
    The provisions of this article shall be supplementary and complementary to all of the provisions of this code, state law, and any law cognizable in common law or in equity, and nothing in this article shall be read, interpreted, or construed in any manner so as to limit any existing right or power of the city to abate any and all nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 3084, § 1, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 22-154. - Responsibility for property maintenance. 
    Every owner of real property within the city is required to maintain such property in a manner so as to not violate the provisions of this article, and such owner remains liable for violations thereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such property. 
(Ord. No. 3084, § 1, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 22-155. - Nuisance declared. 
    It is declared unlawful and a public nuisance for any owner of any real property in the city to maintain such property or to permit such property to be maintained in such a manner that either of the following conditions are found to exist on the property: 
(1)  Any vacant building or structure whose doors, windows, roof, or other openings are broken or missing, so as to allow access to the interior of the building; or 
(2)  Any vacant building or structure whose doors, windows, roof, or other openings are not secured in compliance with each of the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3084, § 1, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 22-156. - Boarding certificates. 
(a)  All boarded buildings shall require a boarding certificate issued by the city. The fee for the boarding certificate shall be established by the city council. 
(b)  No person shall erect, install, place or maintain boards over the doors, windows or other openings of any building or structure or otherwise secure such openings by a means other than the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure without first applying for and, within 30 days, completing all steps necessary for the issuance of a boarding certificate and thereafter having a valid and current boarding certificate therefore from the building official. 
(c)  The building official shall issue a boarding certificate required by subsection (a) upon the submission of a written application and two copies of detailed boarding plan by the property owner or the property owner's authorized representative or contractor; upon the payment of the required fee; and upon confirmation through inspection by a city inspector that the building or structure has been secured as required by this article. 
(d)  The boarding certificate issued pursuant to this section shall authorize the boarding or securing of a building or structure for a period of no longer than one year from the date of issuance. The boarding certificate may be renewed for an additional one-year period provided that: 
(1)  The property owner submits a written application for extension no later than ten days prior to expiration of the original certificate and pays the fee for such extension established by the city council; and 
(2)  The city confirms through inspection that the building or structure has been secured as required by this article. 
(e)  The city's renewal of a boarding certificate beyond the original one-year period shall be subject to each of the following conditions: 
(1)  The property owner or the property owner's authorized representative or contractor shall submit to the building official two copies of detailed plan for correction, repair, or rehabilitation of violations of state or local building and housing standards and for the securing of the doors, windows, roof and other openings by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure or, alternatively, a detailed plan for sale of the property to another person or entity with provision in the sale for correction, repair, or rehabilitation; 
(2)  The property owner or the property owner's authorized representative shall submit a time line for applying for appropriate permits for such work and for completing such work prior to the expiration of the renewal certificate, or, alternatively, a time line for the sale of the property; and 
(3)  The city may revoke the renewal certificate by written notice of the building official if the owner fails to comply with the plan for such work or fails to comport to the time line submitted. 
(f)  A boarding certificate may not be extended beyond the renewal period except upon demonstration that good cause for the extension exists. Good cause shall require a showing by the property owner that the certificate extension is made necessary by conditions or events beyond the owner's control, such as inability to obtain financing for repair or rehabilitation, inability to locate a suitable buyer, unanticipated delays in construction or rehabilitation, or unanticipated damage to the property. In addition, where appropriate, good cause shall also require a showing by the property owner that he/she has exercised reasonable and due diligence in attempting to complete the needed correction, repair, or rehabilitation, or is attempting to sell the property. If the building official determines that there exists good cause to extend the certificate, the building official may extend the certificate for a period of up to, but not more than, an additional six months subject to all of the same conditions imposed on the original renewal certificate including the payment of all applicable fees. 
(Ord. No. 3084, § 1, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 22-157. - Standards for securing buildings and structures. 
(a)  Specifications. The boarding of the doors, windows, roof or openings of any building or structure, or any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Securing by boarding: 
a.  Windows and similar openings shall be boarded with exterior grade plywood of minimum thickness of five-eighths inch nominal or its equivalent. Vent holes may be required, as deemed necessary by the city. The plywood shall be secured in place by two inches by four inches or four inches by four inches crossmembers. secured to the plywood by three-eighths inch plated carriage bolts with large washers at each end and with the crossmember turned so that the carriage bolt goes through the larger dimension. Bolts used to secure the crossmember shall be threaded to the correct length. A minimum of two crossmembers shall be used on each window and, depending on the size of the opening, additional crossmembers may be required. Each crossmember shall be a continuous piece of lumber, and each must extend at least one foot past the window opening in each direction. Bolts and nuts used to secure the crossmembers to the plywood must be tightened enough to slightly deflect the wood. Bolt heads must fit tightly against the wood and will not allow for access by pliers or pry bars. 
b.  Exterior doors shall be boarded with exterior grade plywood of a minimum thickness of five-eighths inch nominal or its equivalent, fitted to the entry door jamb with maximum one-eighth inch clearance for each edge. The existing door should be removed and stored inside the building. The plywood shall be attached to three horizontal two inches by four inches wooden crossbars each with two three-eighths inch carriage bolts and matching hardware. The plywood shall be attached to the door entry with three casehardened strap hinges of the type specified by the building official and the plywood shall be secured by a case-hardened steel hasp and minimum two-inch case-hardened padlock also of a type specified by the city. 
(2)  Painting of boarded openings. All boarded openings shall be painted with a minimum of one coat of exterior paint that is of a color compatible with the exterior color of the building or structure. 
(3)  Alternate methods. Upon application for a boarding certificate, the building official may approve alternate methods of securing an unoccupied and vacant building or structure. In making the determination to approve any alternate method, the city shall consider the aesthetic and other impacts of such method on the immediate neighborhood and the extent to which such method provides adequate and long-term security against unauthorized entry to the property. 
(b)  Additional requirements. In connection with the boarding of the doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure, or any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, the owner shall also comply with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  All utility service to the building or structure shall be terminated by removal of the meters and termination of electric power at the pole. Compliance with this subsection may be waived in writing by the city as to the electric utility service if electricity is needed to power exterior security lighting, an alarm system, or equipment to be used in connection with the rehabilitation of the building or structure for which there is an active and current building permit. 
(2)  The sewer shall be capped in a manner approved by the city so as to prevent the accumulation of methane gas in the building or structure. 
(3)  The interior of the building or structure shall be cleaned of all trash, junk, garbage, debris, and solid waste, and personal possessions shall be removed from the interior of the building or structure, so as to eliminate any fire or health hazard and to prevent hindrance to firefighting equipment or personnel in the event of a fire. 
(Ord. No. 3084, § 1, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 22-158. - Exceptions. 
    A boarding certificate shall not be required for: 
(1)  Temporary emergency situations, including, but not limited to, hurricane preparation and damage caused by weather. 
(2)  City-owned property, provided, however, that such property shall be secured in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3084, § 1, 10-20-10) 
Sec. 22-159. - Violations; enforcement; demolition. 
    Violations of this article shall be enforced pursuant to any of the following provisions: 
(1)  Chapter 2, article VI of the City Code (Code enforcement). 
(2)  Section 1-11 of the City Code. 
(3)  By injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction upon a suit brought by the city. 
(4)  Demolition. If the property is vandalized or becomes unsecure; becomes a location for criminal activity; or remains boarded for longer than one year and otherwise qualifies as an unsafe building; the city may declare the building unsafe and demolish the structure in accordance with section 22-35 of the City Code. 
(4)  All other legal or equitable remedies and penalties available to the city under this Code, federal law, state law or common law. 
(Ord. No. 3084, § 1, 10-20-10) 
Chapter 23 - COASTAL CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Deposit of cost of notice required with applications for permits, § 2-1; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; bulkhead lines on Lake Worth, § 22-61 et seq.; flood prevention and protection, ch. 25; planning, ch. 27; signs, ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; subdivisions, ch. 30; zoning, ch. 31; site plan review procedure, § 31-56 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Title. 
    The provisions contained in this chapter shall constitute the coastal construction code for construction within the coastal building zone and coastal barrier islands in the city and may be referred to as the coastal code. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-1) 
Sec. 23-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Beach means the zone of unconsolidated material that extends landward from the mean low water line to the place where there is marked change in material or physiographic form, or to the line of permanent vegetation, usually the effective limit of storm waves. "Beach" is alternatively termed "shore." 
    Breakaway wall or frangible wall means a partition independent of supporting structural members that will withstand design wind forces, but will fail under hydrostatic, wave and runup forces associated with the design storm surge. Under such conditions, the wall shall fail in a manner such that it breaks up into components that will minimize the potential for damage to life or adjacent property. 
    Building support structure means any structure which supports floor, wall or column loads, and transmits them to the foundation. The term includes beams, grade beams of joists, and includes the lowest horizontal structural member exclusive of piles, columns or footings. 
    Coastal barrier islands means geological features which are completely surrounded by marine waters that front upon the open waters of the Gulf of Mexico, Atlantic Ocean, Florida Bay or Strait of Florida and are composed of quartz sands, clays, limestone, oolites, rock, coral, coquina, sediment or other material, including soil disposal, which features lie above the line of mean high water. Mainland areas which were separated from the mainland by artificial channelization for the purpose of assisting marine commerce shall not be considered coastal barrier islands. 
    Coastal building zone means the land area 1,500 feet landward of the coastal construction control line established pursuant to F.S. § 161.053. For those coastal cities and counties for which no coastal construction control line has been established, the coastal building zone is defined as that land area 3,000 feet landward from the mean high water line. On coastal barrier islands, the coastal building zone is defined as the area 5,000 feet landward from the coastal construction control line or the entire island, whichever is less. On barrier islands for which no coastal construction control line has been established, the coastal building zone is the area 5,000 feet landward from the mean high water line or the entire island, whichever is less. 
    Column action means the potential elastic instability in piles or columns resulting in axial or lateral bending of the member due to compressive stress. 
    Construction means the carrying out of any building, clearing, filling or excavation or the making of any material change in the size or use of any structure or the appearance of any land. When appropriate to the context, "construction" refers to the act of construction or the result of construction. 
    Dune means a mound or ridge of loose sediments, usually sand-sized, lying landward of the beach and deposited by natural or artificial means. 
    Major structure means and includes, but is not limited to, residential buildings including mobile homes, commercial, institutional, industrial and other construction having the potential for substantial impact on coastal zones. 
    Mean high water line means the intersection of the tidal plane of mean high water with the shore. Mean high water is the average height of high waters over a 19-year period. (See F.S. § 177.27(15)). 
    Minor structure means and includes, but is not limited to, pile-supported, elevated dune and beach walkover structures; beach access ramps and walkways; stairways; pile-supported elevated viewing platforms, gazebos and boardwalks; lifeguard support stands; public and private bathhouses; sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, shuffleboard courts, tennis courts, handball courts, racquetball courts and other uncovered paved areas; earth retaining walls; sand fences, privacy fences, ornamental walls, ornamental garden structures, aviaries and other ornamental construction. It shall be a characteristic of minor structures that they are considered to be expendable under design wind, wave and storm forces. 
    NGVD means National Geodetic Vertical Datum, which is a geodetic datum established by the National Ocean Service and frequently referred to as the 1929 Mean Sea Level Datum. 
    Nonhabitable major structure means and includes, but is not limited to, swimming pools; parking garages; pipelines; piers; canals, lakes, ditches, drainage structures and other water retention structures; water and sewage treatment plants; electrical power plants, transmission and distribution lines, transformer pads, vaults and substations; roads, bridges, streets and highways; underground storage tanks; communications buildings and towers; flagpoles and signs over 15 feet in height. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-4) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 23-3. - Applicability. 
    The requirements of this chapter shall apply to the following types of construction in the coastal building zone and on coastal barrier islands in the city: 
(1)  New construction of, or improvement to major structures, nonhabitable major structures and minor structures as defined in section 23-2. 
(2)  Construction which would change or alter the character of the shoreline (e.g., excavation, grading, paving). This chapter shall not apply to minor work in the nature of normal beach cleaning or debris removal. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-3(a)) 
Sec. 23-4. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for the design and construction of buildings and structures to reduce the harmful effects of hurricanes and other natural disasters occurring along the coastal areas of the city which front on the Atlantic Ocean. These standards are intended to specifically address design features which affect the structural stability of the beach, dunes and topography of adjacent properties. This chapter is site specific to the coastal building zone and coastal barrier islands and is not applicable to other locations. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and other provisions of this Code, the requirements resulting in more restrictive design shall apply. No provision in this chapter shall be construed to permit any construction in any area prohibited by local city, county or state regulation. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-2) 
Sec. 23-5. - Existing structures. 
    The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to existing structures, structures under construction or structures for which a valid and unexpired municipal or county building permit was issued prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-3(b)) 
Sec. 23-6. - Multi-zone structures. 
    For structures located partially in the coastal building zone, the requirements of this chapter shall apply to the entire structure. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-3(c)) 
Sec. 23-7. - Construction seaward of mean high water, exemptions. 
    Structures or construction extending seaward of the mean high water line which are regulated by F.S. § 161.041 (e.g., groins, jetties, moles, breakwaters, seawalls, revetments, beach nourishment, inlet dredging, etc.), are specifically exempt from the provisions of this chapter. In addition, this chapter does not apply to piers, pipelines or outfalls which are regulated pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 161.053. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-3(d)) 
Sec. 23-8. - Applications for building permits. 
    Applications for building permits for all construction in the coastal building zone and on coastal barrier islands, if not of normal or usual design as determined by the building official, shall be certified by an architect or professional engineer registered in the state. Such certification shall state that the design plans and specifications for the construction are in compliance with the criteria established by this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-3(e)) 
Sec. 23-9. - Construction requirements generally. 
    Construction within the coastal building zone and on coastal barrier islands shall meet the requirements of this chapter. All structures shall be designed so as to minimize damage to life, property and the natural environment. Assistance in determining the design parameters to minimize such damage may be found in the reference documents listed in section 23-21. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-5(a)) 
Secs. 23-10-23-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STRUCTURAL STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-21. - Publication references used. 
    Assistance in determining the design parameters and methodologies necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter may be obtained from: 
(1)  Shore Protection Manual, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 4th edition, 1984. 
(2)  U.S. Department of the Army, Coastal Engineering Research Center's Technical Papers and Reports. 
(3)  Florida Department of Natural Resources, Division of Beaches and Shores Technical and Design Memoranda. 
(4)  Naval Facilities Engineering Command Design Manual, NAVFAC DM-26, U.S. Department of the Navy. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-7) 
Sec. 23-22. - Location of construction. 
    Construction, except for elevated walkways, lifeguard support stands, piers, beach access ramps, gazebos and coastal or shore protection structures, shall be located a sufficient distance landward of the beach to permit natural shoreline fluctuations and to preserve dune stability. Construction, including excavation, may occur to the extent that the natural storm buffering and protection capability of the dune is not diminished. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-5(e)) 
Sec. 23-23. - Public access areas. 
    Where the public has established an accessway through private lands to lands seaward of the mean high tide or water line by prescription, prescriptive easement or any other legal means, development or construction shall not interfere with such right of access unless a comparable alternative accessway is provided. The developer shall have the right to improve, consolidate or relocate such public accessways so long as they are: 
(1)  Of substantially similar quality and convenience to the public; 
(2)  Approved by the local government; and 
(3)  Consistent with the coastal management element of the local comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to F.S. § 163.3178. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-6) 
Sec. 23-24. - Nonhabitable major structures. 
    Nonhabitable major structures need not meet the specific structural requirements of sections 23-41 through 23-48, except that they shall be designed to produce the minimum adverse impact on the beach and dune system and shall comply with the applicable standards of construction found elsewhere in this chapter. All sewage treatment and public water supply systems shall be floodproofed to prevent infiltration of surface water anticipated under design storm conditions. Underground utilities, excluding pad transformers and vaults, shall be floodproofed to prevent infiltration of surface water expected under design storm conditions or shall otherwise be designed to function when submerged under such storm conditions. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-5(c)) 
Sec. 23-25. - Minor structures. 
    Minor structures need not meet the specific structural requirements of sections 23-41 through 23-48, except that they shall be designed to produce the minimum adverse impact on the beach and dune system and shall comply with the applicable standards of construction found elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-5(d)) 
Secs. 23-26-23-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAJOR STRUCTURES 

Sec. 23-41. - Foundations. 
(a)  All major structures shall be anchored to their foundations in such a manner as to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral displacement. 
(b)  Foundation design and construction shall consider all anticipated loads resulting from design storm conditions, including wave, hydrodynamic, hydrostatic and wind loads acting simultaneously with dead loads. Erosion computations for foundation design shall account for all vertical and lateral erosion and scour-producing forces, including localized scour due to the presence of structural components. 
(1)  Pile foundations shall be required for buildings located in federal emergency management agency flood insurance rate map V (velocity) zones or where impacted by wave action. 
a.  Pile dimensions, spacing and embedment shall be designed consistent with the requirements of the site, taking into account all vertical, lateral, erosion and scour-producing forces. 
b.  Piles shall be driven to a penetration which achieves adequate bearing capacity, taking into consideration the anticipated loss of soil above the design grade. 
c.  In addition to the normal foundation analysis, the pile foundation analysis shall consider piles in column action, where appropriate, from the bottom of the support structure to the design grade. 
d.  Consideration shall also be given to the degree of exposure to wave attack and the resulting impact loads on lateral or diagonal bracing between piles. 
(2)  Monolithic foundations may be permitted in federal emergency management agency flood insurance rate map A or B zones or in locations not impacted by wave action. 
a.  Monolithic foundations may be used if soil conditions permit and if located at an elevation which minimizes their effect on the beach and adjacent properties. Due consideration shall be given to their vulnerability to erosion under design storm conditions. 
b.  If a monolithic foundation is used, the maximum elevation of the top of the slab is to be below the design scour depth (see Chapter 5.28, Shore Protection Manual, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 4th edition, 1984) unless positive methods are provided to prevent scour. 
c.  Other types of spread footings such as running footers or pads may be permitted when positive methods are provided to prevent scour. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-5(b)(1)) 
Sec. 23-42. - Understructures. 
    No substantial walls or partitions of any major structure shall be constructed below the level of the first finished floor. This does not preclude the construction of: 
(1)  Stairways; 
(2)  Shearwalls essentially perpendicular to breaking waves; 
(3)  Shearwalls essentially parallel to breaking waves which do not exceed a maximum of 20 percent of the building length; 
(4)  Wind or sand screens constructed of fabric or wire mesh; 
(5)  Light open lattice partitions with individual wooden lattice strips no greater than three-fourths-inch thick or three inches wide; 
(6)  Elevator shafts; 
(7)  Breakaway or frangible walls; or 
(8)  Substantial walls constructed above the wave action and storm surge expected under design storm conditions. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-5(b)(2)) 
Sec. 23-43. - Building and floor elevations. 
    The minimum elevation for the underside of the building support structure, excluding foundation, shall be above the elevation of the design breaking wave crests or wave uprush superimposed on the storm surge with dynamic wave setup expected under design storm conditions. The elevation of the storm surge with dynamic wave setup shall be either the elevation established by the Florida Department of Natural Resources Coastal Construction Control Line Study or the base flood elevation for the specific area established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as determined by the design engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-5(b)(3)) 
Sec. 23-44. - Erosion and design grade. 
    The elevation of the soil surface to be used in the design of foundations, calculation of pile reactions and bearing capacities shall not be greater than that which would result from the erosion reasonably anticipated as a result of design storm conditions. Calculation of the design grade shall take into account localized scour due to the presence of structural components. Erosion computations for foundation design shall consider all vertical and lateral erosion and scour-producing forces. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-5(b)(4)) 
Sec. 23-45. - Wave force design. 
(a)  Calculations for wave forces resulting from design storm conditions on building foundations and superstructures may be based upon the minimum criteria and methods prescribed in the Naval Facilities Engineering Command Design Manual, NAVFAC DM-26, U.S. Department of Navy; Shore Protection Manual, U.S. Department of the Army Corps of Engineers; U.S. Department of the Army Coastal Engineering Research Center Technical Papers and Reports; the Technical and Design Memoranda of the Division of Beaches and Shores, Florida Department of Natural Resources; or other professionally recognized methodologies which produce equivalent design criteria. 
(b)  Breaking, broken and nonbreaking waves shall be considered as applicable. Design wave loading analysis shall consider vertical uplift pressures and all lateral pressures to include impact as well as dynamic loading and the harmonic intensification resulting from repetitive waves. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-5(b)(5)) 
Sec. 23-46. - Hydrostatic loads. 
    Calculations for hydrostatic loads shall consider the maximum water pressure resulting from a fully peaked, breaking wave superimposed upon the design storm surge with dynamic wave setup. Both free and hydrostatic loads shall be considered. Hydrostatic loads which are confined shall be determined using the maximum elevation to which the confined water would freely rise if unconfined. Vertical hydrostatic loads shall be considered both vertically downward and upward on horizontal or inclined surfaces of major structures (e.g., floors, slabs, roofs, walls). Lateral hydrostatic loads shall be considered as forces acting horizontally abovegrade and belowgrade on vertical or inclined surfaces. Hydrostatic loads on irregular or curved geometric surfaces shall be determined by considering the separate vertical and horizontal components acting simultaneously under the distribution of the hydrostatic pressures. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-5(b)(6)) 
Sec. 23-47. - Hydrodynamic loads. 
    Hydrodynamic loads shall consider the maximum water pressures resulting from the motion of the water mass associated with the design storm. Full intensity loading shall be applied on all structural surfaces above the design grade which would affect the flow velocities. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-5(b)(7)) 
Sec. 23-48. - Design conditions. 
(a)  Foundations for all major structures shall be designed for the horizontal and vertical pressures generated by wave forces between the elevation of the design breaking wave crests or wave uprush superimposed upon the storm surge and the stable soil elevation of the site. 
(b)  All major structures, except mobile homes, shall be designed to withstand 140 miles per hour windspeeds. Horizontal wind velocity pressures shall not be less than the values given below: 
Basic Wind Velocity Design Pressure 
(Pounds per Square Foot) 
  Standard Building Code  So. Florida Building Code  Height 
  (ft.) Pressure 
(psf)  Height 
  (ft.) Pressure 
(psf)   0-30  41   0-5  30  31-50  54   5-15  37  51-100  65  15-25  45 101-200  79  25-35  50 201-300  92  35-55  56 301-400 101  55-75  63 401-500 109  75-100  68 501-800 121 100-150  75 801-1000 133 150-250  83 Over 1000 137 250-350  97 350-550 109 550-750 121 750-1000 132 Over 1000 137  
*The above table is based upon the formula p = .00256 × V 2 × (H/30) 27 , where: 
P = pressure in pounds/square foot V = 140 mph H = height above grade in feet  
(c)  Appropriate shape factors shall be applied for resistance against overturning and uplift as required elsewhere in this code. Internal pressures on internal walls, ceilings and floors resulting from damaged windows or doors shall also be considered in the design unless the specified windows and doors have been tested by an approved testing agency and have been shown to be capable of withstanding the design pressures required herein. 
(d)  Mobile homes shall conform to the federal mobile home construction and safety standards of the Uniform Standards Code ANSI book A-119.1, pursuant to F.S. § 320.823, in addition to the other requirements contained in this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 5A-5(b)(8)) 
Secs. 23-49-23-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WETLANDS PRESERVATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 31. 

Sec. 23-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    CDEC means the department of community development and environmental control. 
    Debris line means the line of debris left on the shore by high tide or ordinary high water. 
    Development means any of the following activities within wetlands: any filling, excavating, dredging, earth moving, grading, paving, dumping of liquid or solid wastes, constructing, expanding or relocating of any structure, drilling or reactivation of wells, and cutting, uprooting, polluting, flooding or other altering of vegetation. 
    Drip line means a line established by projecting a vertical line from the outer edge of the vegetation canopy to the ground below. 
    Mean high water line means the average of the elevation of all high tides in an area over a period of 19 years. 
    Ordinary high water line means the line of the average high water elevation as determined by data taken over the previous one year period in those areas that are not subject to tidal influence. 
    Upland means the area landward of the wetlands preservation area, and dominated by species other than those listed in appendix II, to the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    Wetlands mean those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation capable of growth and reproduction and typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, tidal basins and similar areas, which are periodically inundated with fresh, salt or brackish water. Wetlands do not include artificially created on-site retention ponds designated for drainage purposes. Wetlands are identified by vegetation in appendix II to the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    Wetlands preservation area means the area consisting of wetlands and transitional/buffer zone, and identified in appendix I to the ordinance from which this article is derived, in which no development may occur except as specified within this article. 
(Ord. No. 2153, § 2, 4-7-82) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 23-82. - Legislative intent. 
(a)  The city council finds that the spread of development and increasing demands upon natural resources are encroaching upon, despoiling and eliminating the wetland areas and mangrove species within the corporate limits of the city. These wetlands serve important natural biological functions, including food chain production, general habitat and nesting, spawning, rearing and resting sites for aquatic or land species and filtering of stormwater pollutants from runoff. Wetlands are ecosystems and are integral to larger estuarine zone ecosystems, supporting plant species and species communities, which are in delicate balance. Seemingly minor physical alterations could stress a delicately balanced system and cause severe damage to the kinds and abundance of plant and animal species inhabiting the wetlands. Wetlands are vital areas that constitute a productive and valuable public resource, the destruction of which is contrary to the public interest. 
(b)  It is the intent of the city council to conserve and protect the natural resources and scenic beauty of the lands within the corporate limits of the city adjacent to the waters of the Atlantic Ocean and Lake Worth, by prohibiting any activity that would destroy or significantly disrupt the biological capacity of areas. It is the intent of the city council to carry out the policies of the comprehensive plan to preserve and protect mangroves and tidal areas from off-site and on-site developmental impacts. 
(Ord. No. 2153, § 1, 4-7-82) 
Sec. 23-83. - Designation and delineation of wetlands preservation areas. 
(a)  Designation: The general location of wetlands preservation areas within the city to be regulated by this article is hereby noted on an official Wetlands Preservation Area Map, City of Riviera Beach, which shall be made a part of this article as appendix I to the ordinance from which this article is derived. The CDEC is authorized to amend/update the official map when necessary, as authorized by the planning and zoning board. 
(b)  Delineation of wetlands preservation area: 
(1)  A wetlands preservation area shall be composed of: 
a.  Wetlands area; and 
b.  Transitional/buffer zone. 
(2)  Wetland area, for purposes of delineation, are those lands which are covered by water and/or dominated by the species, either singly or in combination, listed in appendix II to the ordinance from which this article is derived, and made a part of this article. When vegetation indices are used, the perimeter of the wetlands shall be determined by establishing a circumference taken from points determined by the most landward driplines of the applicable vegetation. In the absence of vegetation, or if more restrictive, the boundary of the wetlands may be determined by a survey of the mean high water line, ordinary high water line, or debris line, as determined by a registered surveyor. 
(3)  Transitional/buffer zone is that area ten feet landward of the determined perimeter of the wetlands. A five-foot landscape strip with a six-foot wall may be substituted at the discretion of the CDEC. 
(c)  Burden of determination. It is not the intent of this section to set the specific dimensions of each designated wetlands preservation area. The burden of determining the specific boundaries, according to the criteria set forth in this article, shall be upon the applicant. The CDEC shall determine whether the preservation boundaries are sufficient, according to the definitions contained within this article. 
(Ord. No. 2153, § 3, 4-7-82) 
Sec. 23-84. - Prohibited activities within wetlands preservation area. 
    Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Place or deposit, or permit to be placed or deposited, any debris, fill or any materials, including structures, into, within or upon any wetlands. 
(2)  Dig, dredge or in any way alter or remove material or vegetation from wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 2153, § 4, 4-7-82) 
Sec. 23-85. - Uses permitted where natural character of land is not disturbed. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, with proper permit per section 23-87, in wetlands preservation areas, provided they do not disturb the natural character of the land. This shall mean that the activity will not significantly disturb the wetlands habitat, by reason of removal or deposition of material, will not cause the alteration or obstruction of water flow, will not result in the pollution of the wetlands, or damage existing wetlands vegetation. 
(1)  Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish and wildlife. 
(2)  Modification of wetlands to enhance the existing natural environment. This may include opening culverts to increase tidal flow or expansion of the wetlands area. 
(3)  Trimming of mangroves, as approved by county environmental control officer and after notification to the CDEC. Proof of county permit shall be acceptable as to satisfying city permit process. 
(Ord. No. 2153, § 5, 4-7-82) 
Sec. 23-86. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  In cases of practical difficulty in utilization of land as permitted by zoning, special exceptions may be granted to allow modification of the wetlands, which shall be determined by public hearings before the planning and zoning board and the city council. The applicant for a special exception must demonstrate that all of the following apply: 
(1)  Granting the special exception would not be contrary to the public interest. 
(2)  Applicant would otherwise be denied all reasonable use of property, i.e., modification for access necessary. 
(3)  No other feasible alternative exists to accomplish the permitted use. (Proposed alternative is least damaging to wetlands.) 
(4)  All reasonable technical improvements and safeguards for implementation have been or will be carried out. 
(5)  That the modification will result in little, if any, reduction in the natural capacity of the wetlands to support biological life, prevent flooding and facilitate drainage. 
(6)  Means exist for restoring any damage to wetlands, particularly mangroves. 
(b)  A granting of a special exception in the cause for the terms and conditions of this section shall be effective only upon approval by unanimous vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2153, § 6, 4-7-82; Ord. No. 2534, § 1, 6-19-91) 
Sec. 23-87. - Permit procedures. 
    No development shall occur within or adjacent to the wetlands preservation area unless a permit has been issued in accordance with this article. The following information shall accompany all requests for development permits within the wetlands preservation area: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant and the applicant's agent, if any, and whether the applicant is the owner, lessee, licensee, etc. If the applicant is not the owner, the written consent of the owner, duly acknowledged, must be attached. 
(2)  Description of the area in which the activity or use is proposed, including survey of the wetlands preservation area and inventory of wetlands vegetation. 
(3)  Type and purpose of proposed use or activity. 
(4)  Amount of material proposed to be removed or deposited. 
(5)  Depth to which removal or deposition operations are proposed and angle of repose of all slopes, including deposited materials and sides of excavations. 
(6)  Manner in which material will be removed or deposited, structure installed or use carried out. 
(7)  Cross section and individual section of wetlands. 
(8)  Requests for special exception shall also be accompanied by information required in section 23-88. 
(Ord. No. 2153, § 7, 4-7-82) 
Sec. 23-88. - Development of lands adjacent to wetlands preservation areas. 
(a)  Any persons undertaking development on any land abutting or adjacent to wetlands preservation areas shall, prior to commencing work, submit a site plan for approval. 
(b)  The site plan may be submitted simultaneously with any other site plans required by the city. 
(c)  Information submitted shall include: 
(1)  Plat by a registered surveyor of the wetlands preservation area, including boundaries as defined in section 23-83. The wetlands, transitional/buffer zones and uplands shall be indicated. 
(2)  Vegetation map of wetlands and adjacent uplands. 
(3)  Topographic map. 
(4)  Soil map or survey. 
(5)  Existing and proposed drainage. 
(6)  Evidence that functional capacity of wetlands will be maintained during construction as well as upon project completion. This would include evidence that the project will not alter presently occurring plant and animal populations in the ecosystem in a manner that would impair either the short-term or the long-term stability of the ecosystem; i.e., natural species diversity, abundance and composition are essentially unchanged as a result of the project. 
(7)  Indication of any development mitigation measures, including restoration and expansion of wetlands. 
(8)  If the wetlands system extends to adjoining property owners, evidence that such owners have been notified of proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 2153, § 8, 4-7-82) 
Sec. 23-89. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-11, and further may be subject to revocation of building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2153, § 9, 4-7-82) 
Chapter 24 - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 13; planning, ch. 27; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; subdivisions, ch. 30; zoning, ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Community redevelopment, F.S. § 163.330 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- City personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7; boards, committees and commissions, § 2-41 et seq. 

Sec. 24-21. - Created; powers and duties. 
    In accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 163.357, the city council declares itself to be the community redevelopment agency empowered to transact business and exercise powers as provided for in F.S. § 163.330 et seq. This agency shall assume all of the responsibilities and liabilities imposed on or incurred by the previously-existing agency. 
(Ord. No. 2550, § 2, 4-1-92) 
Sec. 24-22. - Membership; compensation. 
(a)  The agency shall consist of the five members of the city council. 
(b)  Each member shall serve without compensation for his services, but shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including traveling expenses, incurred in the discharge of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 2550, §§ 3, 4, 4-1-92) 
Secs. 24-23-24-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT PLAN 

Sec. 24-41. - Adoption. 
    The Inlet Harbor Center Plan, having been duly received and considered as provided by law, is hereby approved and adopted and is on file in the city clerk's office and made a part of this article by reference. The plan is hereby designated as the official redevelopment plan for the redevelopment area, the boundaries of which are described in the plan. It is the purpose and intent of the city council that the redevelopment plan be implemented in the redevelopment area. 
(Ord. No. 2296, § 1, 12-18-85) 
Sec. 24-42. - Findings. 
    It is hereby found and determined that the redevelopment plan for redevelopment of the community redevelopment area: 
(1)  Provides a feasible method for the location of families who will be displaced from the community redevelopment area in decent, safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations within their means and without undue hardship to such families; 
(2)  Conforms to the general plan of the city as a whole; 
(3)  Gives due consideration to the provision of adequate park and recreational areas and facilities that may be desirable for neighborhood improvement, with special consideration for the health, safety and welfare of children residing in the general vicinity of the site covered by the plans; 
(4)  Will afford maximum opportunity, consistent with the sound needs of the city as a whole, for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of the community development area by private enterprise; and 
(5)  Is necessary and in the interests of public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the city, and will effectuate the purpose of the act by revitalizing the area economically and socially, thereby increasing the tax base, promoting sound growth, improving housing conditions and eliminating the conditions which the state legislature has found in the act to constitute a menace which is injurious to the public health, safety, welfare and morals of the residents. 
(Ord. No. 2296, § 2, 12-18-85) 
Sec. 24-43. - Council action. 
    In order to implement and facilitate the effectuation of the redevelopment plan hereby approved and adopted, it is found and determined that certain official action must be taken by the city council with reference, among other things, to changes in zoning, the vacation and removal of streets, alleys and other public places, relocation of public facilities, the establishment of new street patterns and other public action. Accordingly, the city council hereby: 
(1)  Pledges its cooperation in helping to carry out the redevelopment plan; 
(2)  Directs the various officials, departments, boards and agencies of the city likewise to cooperate in carrying out the redevelopment plan, exercise their respective functions and powers in a manner consistent with the redevelopment plan; 
(3)  Stands ready to consider and take appropriate action upon proposals and measures designed to effectuate the redevelopment plan; and 
(4)  Intends to undertake and complete any proceedings necessary to be carried out by the city under the provisions of the redevelopment plan. 
All of the foregoing shall be done and performed in a timely manner. The redevelopment agency shall, from time to time, present specific developmental plans in the implementation of the redevelopment plan to the city manager in order that the city council may be assured of compliance by the agency with the redevelopment plan. 
(Ord. No. 2296, § 3, 12-18-85) 
Sec. 24-44. - Modifications. 
    The community redevelopment plan may be amended or modified as set forth in F.S. § 163.361. 
(Ord. No. 2296, § 4, 12-18-85) 
Chapter 25 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4088, § 2, adopted Dec. 21, 2016, amended former Ch. 25, arts. I-VII, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 25 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2929, § 3, adopted Sept. 18, 2002. 
Cross reference- Code enforcement, § 2-311 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; coastal construction, ch. 23; planning, ch. 27; signs, ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; subdivisions, ch. 30; zoning, ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Authority to promulgate flood prevention regulations, F.S. ch. 166. 

ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 25-1. - General. 
(1)  Title. These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of City of Riviera Beach hereinafter referred to as "this ordinance." 
(2)  Scope. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(3)  Intent. The purposes of this ordinance and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
a.  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
b.  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
c.  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
d.  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
e.  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
f.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
g.  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
h.  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
(4)  Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This ordinance is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(5)  Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the Flood Insurance Study and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this ordinance. 
(6)  Disclaimer of Liability. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of City Council of Riviera Beach or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Sec. 25-2. - Applicability. 
(1)  General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Areas to which this ordinance applies. This ordinance shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the Riviera Beach as established in subsection 25-2(3). 
(3)  Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The Flood Insurance Study for Palm Beach County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated October 5, 2017, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this ordinance and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the Building Department at 600 W Blue Heron Blvd, Riviera Beach, FL 33404. 
(4)  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to subsection 25-5 the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
a.  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this ordinance and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
b.  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(5)  Other laws. The provisions of this ordinance shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(6)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this ordinance and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This ordinance shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this ordinance. 
(7)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be: 
a.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
b.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
c.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16; Ord. No. 4099, § 2, 9-20-17) 
Sec. 25-3. - Duties and powers of the floodplain administrator. 
(1)  Designation. The city manager or designee is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(2)  General. The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this ordinance consistent with the intent and purpose of this ordinance and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this ordinance without the granting of a variance pursuant to subsection 25-7. 
(3)  Applications and permits. The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
a.  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
b.  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this ordinance; 
c.  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
d.  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
e.  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
f.  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
g.  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this ordinance is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
h.  Coordinate with and provide comments to the Building Official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
(4)  Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall: 
a.  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
b.  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
c.  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
d.  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this ordinance is required. 
(5)  Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the Building Official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to subsection 25-7. 
(6)  Notices and orders. The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this ordinance. 
(7)  Inspections. The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in subsection 25-6 for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(8)  Other duties of the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
a.  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to subsection 25-3(4); 
b.  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
c.  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within 6 months of such data becoming available; 
d.  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this ordinance and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; 
e.  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of Riviera Beach are modified; and 
f.  Advise applicants for new buildings and structures, including substantial improvements, that are located in any unit of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) and the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-591) that federal flood insurance is not available on such construction; areas subject to this limitation are identified on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as "Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas" and "Otherwise Protected Areas." 
(9)  Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this ordinance and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps; Letters of Map Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this ordinance; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this ordinance and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at Building Department. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Sec. 25-4. - Permits. 
(1)  Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this ordinance, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the Floodplain Administrator, and the Building Official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(2)  Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this ordinance for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the Floodplain Administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(3)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this ordinance: 
a.  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
b.  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in section 604.50, F.S. 
c.  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
d.  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
e.  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in section 366.02, F.S., which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
f.  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
g.  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
h.  Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
i.  Structures identified in section 553.73(10)(k), F.S., are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
(4)  Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
a.  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
b.  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
c.  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
d.  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in subsection 25-5. 
e.  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
f.  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
g.  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(5)  Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this ordinance shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this ordinance, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(6)  Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(7)  Suspension or revocation. The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
(8)  Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  The South Florida Water Management District; section 373.036, F.S. 
b.  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; section 381.0065, F.S. and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
c.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for construction, reconstruction, changes, or physical activities for shore protection or other activities seaward of the coastal construction control line; section 161.141, F.S. 
d.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; section 161.055, F.S. 
e.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
f.  Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Sec. 25-5. - Site plans and construction documents. 
(1)  Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this ordinance shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
a.  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
b.  Where base flood elevations or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be established in accordance with subsection 25-5(2)b or c. 
c.  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with subsection 25-5(2)a. 
d.  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal high hazard areas, new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
e.  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
f.  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
g.  Delineation of the Coastal Construction Control Line or notation that the site is seaward of the coastal construction control line, if applicable. 
h.  Extent of any proposed alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, provided such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
i.  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
    The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this ordinance but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this ordinance. 
(2)  Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
b.  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
c.  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
i.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
ii.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet. 
d.  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(3)  Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
a.  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection 25-5(4) and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
b.  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as zone AO or zone AH. 
c.  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection 25-5(4). 
d.  For activities that propose to alter sand dunes or mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas (zone V), an engineering analysis that demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. 
(4)  Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a Letter of Map Change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Sec. 25-6. - Inspections. 
(1)  General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(2)  Development other than buildings and structures. The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(3)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(4)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
a.  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
b.  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with subsection 25-(5)2.b, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(5)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in subsection 25-6(4). 
(6)  Manufactured homes. The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Sec. 25-7. - Variances and appeals. 
(1)  General. The development special magistrate shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this ordinance. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the development special magistrate shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. This section does not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(2)  Appeals. The development special magistrate shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this ordinance. Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(3)  Limitations on authority to grant variances. The development special magistrate shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in subsection 25-7(7), the conditions of issuance set forth in subsection 25-7(8), and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The development special magistrate has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this ordinance. 
(4)  Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in subsection 25-5(3). 
(5)  Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(6)  Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this ordinance, provided the variance meets the requirements of subsection 25-107(4), is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(7)  Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the Development Special Magistrate shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this ordinance, and the following: 
a.  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
e.  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
f.  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
g.  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
h.  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
i.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
j.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(8)  Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
a.  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this ordinance or the required elevation standards; 
b.  Determination by the development special magistrate that: 
i.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
ii.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
iii.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
c.  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
d.  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the Floodplain Administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Sec. 25-8. - Violations. 
(1)  Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this ordinance that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this ordinance, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(2)  Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this ordinance and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(3)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by Chapter 22 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16; Ord. No. 4099, §2, 9-20-17) 
Secs. 25-9-25-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 25-21. - General. 
(1)  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this ordinance, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(2)  Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this ordinance and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(3)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this ordinance or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(4)  Definitions. 
    Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
    ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Base flood. A flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202; see "Basement (for flood loads)".] 
    Coastal construction control line. The line established by the State of Florida pursuant to section 161.053, F.S., and recorded in the official records of the community, which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a 100-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions. 
    Coastal high hazard area. A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V Zones" and are designated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V. 
    Critical facility. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste. The term includes facilities that are assigned Risk Category III and Risk Category IV pursuant to the Florida Building Code, Building. 
    Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
    Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 22, 1972. Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 22, 1972. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this ordinance (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this ordinance. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings. 
    Letter of map change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: ;;p1; Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this ordinance, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
    New construction. For the purposes of administration of this ordinance and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after September 22, 1972 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 22, 1972. 
    Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in section 320.01, F.S.] 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [See section 320.01, F.S.) 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Sand dunes. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
    Start of construction. The date of issuance of permits for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
    Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
    Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. [See Instructions and Notes] 
    Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this ordinance or the Florida Building Code. 
    Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Secs. 25-22-25-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 25-31. - Buildings and structures. 
(1)  Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to subsection 25-4(3), buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of subsection 25-37. 
(2)  Buildings and structures seaward of the coastal construction control line. If extending, in whole or in part, seaward of the coastal construction control line and also located, in whole or in part, in a flood hazard area: 
a.  Buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed to comply with the more restrictive applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building Section 3109 and Section 1612 or Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
b.  Minor structures and non-habitable major structures as defined in section 161.54, F.S., shall be designed and constructed to comply with the intent and applicable provisions of this ordinance and ASCE 24. 
(3)  Critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, to the extent feasible, be located outside of the special flood hazard area and outside of the 0.2% annual chance flood hazard area (500-year floodplain). If documentation is provided that feasible sites outside of the special flood hazard are not available that satisfy the objectives of a proposed critical facility, then the critical facility shall have the lowest floor elevated to the base flood elevation plus 3 feet. Floodproofing and sealing measures shall ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced or released into floodwater. Access routes that are elevated to or above the base flood elevation shall be provided to the extent feasbile. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Sec. 25-32. - Subdivisions. 
(1)  Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
a.  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(2)  Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
a.  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
b.  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with subsection 25-5(2)a; and 
c.  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of subsection 25-33. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Sec. 25-33. - Site improvements, utilities and limitations. 
(1)  Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
a.  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(2)  Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(3)  Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(4)  Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in subsection 25-5(3)a demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(5)  Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this ordinance, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(6)  Limitations on sites in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be permitted only if such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and only if the engineering analysis required by subsection 25-5(3)d demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. Construction or restoration of dunes under or around elevated buildings and structures shall comply with subsection 25-37(8)c. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Sec. 25-34. - Manufactured homes. 
(1)  General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to section 320.8249, F.S., and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this ordinance. If located seaward of the coastal construction control line, all manufactured homes shall comply with the more restrictive of the applicable requirements. 
(2)  Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that: 
a.  In flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 and this ordinance. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to subsection 25-34(6) are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. 
b.  In coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.3 and this ordinance. 
(3)  Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(4)  Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with subsection 25-34(5) or (6), as applicable. 
(5)  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of subsection 25-34(6), all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V). 
(6)  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to subsection 25-34(5), including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
a.  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V); or 
b.  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(7)  Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 or R322.3 for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(8)  Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16; Ord. No. 4099, § 2, 9-20-17) 
Sec. 25-35. - Recreational vehicles and park trailers. 
(1)  Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(2)  Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in subsection 25-35(1) for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of subsection 25-34 for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Sec. 25-36. - Tanks. 
(1)  Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(2)  Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of subsection 25-36(3) shall: 
a.  Be permitted in flood hazard areas (zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
b.  Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
(3)  Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(4)  Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
a.  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
b.  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Sec. 25-37. - Other development. 
(1)  General requirements for other development. All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this ordinance or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
a.  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
b.  Meet the limitations of subsection 25-33(4) if located in a regulated floodway; 
c.  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
d.  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
e.  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(2)  Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of subsection 25-33(4). 
(3)  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection 25-33(4). 
(4)  Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection 25-33(4). Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of subsection 25-5(3)c. 
(5)  Concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be: 
a.  Structurally independent of the foundation system of the building or structure; 
b.  Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any structure; and 
c.  Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four inches. 
(6)  Decks and patios in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following: 
a.  A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck. 
b.  A deck or patio that is located below the design flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
c.  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than 12 inches or that is constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
d.  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of twelve (12) inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection. 
(7)  Other development in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the appropriate federal, state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities include but are not limited to: 
a.  Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control structures; 
b.  Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters; and 
c.  On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems defined in 64E-6.002, F.A.C., as filled systems or mound systems. 
(8)  Nonstructural fill in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas: 
a.  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings. 
b.  Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than one unit vertical to five units horizontal shall be permitted only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
c.  Where authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the diversion of floodwater or wave runup and wave reflection if the scale and location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the lowest horizontal structural member of the building. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
EXHIBIT A. - TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS TO THE FLORIDA BUILDING CODE, "RESIDENTIAL" 

R322.2.1 - Elevation requirements. 
1.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas not designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
2.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot (305 mm), or to the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
3.  In areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), buildings and structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM plus 1 foot, or at least 3 feet if a depth number is not specified. 
4.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
    Exception: Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation, including basements whose floors are not below grade on all sides, shall meet the requirements of Section R322.2.2. 
R322.3.2 - Elevation requirements. 
1.  All buildings and structures erected within coastal high-hazard areas shall be elevated so that the lowest portion of all structural members supporting the lowest floor, with the exception of piling, pile caps, columns, grade beams and bracing, is elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
2.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides are prohibited. 
3.  The use of fill for structural support is prohibited. 
4.  Minor grading, and the placement of minor quantities of fill, shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios and walkways. 
    Exception: Walls and partitions enclosing areas below the design flood elevation shall meet the requirements of Sections R322.3.4 and R322.3.5. 
(Ord. No. 4088, § 2, 12-21-16) 
Chapter 26 - MINORITY EMPLOYMENT AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY PLAN[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3010, § 1, adopted July 9, 2006, amended ch. 26 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 26, §§ 26-1-26-11, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2214, § 1, adopted Sep. 21, 1983; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, adopted July 17, 1985. 
Cross reference- Human relations, ch. 9; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; planning, ch. 27; zoning, ch. 31. 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affordable housing unit means a unit which is sold or rented to low to moderate-income families where housing expenses shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Rental expenses shall not exceed 35 percent of the gross monthly income, adjusted for family size (range potential equals $785.00 to $1,200.00 per month rental). 
(2)  Homeownership expense means the price paid for the unit, which shall not exceed 21/2 times of the purchaser's annual income. 
An affordable unit may be either a single-family or multiple-family dwelling unit. 
    General contractor means a person having the primary responsibility of causing to be erected a building or buildings on a job site or of bringing to a job site such services as sewers, water, and drainage attendant to the erection of the buildings on the job site. 
    General labor means persons engaged in building activity on a job site of a nonspecific nature and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, includes persons engaged in security, night or day watchmen, flagmen, traffic control, time-keepers, clean-up and handymen. 
    Job site means the land where it is proposed by the party requesting the bonus to carry on construction or servicing activities. 
    Minority employers means those businesses employing six or more persons, including the owner or owners and/or managerial staff from minority groups on a job site. 
    Minority group means persons of the Black or Hispanic race or from any racial group which has an unemployment rate in excess of the state unemployment rate for white caucasians. 
    Moderate-income family means those families whose gross incomes are between $32,200.00 to $51,500.00 a year, based on family of four. 
    Party requesting the bonus means the owner of the job site, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns. 
    Subtrades means those businesses, whether or not incorporated, engaged in providing supplies or services related to the construction industry by contract to a general contractor or owner of a job site. 
(Ord. No. 3010, § 1, 7-9-06) 
Sec. 26-2. - Purpose of plan. 
    The provisions of this chapter are enacted to effectuate the following purposes: 
(1)  Decrease unemployment by encouraging the hiring of minorities in the construction industry, including minority businesses, skilled and nonskilled labor and professionals. 
(2)  Provide a means of increasing the supply of affordable housing in this city. 
(3)  Encourage revitalization of the downtown, particularly mixed use development. 
(4)  Accomplish the objectives of this section through the use of a voluntary program utilizing zoning-related incentives, in various zoning districts throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 3010, § 1, 7-9-06) 
Sec. 26-3. - Rationale. 
(a)  Solutions to unemployment and lack of affordable housing are two serious challenges facing the city and, under current fiscal constraints, the government cannot rely solely upon public programs, but must work with the private sector. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter recognize that the private sector has the expertise and resources to aid the city in these areas and that the city may call upon that aid in exchange for compensation. 
(c)  The program is designed so that bonuses will reflect the appropriate economic incentive for the particular use or district, making it financially advantageous for the developer to use the bonus and provide employment or housing in return. 
(Ord. No. 3010, § 1, 7-9-06) 
Sec. 26-4. - Housing needs, potentials and goals. 
(a)  Need. The need for an increased supply of affordable housing in the city is substantiated by review of the housing market and existing supply. For example: The average value of house in the county (in 2006) was $375,000.00. This is outside affordable range for city mainland residents, indicating the need for means to ensure city residents will be able to become homeowners. 
(b)  Potentials for vacant land. A substantial amount of vacant land is available for housing, both on a large scale and for smaller infill development. The area with the greatest potential for receiving affordable housing units is the south central planning sector, which is west of Old Dixie Highway and south of Blue Heron Boulevard. Numerous scattered single-family and small multifamily sites are located throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 3010, § 1, 7-9-06) 
Sec. 26-5. - Bonuses offered. 
(a)  Generally. One of the keys to the success of a voluntary program is the bonuses offered to the developer. These bonuses must be attractive enough so that even when something is demanded in return, the developer still desires to participate and utilize the bonus. 
(b)  Bonuses offered, by zoning district. Table II lists the bonuses to be offered, by zoning district. Bonuses chosen relate to what has been determined as a financial incentive for a particular zoning district. These determinations were made based on staff experience in working with developers and site plans, and discussion with industrial and commercial developers. For example, excessive parking requirements relating to industrial uses are frequently cited by developers, so a reduction has been offered as an incentive. 
_____ ; 
Table II 
Bonuses Offered 
Districts Bonus RM-20, RH and RMH-20 1. Density: 3 du/ac (hotel bonus per specific zoning regulation) 2. Parking reduction: up to 20 percent of total required and/or 25 percent may be designated compact _____CG 1. Height: additional 5 stories 2. Parking reduction: up to 20 percent of total required and/or 25 percent may be designated compact _____IL and IG 1. Parking reduction: no limit, based on demonstrated use 2. Waive one side setback 3. Additional lot coverage: 10 percent 4. CN uses as accessory use _____C-PUD 1. Density: 10 du/ac 2. Height: additional 15 stories 3. Parking reduction: up to 20 percent of total required and/or 25 percent may be designated compact _____R-PUD 1. Height: additional story (one story) _____I-PUD 1. Height: additional 50 feet 2. Parking reduction: no limit, based on usage or alternative plan  
(c)  Base requirements and bonuses. Table III establishes the relationship of the bonus to the base regulations, indicating the ultimate requirements if a bonus is used. The base is kept at a reasonable standard, so that a developer not using an incentive can still produce a viable project, based on current building trends. However, developers with more ambitious projects will be able to build, while contributing towards the goals of this chapter. 
Table III 
Base Requirements and Bonuses 
Zoning District Base Requirement Bonus Maximum Permitted 
With Bonus RM-20, RH and RMH-20 1. Density: 17 du/ac (hotel per zoning) 1. 3 du/ac 1. 20 du/ac 2. Parking: 2 spaces/unit (2 bedroom) 2. Parking reduction: 2. Parking reduction: a. 20 percent of total req.; and/or a. 20 percent of total req.; and/or b. 25 percent of total spaces may be compact b. 25 percent of total spaces may be compact _____CG 1. Height: 5 stories or 65 feet 1. Additional 5 stories 1. 10 stories 2. Parking: 2. Parking reduction: 2. Parking reduction: a. 1/300 sq. ft. office a. 20 percent of total req.; and/or a. 20 percent of total req.; and/or b. 1/200 sq. ft. retail b. 25 percent of total spaces may be compact b. 25 percent of total spaces may be compact IG and IL 1. Parking: 1. Parking reduction: 1. Reduction in spaces or size (no limit) based on demonstrated use or alternative plan a. 1/300 manufacture a. Number of spaces b. 1/1,000 wholesale b. Percent compact 2. Side setbacks: 15 feet 2. Waive side setbacks one side only 2. Elimination of one side setback requirement 3. Lot coverage: 45 percent 3. Additional 10 percent coverage 3. 55 percent lot coverage 4. Commercial uses prohibited 4. CN uses to be allowed 4. CN uses as accessory use _____C-PUD 1. Density: 15 du/ac 1. 10 du/ac 1. 25 du/ac (50 hotel/motel) 2. Height: 10 stories 2. 15 stories 2. 25 stories 3. Parking: based on use requirements 3. Parking reduction: 3. Parking reduction: a. 20 percent of total required; and/or a. 20 percent of total required; and/or b. 25 percent of total spaces may be compact b. 25 percent of total spaces may be compact _____R-PUD 1. Height: 3 stories 1 story 
maximum of 2% 
of site area 4 stories _____I-PUD 1. Height: 50 feet 1. 50 feet 1. 100 feet 2. Parking: based on use/sq. ft. 2. Parking reduction (no limit): 2. Reduction in spaces or size (no limit) based on demonstrated use or alternative plan a. Number of spaces b. Percent of compact  
_____
(d)  Intent of bonuses. The intent of the bonuses is not to relax zoning restrictions indiscriminately, but to allow for additional leeway upwards within the acceptable bounds of a zoning standard. For example, a developer cannot simply reduce parking by 20 percent. It must be demonstrated that the requirement is unrealistic for a particular use (i.e., based on number of employees) or that an alternative plan, such as park and ride, is available. 
(Ord. No. 3010, § 1, 7-9-06) 
Sec. 26-6. - Minority employment component. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to encourage the developer to hire minorities in various capacities of project development, from planning to final construction. This will enable the workforce of the city, which is predominately minority, to directly benefit from the economic boom South Florida is experiencing. 
(b)  A zoning bonus, or bonuses, as set forth in this chapter shall be permitted where the person requesting the bonus enters into a written agreement with the city providing for the following: 
(1)  The party requesting the bonus shall employ on the job site at least 20 percent of its part-time and full-time general labor on a job site from minority groups; 
(2)  The party requesting the bonus enters into contracts for work or supplies to a job site with at least ten subtrades or suppliers who are minority employers; and 
(3)  Where the party requesting the bonus demonstrates through an approved minority participation plan, the hiring of five minority professionals. 
(c)  While under the minority employment option, all three components of subsection (b) of this section must be met to qualify for a bonus. 
(d)  A developer desiring more than one bonus to the employment option need only satisfy the requirement once to utilize multiple bonuses. 
(e)  Prior to project site plan approval, the party applying for the bonus shall submit a minority participation plan for council approval, as per administrative procedures. 
(Ord. No. 3010, § 1, 7-9-06) 
Sec. 26-7. - Housing contribution component. 
(a)  Options. A developer choosing the housing option will have two methods to choose from to satisfy this requirement: 
(1)  Construction of affordable units; or 
(2)  In lieu cash contribution to the housing trust fund. 
(b)  Extent of contribution. 
(1)  The amount of the housing contribution by a developer directly relates to the extent and number of bonuses used, as shown in Table IV in section 26-8; i.e., as the number of bonus units requested increases, so does the corresponding housing contribution that must be made. 
(2)  It is the intent of the program to encourage construction of units by developers; contribution ratios have been set accordingly. 
(3)  It is anticipated that the additional financial gain with incentives should not exceed the costs of participating in the program. 
(c)  Construction of affordable units; option 1. 
(1)  Under this option, the developer is responsible for actually constructing the units, including purchasing the land. The units may be single-family or multiple-family. 
(2)  Units must meet the definition of affordable housing and be sold or rented to moderate-income families. 
(3)  Rental units may be rented by the developer or managed by the housing authority or sold to a private party to rent as affordable units. 
(4)  Affordable units shall be governed by legal covenant which guarantees availability to moderate-income residents for at least five years. 
(5)  The principle behind the construction contribution is that, while the developer must bear the cost of buying the land and constructing the unit, his costs are recovered when it is sold. The difference between his cost and the affordable price is his profit. 
(6)  Under the construction option, while time and effort is involved, the developer will make a profit or break even. His contribution is the production of affordable housing adding to the supply. 
(7)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a project utilizing bonuses, until the affordable units are complete and have received a certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  In lieu contribution to housing trust fund, option 2. 
(1)  Under this option, the developer chooses to contribute directly to the housing trust fund in accordance with Table IV in section 26-8. 
(2)  Timing of the contribution shall be one-half to be deposited in fund prior to permit remainder prior to certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 3010, § 1, 7-9-06) 
Sec. 26-8. - Calculating bonus contributions. 
(a)  Introduction. 
(1)  This section sets forth the means of translating the bonus used into the amount of contribution which is required in return, as shown in Table IV. As Table IV indicates, available bonuses include: 
a.  Additional density. 
b.  Reduction in number of parking spaces. 
c.  Reduction in size of spaces. 
d.  Additional height. 
e.  Setback waiver. 
f.  Lot coverage. 
g.  Additional uses permitted. 
(2)  To simplify contribution calculations, the benefits of the above, varied bonuses are translated into two bonus measures: units or building square footage. The amount of housing contribution is then assessed by unit or square footage gain. (There is one exception, which is detailed in subsection (d) of this section.) 
(3)  Only the bonus increments are assessed a contribution. 
(b)  Bonus measure: units. 
(1)  Where available. Additional units may be created by density bonus in the RM-20, RH, and RMH-20 districts. Additional units may be created by density, height or parking in the C-PUD (see subsection (e) of this section.) 
(2)  How assessed. Contribution is assessed on the additional units possible through use of the bonus. The amount of contribution per unit will vary according to the project location, as per Table IV. 
(c)  Bonus measure: square footage. 
(1)  Generally. Bonuses of height, lot coverage, setback waiver, CN uses and parking reductions are translated into additional square footage gained for a structure, by the use of these bonuses, as detailed in this subsection. 
(2)  Height. 
a.  Where available. In CG, C-PUD, I-PUD, R-PUD districts. 
b.  How assessed. The available stories allowed by the bonus are translated into the additional square footage gained. 
c.  Bonus square footage is then assessed according to Table IV. 
(3)  Lot coverage. 
a.  Where available. IG and IL districts. 
b.  How assessed. That building square footage which exceeds the amount permitted under the base lot coverage requirements is assessed. 
c.  Example. A base 45 percent lot coverage on a certain lot allows a 15,000 square foot building. Using the bonus of increased lot coverage, a 20,000 square foot building is constructed, the additional 5,000 square feet are then used to assess contribution. 
(4)  Setback waiver. 
a.  Where available. IG and IL districts. 
b.  One side setback may be waived, allowing for zero lot line construction (not streetside). 
c.  How assessed. That portion of the building which encroaches into the setback is assessed in terms of the square footage which is in the base setback. 
(5)  CN uses in industrial districts. 
a.  Where available. IG and IL districts. 
b.  How assessed. 
1.  Neighborhood commercial use (except as residential) permitted as subordinate use in an industrial building. 
2.  Industrial use must comprise 75 percent or more of the building. 
3.  Assessed by amount of square footage devoted to CN use. 
(6)  Parking reduction in number of spaces. 
a.  Available in: 
1.  RM-20, RMH-20, CG, C-PUD: reduction up to 20 percent. 
2.  IG, IL, I-PUD: no limit on reduction. 
b.  How assessed. 
1.  Assumption is made that a reduction in the number of spaces creates additional buildable area and thus results in a larger structure. 
2.  The square footage of the building gained by the reduction in spaces is then assessed. 
c.  Example. 
1.  A developer desires to build a 10,000 square foot building which would require 50 parking spaces. 
2.  The developer can only supply 40 spaces (20 percent less than requirement). 
3.  Under base requirements, 40 spaces would allow 8,000 square feet. 
4.  The developer is able to construct 2,000 additional square feet based on bonus. 
5.  This 2,000 bonus square feet of building is assessed as per Table IV. 
d.  To utilize parking spaces reduction, a developer shall demonstrate the following: 
1.  Parking requirements are excessive and require substantially more spaces than are needed, as demonstrated by actual usage, etc.; or 
2.  Alternative means of transportation are to be provided, such as park and ride, shuttle buses, etc. 
e.  Failure to accommodate parking demand on site or by alternative methods may result in revocation of the permit to occupy the building. 
(7)  Parking; allowance for compact spaces. 
a.  Where available. RM-20, RMH-20, CG, IL, IG, I-PUD and C-PUD districts. 
b.  Compact parking stall shall measure eight feet by 16 feet. 
c.  How assessed. As use of this bonus, by decreasing parking area and increasing buildable area, results in a larger structure, additional building square footage created shall be assessed accordingly. 
(d)  Parking reduction. If reduction in number or size of spaces is unrelated to an increase in size, an assessment shall be made based on either: 
(1)  Number of spaces reduced, at $250.00 for each space eliminated; or 
(2)  Number of compact provided at $150.00 for compact space. 
(e)  C-PUD; special case. 
(1)  Bonuses in the C-PUD are translated into units or square footage gains, as in the above district. 
(2)  However, due to the more complex nature of a C-PUD involving multiple uses, the means of assessment are summarized below: 
a.  If use of the bonus regarding height, density or parking reduction results in additional residential units, the unit measurement is used; i.e., for each bonus condo unit created, one affordable unit or 7,500 square feet are required. 
b.  For bonuses relating to nonresidential uses, the gain is translated into square feet in CG and the contribution is assessed per square foot at the rate in Table IV. 
c.  Special case: height. In cases where the building contains mixed uses, the bonus square footage shall be assessed at the least restrictive ratio. 
d.  Use of the parking bonus for residential uses shall not be assessed a contribution if a contribution has been received in the density category. 
(f)  Bonus/contribution ratio. 
_____
Table IV 
Bonus/Contribution Ratio 
Minority Employment       Or 
  Contribution Housing Contribution 
(Per Bonus Increment) Bonus  Construction     Or      Cash in Lieu RM-20, RH and RMH-20 districts: 1. Density: 3 du/ac 1. Per section 26-6 1. 1 AU*/bonus condo unit 1. Ocean: 
3.5% of sale 
price/value-minimum 
$30,000 1 AU*/bonus motel/hotel unit Mainland: 
3.5% of sale 
price/value-minimum 
$30,000 2. Parking reduction: 20 percent required spaces 2. Per section 26-6 2. Same as 1 above based on additional units due to parking reduction _____CC district: 1. Height: 5 stories 1. Per section 26-6 1. 1 AU*/bonus 1,000 sq. ft. 1. $10,000/1,000 sq. ft. ($10/sq. ft.) 2. Parking reduction: 20 percent required space 2. Per section 26-6 2. 1 AU*/1,000 sq. ft. 2. $10,000/1,000 sq. ft. _____IL and IG districts: 1. Parking reduction 1. Per section 26-6 1. 0.5 AU*/1,000 sq. ft. 1. $5,000/1,000 sq. ft. ($5/sq. ft.) 2. Side setback waiver 2. Not applicable 2. Not applicable 2. $2/sq. ft. (area within required 15 foot setback) 3. Lot coverage 3. Per section 26-6 3. 0.5 AU*/1,000 bonus sq. ft. 3. $5,000/1,000 sq. ft. 4. CN uses as accessory 4. Per section 26-6 4. 1 AU*/1,000 sq. ft. 4. $10,000/1,000 sq. ft. bonus _____C-PUD district: 1. Density: 10 du/ac 1. Per section 26-6 1. 1 AU*/bonus condo unit 
1 AU*/bonus motel unit 1. 3.5% of 
sale price/value 2. Height: 15 stories 2. Per section 26-6 A. Residential: see 1 above, based on additional units due to increased height B. Nonresidential: 1 AU*/1,000 sq. ft. $10,000/1,000 sq. ft. 3. Parking reduction: 20 percent of required spaces 3. Per section 26-6 A. Residential: see 1 above, based on additional units due to parking reduction B. Nonresidential: see 2-B above _____R-PUD district: 1. Height: 1 story 1. Per section 26-6 1. 1 AU*/1,000 sq. ft. 
Maximum 2% of total site area $3,000/1,000 sq. ft.($3/sq. ft.) _____I-PUD district: 1. Height: Additional 50 feet (office and commercial) 1. Per section 26-6 1. 0.5 AU*/1,000 sq. ft. 1. $5,000/1,000 sq. ft. 2. Parking reduction 2. Per section 26-6 2. 0.5 AU*/1,000 sq. ft. 2. $5,000/1,000 sq. ft. _____Parking reduction (No relationship to square feet): 1. Reduction in number of spaces 1. Not applicable 1. Not applicable 1. $250/space 2. Reduction in size; 25 percent compact 2. Not applicable 2. Not applicable 2. $150/space  
*AU = affordable unit 
(Ord. No. 3010, § 1, 7-9-06) 
_____
Sec. 26-9. - Related policies and administration. 
(a)  In recognition of the value of C-PUD and I-PUD projects to downtown revitalization and/or the general economy of the city, the city council shall have the authority to waive, in part, portions of the contribution amounts based upon the following: 
(1)  Demonstration that the project will result in the creation of a significant number of permanent jobs for city residents. 
(2)  Demonstration that the magnitude of the project is such that satisfying the total contribution (based on cumulative assessments) would render the project infeasible. 
(3)  Long-range economic benefits to the city and downtown are substantial and should be considered in lieu of stated contributions in this chapter. 
(b)  A developer of an I-PUD choosing to construct affordable units may place those units within the I-PUD, and further may construct additional housing units within the I-PUD, not to exceed 25 percent of the area. 
(c)  Administrative guidelines shall be established and adopted by city council. 
(1)  All bonus requests shall be approved by city council in accordance with the plan and guidelines. 
(2)  Guidelines shall include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Review procedures to be followed. 
b.  Staff personnel responsibilities. 
c.  Monitoring and enforcement. 
d.  Means to ensure mix of affordable homes across income range, and by housing type. 
e.  Guidelines as necessary to implement the goals of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3010, § 1, 7-9-06) 
Sec. 26-10. - Role of single-family and medium density multiple-family districts. 
(a)  It is anticipated that the affordable units produced by the developer or through the housing trust fund would be located in the RM-15 multiple family, RD-15 duplex or RS-8 single-family districts. Under the plan, bonuses are not given in these single-family or multiple-family districts. Examination of existing zoning standards for the districts indicates: 
(1)  Existing standards are set at a minimum level already, which allow the development of affordable housing: 
a.  For example, 800 square feet minimum for a house could not be categorized as an excessive requirement. 
b.  Minimum lot size for single-family is lower than in the county. 
(2)  Review of those communities which were able to offer cost-reducing incentives revealed that the codes contained requirements for enclosed garages and minimum number of bedrooms. The city Code does not contain these types of excessive standards. 
(b)  The types of bonuses given in the high density residential and commercial districts would not contribute to creating quality low density residential housing. Allowing increased densities in the RM-15 district would generally result in overcrowded sites, without adequate play area for children and privacy for occupants. 
(c)  The districts are best served by being the recipients of the units added through the housing contribution process, in keeping with existing standards. 
(d)  Those who choose to build affordable housing in the districts will be able to take advantage of the programs offered through the housing trust fund to help with the costs of construction, rental, home ownership, etc. 
(Ord. No. 3010, § 1, 7-9-06) 
Sec. 26-11. - Appendices. 
    The appendices to the minority employment and affordable housing opportunity plan adopted regarding certain recommendations and methods are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 3010, § 1, 7-9-06) 
Chapter 27 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning, art. IV; planning board, art. IV, § 1; director of planning, art. IV, § 2. 
Cross reference- Deposit of cost of notice required with applications for permits, § 2-1; code enforcement, § 2-311 et seq.; restrictions on location of alcoholic beverage establishments, § 3-5; parks and recreation, ch. 13; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; coastal construction, ch. 23; community redevelopment, ch. 24; flood prevention and protection, ch. 25; minority employment and affordable housing opportunity plan, ch. 26; subdivisions, ch. 30; zoning, ch. 31; site plan review procedure, § 31-56 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 27-1-27-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 27-16. - Planning manuals 
    Specific authority is granted to the development services director to create, implement, amend and administer the following manuals: 
(1)  Technical manual. 
a.  The technical manual shall be utilized by the development services department and associated divisions and shall provide written and visual descriptions of elements required to be provided on site plans and similar documents to ensure uniformity for all development submittals. 
b.  The technical manual may also include any additional information associated with development within the city. 
(2)  Policy and procedure manual. The policy and procedure manual shall be utilized by the development services department and associated divisions and shall provide a mechanism for administration to provide processes, code interpretations and to enact temporary measures to rectify existing deficiencies prior to ordinance amendments being approved accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 4112, § 2, 6-6-18) 
Secs. 27-17-27-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- City personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7; boards, committees and commissions, § 2-41 et seq. 

Sec. 27-31. - Created; members; quorum; term; vacancies; removal. 
(a)  There shall be a city planning board, which shall consist of not less than seven members who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(b)  The members thereof now holding office shall be divided into three groups, designated as groups A, B and C. The members in group A shall hold office until May 1, 1963; the members in group B shall hold office until May 1, 1964, and the members in group C shall hold office until May 1, 1965; and at the expiration of the term of each group the new appointments to each group shall be for terms of three years each. In cases of vacancies by resignation, removal or otherwise, the city council shall fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. 
(c)  The city manager, city attorney and mayor shall serve as ex officio members of the board. The members shall select the chairman of the board. A majority of the board shall be a quorum. 
(d)  The city council may remove any member for cause. Any member of the board who fails to attend two out of three regular meetings without cause and without prior notification to the secretary of the board shall automatically forfeit his appointment to serve on the board, and the city council shall promptly fill such vacancy. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-1) 
Sec. 27-32. - Advisory status. 
    All decisions of the planning board and of the platting board are of an advisory nature. The city council may by a majority vote of its members overrule, override, change, modify, cancel or approve any decision of either board. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-4) 
Sec. 27-33. - General duties. 
    The planning board shall have power to and shall make recommendations and suggestions to the city council in regard to: 
(1)  Making, amending, extending, and adding to the master plan for the physical development of the city as defined in section 27-36. 
(2)  Exercising of control over platting and subdividing land within the city. 
(3)  Drafting for the city council an official map of the city and recommending or disapproving proposed changes in such map. It shall be the duty of the director of the planning board to periodically update the official map and to institute a procedure to show on such map a change list column reflecting past and present changes in zoning districts. 
(4)  Making, as provided in section 31-6, a zoning plan, and recommending or disapproving proposed changes in such plan. 
(5)  Making, as provided in chapter 26, plans for the clearance and rebuilding of slum districts and blighted areas within the city. 
(6)  Submitting annually to the city manager, not less than 120 days prior to the beginning of the budget year, a list of recommended major capital improvements relating to planning and zoning, which in the opinion of the board are necessary or desirable to be constructed during the forthcoming six-year period. Such list shall be arranged in order of preference, with recommendation as to which projects shall be constructed in which year. 
(7)  Promoting public interest in and understanding of the master plan and of planning, zoning and slum clearance. 
(8)  Meeting not less than once each month and keeping a public record of its resolutions, findings and determinations. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-2) 
Sec. 27-34. - Comprehensive plan. 
(a)  The planning board is hereby designated as the local planning agency responsible for the preparation, adoption, completion, updating and administration thereon of the city's comprehensive plan and the elements thereof, in accordance with the city Charter, article IV, section 1, and pursuant to Laws of Florida, Chapter 75-257, sections 4(8) and 6. 
(b)  The planning board shall have the power to carry out any project related to its activities. The council's approval shall be required for spending and allocation of all public funds. The planning board shall be responsible for the coordination of other departments' actions resulting from the implementation of the comprehensive development plan and the elements thereof. The planning board shall monitor and oversee the implementation of the comprehensive development plan by other departments of the city. The planning board shall review, evaluate and update the comprehensive development plan every three years, as needed. The planning board shall coordinate state and federal funds as they apply to the implementation of the comprehensive development plan. 
(c)  The director of the planning department shall be the executive secretary to the planning board and shall provide administrative assistance for a smooth operation of the board. 
(d)  The planning department shall also provide all the necessary technical assistance to other departments for the implementation of the comprehensive development plan as needed. 
(e)  All plans, policy statements and related documents as well as any record of all public meetings and/or hearings of the planning board shall be public records. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-2.1) 
Sec. 27-35. - General powers. 
    The planning board shall have power to: 
(1)  Require information which shall be furnished within a reasonable time from the other departments of the city government in relation to its work. 
(2)  Within its budget appropriation, contract with city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require, with the permission of the city council. 
(3)  Request additional assistance for special survey work of the city manager, who may at his discretion assign to the board members of the staff of any administrative department or direct such department to make special studies requested by the board. 
(4)  In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. 
(5)  Draft plans for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of neighborhoods. 
(6)  Draft a plan for the replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any area or district which may be destroyed in whole or in part or seriously damaged by fire, earthquake, flood or other disaster. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-3) 
Sec. 27-36. - Approval of public improvements, public or private utilities. 
    No street, park or other public way, ground or space, no public building or structure and no public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, shall be constructed or authorized in the city, nor shall any real property be acquired by the city, until and unless the location and extent thereof are submitted to the board for its information. The city council shall then consider such matter and shall approve or disapprove same, and if approved, the appropriate office, department or agency shall have power to proceed. The widening, narrowing, relocation, vacation or change in the use of any street or other public way or ground or the sale of any public building or real property shall be sub-ject to similar submission to the board, and consideration and proper action of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-7) 
Sec. 27-37. - Platting board; supervision of subdividing. 
    The planning board shall be the platting board of the city, and as such may supervise the platting or subdivision of land within the city or within three miles thereof for the purpose of making its recommendations to the city council; provided, however, that such control shall not apply to land outside of the city over which platting or subdivision control is reposed by law in some authority other than this city or any of its offices, departments, or agencies. Subdivision means the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, building development or for any other purpose. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-8) 
Sec. 27-38. - Subdivision regulations authorized; approval of plats. 
(a)  In exercising the powers granted to it by this division, the planning board may adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within the city's jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for the harmonious development of the city and its environs, for the coordination of streets and other ways within the subdivided land with other existing or planned streets and ways or for conformance to the master plan or official map, for adequate open spaces, for spaces for traffic, utilities, recreation, light and air, and for the avoidance of congestion of population. Such regulations may include requirements as to the extent to which and the manner in which streets and other ways be graded and improved; and water, sewer and other utility mains, piping, connections or other facilities be installed as a condition to the approval by the city council of a subdivision. 
(b)  The regulations or practice of the board may provide for a tentative approval of the plat previous to such improvements and installation and for submission for tentative approval of the city council, but any such tentative approval shall not be entered on the plat. In lieu of the completion of such work previous to the final approval of a plat, the city council shall require a bond, in an amount and with surety satisfactory to the city council, providing and securing to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities within a period specified by the city manager and expressed in the bond. 
(c)  After it shall have adopted a major thoroughfare plan of the territory of the city or of any section thereof, the planning board shall have the power to make or cause to be made, from time to time, surveys for the exact locations of the lines of new, extended or widened streets in any portion of such planned territory, and to make and certify to the council, plats of the areas thus surveyed, on which are indicated the location of the lines recommended by the board as the planned or mapped lines of future streets, street extensions or street widenings, together with the board's estimate of the time period within which the land shown on the plat or street locations should be acquired for street purposes. 
(d)  The city council may by ordinance adopt any such plat, in accordance with the procedure prescribed for the adoption of ordinances, and shall set a time limit not to exceed five years for the acquisition of such land, provided that notice of the time and place when and where it will be considered for final passage shall be sent by mail to the record owners of land on or abutting which the future street lines designated on the plat are located. Any modification of such plat shall before passage be submitted to the planning board; if disapproved by the board, may be approved by a favorable vote of the city council. The adoption of a plat shall not, in and of itself, constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any street or the taking or acceptance of any land for street purposes. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-9) 
Secs. 27-39-27-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DIRECTOR OF PLANNING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- City personnel prohibited from accepting gifts, discounts, etc., § 2-7; officers and employees, § 2-161 et seq.; personnel, ch. 15. 

Sec. 27-51. - Appointment, duties. 
    There may be a director of planning to be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council and who shall be qualified by special training and experience in the field of city planning. He shall be the regular technical advisor of the board, may also be designated its executive secretary and shall have such other authority, duties and responsibilities under the direction and control of the council as it may require and establish. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-5) 
Secs. 27-52-27-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLANS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 27-66-27-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFFICIAL MAP 

Sec. 27-81. - Authorized; contents. 
(a)  The city council may by ordinance establish an official map of the city, on which shall be shown and indicated: 
(1)  All public streets existing and established by law at the time of the establishment of the official map. 
(2)  All planned streets or street lines as located on plats adopted by city council in accordance with the provisions of section 27-38 at the time of the establishment of the map. 
(3)  All streets or street lines as located on final or recorded plats of subdivisions approved by the planning board and city council at the time of the establishment of the map. 
(b)  The placing of any street or street lines upon the official map shall not, in and of itself, constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any street nor the taking or acceptance of any land for street purposes. The city council may in the same manner place upon the official map the location of existing or planned parks or other public open spaces. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-10) 
Sec. 27-82. - Modifications. 
    All street locations on final or recorded plats of subdivisions approved by the planning board and/or city council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or on plats adopted by city council under the provisions of section 27-38 shall be deemed additions to or modifications of the official map and shall be placed thereon. The city council may by ordinance make, from time to time, other additions to or modifications of the official map by placing thereon the location of proposed streets, street extensions, widenings, narrowings or vacations, in accordance with the procedure for the adoption of ordinances; provided that notice of the time and place when and where such additions or modifications will be considered for final passage shall be sent by mail to the record owners of the lands on or abutting which such mapped streets or street lines or street vacations are located. Any such proposed addition to or modification of the official map may be referred to the planning board for its information; thereafter, the city council by a majority vote of its members may approve or disapprove same. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-11) 
Sec. 27-83. - Effect. 
    After the establishment of the official map, the city council may provide by ordinance that no public water or sewer connection or other public utility or improvement shall be constructed in, or any water, drainage, light or other public service rendered to or along any street, until and unless such street shall have been duly placed on the official map in accordance with the authority and procedure set forth in sections 27-81 and 27-82. The city council may also provide by general ordinance that no permit for the erection of any building shall be issued unless a street giving access to such proposed structure is shown on the official map. Such ordinance shall contain provisions whereby the applicant for such building permit may appeal to the city council; the hearing upon which appeal and notice of which hearing shall be held and given as provided in section 27-85, and the city council may issue a permit, subject to such conditions as the council may impose, where the circumstances of the case do not require the proposed building to be related to existing mapped or planned streets and where the permit would not tend to dislocate or increase the difficulty of carrying out the official map or master plan. The word street, when used in this division, shall be deemed to include streets, boulevards, avenues, alleys, lanes and other ways. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-14) 
Sec. 27-84. - Buildings on mapped streets. 
    The city council may provide by general ordinance that no permit shall be issued for any building or structure or any part thereof on any land located between the mapped lines of a street as shown on the official map. Any such ordinance shall provide that the city council shall have the power, upon an appeal filed with it by the owner of such land, to grant a permit for a building or structure or part thereof in any such mapped street location in any case in which such board finds, upon the evidence and arguments presented to it upon such appeal: 
(1)  That the entire property of the appellant, of which such mapped street location forms a part, cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless such permit be granted; and 
(2)  That, balancing the interest of the city in preserving the integrity of the official map and the interest of the owner of the property in the use and benefits of his property, the granting of such permit is required by considerations of reasonable justice and equity. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-12) 
Sec. 27-85. - Hearings on exceptions. 
    Before taking any action under section 27-84 to grant an exception, the city council shall hold a hearing at which the parties in interest shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least ten days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given to the appellant by mail at the address specified by the appellant in his appeal petition. If the city council grants a building permit in any such appeal, it shall have the power to specify the exact location, extent, ground, area, height, duration and other details and conditions to govern the building, structure and other details and conditions to govern the building, structure or part thereof for which the permit is granted. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-13) 
Secs. 27-86-27-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MASTER PLAN 

Sec. 27-96. - Contents, adoption. 
(a)  The master plan for the physical development of the city, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the board's recommendations for the development of the city territory, and may include, among other things: 
(1)  The general location, character and extent of streets, bridges, parks, waterways and other public ways, grounds and spaces. 
(2)  The general location of public buildings and other public property. 
(3)  The general location and extent of public utilities, and whether publicly or privately owned. 
(4)  The removal, relocation, widening, extension, narrowing, vacation, abandonment or change of use of such existing or future public ways, grounds, spaces, buildings, property or utilities. 
(5)  The general extent and location of public housing projects and slum-clearance projects. 
(b)  The board may adopt the master plan as a whole by a single resolution, or may by successive resolution adopt successive parts of the plan, such parts corresponding to major geographical sections of the city or to functional divisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. The adoption of the plan, or of any such part, amendment, extension or addition, shall be by resolution carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of the board; but before the adoption of the plan or any such part or any modification, extension or addition, the board shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed action. An attested copy of the plan or any change shall be approved by the city council, by duly adopted ordinances, before it becomes official. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-6) 
Secs. 27-97-27-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 30; zoning, ch. 31; site plan review procedure, § 31-56 et seq. 

Sec. 27-106. - Adoption. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Act of 1985, as amended, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq., the city council hereby declares its intent to exercise its authority to plan for future development within the municipal boundaries of the city and hereby adopts the comprehensive plan of the city, consisting of a future land use plan element and map; housing element; recreation and open space element; traffic circulation element; sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage and potable water element; coastal zone protection and conservation element; utility element; and intergovernmental coordination element, a copy of which is on file in the city clerk's office and made a part hereof. 
(b)  The comprehensive plan of the city is adopted to direct and achieve coordinated and harmonious development and land use in a manner which will permit planning for adequate community facilities and protect the ecological balance of the environment, in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the city citizens and visitors. In furtherance hereof, the city council hereby declares its policy and intent to evaluate and consider all its public actions involving or affecting land use of development, including action on applications for zoning relief, to be in conformity with the comprehensive plan and to determine whether such action or actions will better serve the community. In recognition that zoning has been and shall continue to be a major tool for the implementation of the land use and development policies, it shall be required that applicants for zoning relief shall affirmatively establish the manner in which the development proposal and requested change in land use conforms to and is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as affecting the validity of existing vested rights. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the applicant alleging vested rights to affirmatively demonstrate the legal requisites of vested rights. Rights shall vest upon demonstration to an appropriate city board or agency that the applicant has relied in good faith upon some act or omission of the government and has made a substantial change in position or incurred extensive obligations and expenses to their detriment. The mere existence of zoning contrary to the comprehensive plan shall not be determined to vest rights. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-2.2) 
Sec. 27-107. - F.S. §§ 163.3161 et seq. and 163.330 adopted as supplemental provisions. 
(a)  F.S. § 163.3161 et seq., County and Municipal Planning for Future Development, and F.S. § 163.330, Community Redevelopment Act, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, three copies of which were filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  This section does not repeal any other ordinance but is supplemental to other sections contained in this chapter and shall be so construed. 
(Code 1957, § 14A-23) 
Chapter 28 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Code enforcement, § 2-311 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; nuisances, ch. 11; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; coastal construction, ch. 23; flood prevention and protection, ch. 25; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; subdivisions, ch. 30; zoning, ch. 31; site plan review procedure, § 31-56 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned sign means those signs on which a business advertised on that sign is no longer licensed, no longer has a certificate of occupancy or is no longer doing business on that location. 
    Add-on sign means any additional sign area added to a previously permitted and/or conforming sign. 
    Advertising structure means any structure installed for advertising purposes, with or without any advertisement display thereon, situated upon or attached to real property upon which any poster, bill, printing, painting, device or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed, posted, painted, tacked, nailed or otherwise fastened, affixed or displayed; provided, however, that such term shall not include buildings. 
    A-frame sign means a movable sign not secured or attached to the ground as required by this Code. 
    Animated sign means a sign with action or motion using electrical energy, electronic or manufactured sources of supply, or wind-actuated elements, including rotating, revolving or flashing signs. 
    Background area of sign means the entire background area of a sign upon which copy could be placed. In computing the area of a sign background, only that face or those faces which can be seen from any one direction at one time shall be counted. 
    Banner means any sign having the characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to cloth, paper, balloons or fabric of any kind with only such material for foundation. The word "banner" shall also include pennant or any animated, rotating and/or fluttering device, with or without lettering for design, manufactured and placed for the purpose of attracting attention. 
    Billboard (off-premises sign) means any sign or framework thereof installed for the purpose of advertising merchandise, services or entertainment sold, produced, manufactured or furnished at a place other than the location of such structure. 
    Building facade means that portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation. 
    Changeable copy sign means a sign which is characterized by changeable copy of letters, regardless of method of attachment. 
    Construction sign means a temporary sign identifying those engaged in construction on any building site. This includes the builder, contractor, developer, architect, engineer, painter, plumber or other persons or artisans concerned in such construction. 
    Copy area of a sign means the actual area of the sign copy applied to any background. The copy area is computed by straight lines drawn closest to copy extremities encompassing individual letters or words. 
    Development sign means a temporary sign advertising the sale or rental of structures under construction upon land which is under development. 
    Digital billboard means an off-premises sign utilizing digital message technology, capable of only displaying a static message or copy, and able to change this message or copy electronically, from one still image to the next in regulated intervals, in a manner that does not produce or create the optical illusion of motion or movement such as video, animation, scrolling, flashing, scintillating or varying light intensity, on any part of the sign or its support structure. 
    Digital sign means a type of animated sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures, numerals, or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means and its components may include, but are not limited to, light-emitting diodes, liquid crystal display screens, plasma screens, and their functional equivalents. Sign display elements may be internally illuminated or may be illuminated by reflected light. A digital sign may be part of another permanent sign that is not a digital sign. 
    Directional sign means any sign permanently or temporarily installed on public property by or with approval of the city or any authorized governmental agency. 
    Double-faced sign means a sign with two faces which are parallel to each other and back to back. 
    Electric sign. See Illuminated sign. 
    Engineer means a person registered as a professional engineer by the state. 
    Entrance sign means an identification structure located at the main entrance to a city-approved subdivision or development. The only advertising on the structure shall be the name of the subdivision or development. 
    Fixed projecting sign means any sign projecting at an angle from the outside wall or walls of any building and rigidly affixed thereto. 
    Flag means a piece of fabric with a color or pattern that represents some country, state, county, city, party, organization or business entity. 
    Flashing sign means any sign, used for identification, directional, advertising or promotional purposes, that includes approved lighting fixtures which flash, blink, cut on and off intermittently, and are used as exterior signs or interior signs visible from the public right-of-way. 
    Flat or wall sign means any sign erected parallel to the facade or on the outside wall of any building and supported throughout its length by the wall of the building. 
    Freestanding sign means and includes and replaces pole and ground signs. It shall mean a sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in or upon the ground. 
    Frontage street facade means that portion of an exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building wall elevation which fronts on a street, unless such parapet wall or eaves shall be over 20 feet high, in which case only the first 20 feet shall be considered the frontage street facade for purposes of this chapter. Only one street facade shall be designated as frontage street facade. 
    Fuel price sign means the display of fuel prices on a monument sign located at a "self-service fueling station," which shall be that portion of property where flammable and combustible liquids used as motor fuels are stored and subsequently dispensed from fixed, approved dispensing equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than the service station attendant. 
    Ground sign. See Freestanding sign. 
    Home nameplate means a nameplate not more than one square foot in area, indicating only the name of the occupant. 
    Identification sign means a sign of not more than three square feet in area used to identify the name of the business located thereon and/or its principals and address. The top of such sign shall be no more than eight feet above ground level. 
    Illuminated sign means a sign in which a source of light is used in order to make the message readable and shall include internally and externally lighted signs. 
    Install means to erect or apply any kind of sign or advertising device. 
    Instructional sign means a sign conveying instructions with respect to the premises on which it is maintained, such as, but not limited to "exit," "entrance," "parking," etc. 
    Marquee sign means any sign projecting from, attached to or hung from a marquee, and said marquee shall be known to mean a canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a building, when such canopy or covered structure extends beyond the building, building line or property line. 
    Multiple-faced sign means a sign with more than two faces. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not comply with the regulations of this chapter. 
    Off-premises sign. See Billboard. 
    On-premises sign. See Point of purchase sign. 
    Painted sign means any sign painted on any surface, including the roof of any building, visible from any public right-of-way. 
    Parapet means that portion of the facade which extends above the roof line. 
    Point of purchase sign means any structure, device, display board, screen, surface or wall, characters, letters or illustrations placed thereto, thereon or thereunder by any method or means whatsoever where the matter displayed is used for advertising, on the premises, a product or service actually or actively offered for sale or rent thereon or therein. 
    Pole sign. See Freestanding sign. 
    Political sign means any temporary advertising structure used in connection with a local, county, state or national election campaign. 
    Premises means a distinct unit or parcel of land, including the appurtenances thereon. 
    Pylon sign means and refers to an advertising structure projecting from the wall or extending over the roof of any building, comprising a framework and display surface, the structural members of which are an integral part of the building upon which the sign is installed. 
    Real estate sign means any sign installed by the owner or his agent on a temporary basis, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent or for sale, but shall not include roominghouse signs. 
    Revolving sign. See Animated sign. 
    Roof sign means any outdoor advertising display sign installed, constructed or maintained on or above the roof of any building. 
    Rotating sign. See Animated sign. 
    Sandwich sign. See A-frame sign. 
    Semi-freestanding sign means any sign which is supported by one or more uprights or braces in or upon the ground and partially attached to any building. 
    Shopping area means a commercial establishment or a group of commercial establishments related in its location, size and types of shops to the trade area which the unit serves. 
    Sidewalk sign. See A-frame sign. 
    Sign means any display of banners and flags, characters, letters, illustrations or any ornamentations, or the complete structure on which any such characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations are stated or applied (except buildings to which the same may be attached); used for identification, directional purposes, advertising or promotional purposes; provided, however, that "sign" shall not be construed so as to include self-contained fixtures approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters or nonelectrical display, wholly contained within a store building and not visible from any public right-of-way. 
    Snipe sign means any sign of any size, made of any material, including paper, cardboard, wood and metal, when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, fences or other objects, and the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the premises upon which the sign is located. 
    Swinging projecting sign means any sign projecting at an angle from the outside wall or walls of any building, which is supported by only one rigid support, irrespective of the number of guy wires used in connection therewith. 
    Time and temperature sign means a display containing illuminated numerals flashing alternately to show the time and/or temperature. 
    V-shaped sign means any sign that is attached to a building, other than a flat or wall sign, and which has two faces which are not parallel. 
    Vehicular sign means a sign affixed to or painted on a transportation vehicle or trailer, for the purposes of business advertising; however, not to include signs affixed to vehicles or trailers for identification purposes as required by licensing ordinances of the city. 
    Window sign means any sign installed or maintained in the window of any building, visible from any public right-of-way. 
(Code 1957, §§ 3-5, 23-28(B); Ord. No. 3091, § 1, 5-18-11; Ord. No. 4059, § 1, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 4073, § 1, 12-16-15) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 28-2. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety, general welfare and aesthetics of the city by regulating and limiting the existing and proposed posting, display, erection, use and maintenance of signs, billboards, posters, bulletins and other advertising structures within the city. 
(b)  It is further the intent of this chapter to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community, preserve the scenic and natural beauty of the city and provide a more enjoyable and pleasing community. Also, it is intended hereby to improve vehicular and pedestrian safety, provide more open space, curb and prevent deterioration of natural beauty, community environment and reduce visual pollution. 
(Code 1957, § 3-1) 
Sec. 28-3. - Labels required for outdoor advertising signs. 
    Every outdoor advertising display sign installed, constructed or maintained for which a permit is required shall be plainly marked with the name of the person installing and maintaining such sign and shall have affixed thereon the number of permit issued for such sign by the permit official. The label shall be visible from ground level. 
(Code 1957, § 3-4(f)) 
Sec. 28-4. - Certain signs to be designed by engineer. 
    The following signs shall be designed by an engineer, who shall submit to the building official with the application for a sign permit complete plans and calculations so as to determine whether the sign complies with the city's Code: 
(1)  All roof signs. 
(2)  Projecting signs over 24 square feet in area. 
(3)  Billboards, freestanding signs (pole or ground signs) over 40 square feet in area. 
(4)  All signs with unusual structural features. 
(Code 1957, § 3-4(b)(9)) 
Sec. 28-5. - Prohibited signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or use within the city: 
(1)  Any swinging sign. 
(2)  Any snipe sign. 
(3)  Any banner. 
(4)  Any sign erected, located or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. 
(5)  Any sign attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(6)  Any sign or other advertising structure which by reason of its position, shape or color interferes, obstructs or may be confused with any authorized traffic control device or emergency vehicle signal. 
(7)  Any sign or advertising structure, portable or fixed, other than directional signs erected by authorized city, county or state agencies placed or erected on or over any part of the public right-of-way, sidewalk, street or curb, except as provided for projection clearance for wall signs in section 28-118. 
(8)  Any other type or kind of sign which does not comply with the terms, conditions and provisions contained in this section and ordinances amendatory hereto and supplemental hereto. 
(9)  Any unauthorized sign on city property. 
(10)  Any sidewalk, A-frame or sandwich sign. 
(11)  Any animated sign, except time and temperature signs with a complete time and/or temperature sequence span of four to eight seconds, except for digital signs and fuel price signs meeting the requirements provided within Chapter 28. 
(12)  Any add-on signs unless they shall have been issued a permit in conformance with the sign code. 
(13)  Any sign in or on the waters of Lake Worth. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(A); Ord. No. 4059, § 2, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 4073, § 2, 12-16-15; Ord. No. 4078, § 1, 2-17-16) 
Secs. 28-6-28-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-36. - Stop work orders for violations. 
    Upon notice from the building official that work on any sign or advertising structure is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the condition under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required to be given by the building official. 
(Code 1957, § 3-12) 
Sec. 28-37. - Notice of violations; abatement. 
    In case any sign shall be installed, erected or constructed in violation of any city ordinance, the building official shall notify, by certified mail or written notice served personally, the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign so as to comply with such regulations of the city and secure the necessary permit therefor, or to remove the sign. If such order is not complied with within ten days, the building official shall order the removal of such sign at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 3-13) 
Sec. 28-38. - Removal, repair or alteration. 
(a)  If any sign is abandoned, nonconforming, insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the building official, the owner or the person maintaining the sign or the owner of the property upon which such sign exists shall upon written notice from the building official forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within ten days, secure the sign in a manner approved by the building official in conformity with the provisions of this chapter or remove such sign. If such order is not complied with within ten days, the building official shall order the removal of such sign at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(b)  The notice shall be in accordance with established procedure for legal notice to the owner, agent or person in control of such sign. 
(c)  The owner, agent or person in control shall have the right, except in cases of emergency, to appeal from the decision of the building official as provided hereinafter, and to appear before the zoning board of adjustments and appeals at a specified time and place to show cause why he should not comply with such notice. 
(d)  In case the owner, agent or person in control of such sign cannot be found or if such owner, agent or person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with notice to repair, rehabilitate or remove such sign, the building official, after ascertaining the cost of removal by competitive bidding procedures, shall cause such sign to be removed by the bidder of the lowest responsible bid. 
(e)  The decision of the building official shall be final in cases of emergency which, in his opinion, involve imminent danger to human life or health. He shall promptly cause such sign to be made safe or cause its removal. For this purpose he may at once enter such land on which it stands, or abutting land or structures, with such assistance and at such cost as he may deem necessary. 
(f)  Any nonconforming sign installed prior to this chapter which is destroyed or damaged to the extent of 50 percent or more, or is altered or replaced, shall not be altered, replaced or reinstalled unless and until it shall have been made to conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  Costs incurred by the removal of the sign shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved in the following manner. The building official shall report the removal of the sign by the city, and city council shall assess the entire cost of such demolition or removal against the real property upon which such cost was incurred, which assessment shall include all administrative costs, postal expenses, newspaper publication and the like, and when made, constitutes a lien upon such property superior to all others except taxes. 
(h)  The city clerk shall file such lien in the county's official record book showing the nature of such lien, the amount thereof and an accurate legal description of the property, including the street address, which lien shall date from the date of filing and recite the names of all persons notified and interested persons. 
(Code 1957, § 3-9; Ord. No. 2971, § 6, 6-16-04) 
Sec. 28-39. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Any sign, billboard or advertising structure which lawfully existed and was maintained at the same time this section became effective may be continued, although such structures do not conform to all the provisions hereof; provided that no structural alterations are made thereto and that all such nonconforming signs, billboards, commercial advertising structures and their supporting members shall be completely removed from the premises or made to conform not later than seven years from the effective date of Ordinance Number 2065, adopted on May 5, 1980. 
(b)  Any sign which may become nonconforming as a result of any amendments to this section shall be completely removed from the premises, or altered to conform, not later than five years from the date on which such use becomes nonconforming. 
(c)  Termination of nonconforming signs: 
(1)  By abandonment. Abandonment of a nonconforming sign shall require the owner immediately to remove such sign. 
(2)  By violations. Any further violation of this section other than the existing nonconforming status at time of adoption shall require the owner immediately to remove such sign. 
(3)  By destruction, damage or obsolescence. The use of any nonconforming sign shall terminate whenever the sign is damaged or destroyed beyond 50 percent, from any cause whatever, or becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable city ordinance to the extent the sign becomes a hazard or danger and upon termination shall be removed. 
(4)  Removal. The use of an animated or abandoned sign within the city shall terminate within 90 days after such sign became nonconforming and the animated or abandoned sign shall be removed on or before the date of termination. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(F); Ord. No. 2152, § 3(A)(3), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 28-40. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the building official in regard to the mode, manner or method of construction, erection or alteration of a sign may appeal such decision to the zoning board of adjustment and appeals. 
(b)  Any persons aggrieved by any decision of the building official in regard to the permitted location, size or height of a sign or the continuance of a nonconforming sign may appeal to the zoning board of appeals. Such appeal shall be an application for a variance and shall be granted only if the zoning board of appeals determines that such variance is not contrary to the intent of this chapter and that a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would be impracticable and would result in an unreasonable and unnecessary hardship. 
(Code 1957, §§ 3-14, 23-28(H); Ord. No. 2971, § 7, 6-16-04) 
Secs. 28-41-28-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 28-56. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in a business of sign or outdoor advertising or in a business of installing or maintaining signs within the city, without having first procured a license for such business in accordance with the requirements of chapter 10. 
(Code 1957, § 3-2) 
Sec. 28-57. - Bond or liability insurance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of sign or outdoor advertising or in the business of installing or maintaining signs within the city unless and until such persons shall have filed with the city a bond or certificate of public liability and property damage insurance policy executed by a company authorized to do business in the state in a sum of not less than $100,000.00 for injuries to one person; $300,000.00 for injury to more than one person; $5,000.00 for damage to property, and a $2,000.00 surety bond to cover damage to public property, and so conditioned as to indemnify, keep harmless and save the city and all persons from any damages, costs, liabilities or expenses of any kind whatsoever which they might suffer by reason of the construction, installation and maintenance of signs or the destruction thereof, total or partial, by any means whatsoever, including acts of God. 
(Code 1957, § 3-3) 
Secs. 28-58-28-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 

Sec. 28-71. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post, display or install any sign or advertising structure or high-voltage tube lighting applying to signs as defined in this chapter, except real estate signs, certain political signs, construction signs, one identification sign three square feet or less in area per business painted on the wall of which the top of sign is no more than eight feet above ground level, and directional signs, in the city without first having obtained a permit. 
(Code 1957, § 3-4(a)) 
Sec. 28-72. - Applications. 
    Applications for permits required by this division shall be filed by such applicant or his agent in the building and zoning department upon forms to be furnished by the department. The applications shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Kind of sign, advertising structure or high-voltage tube lighting. 
(2)  The street address of the property upon which such sign, advertising structure or high-voltage tube lighting is proposed to be located. 
(3)  The proposed location of the sign, advertising structure or high-voltage tube lighting upon the property identified in subsection (2) of this section shown on a scale drawing of the property. 
(4)  The name of the person installing the structure. 
(5)  The estimated value of the sign. 
(6)  The name and address of the owner or other person in control or possession of the real property upon which such sign or advertising structure is to be constructed, installed, operated, used, maintained, posted or displayed. 
(7)  Whether or not such person identified in subsection (4) of this section has consented to the construction, installation, operation, use, maintenance, posting or displaying of such sign. 
(8)  Three copies of detailed drawings, drawn to scale containing complete plans and specifications to show methods of construction and anchoring to building or ground. These drawings must show the height and width of the sign, advertising structure or high-voltage tube lighting and the area in square feet. 
(9)  Complete plans and calculations required for the signs listed in section 28-4. 
(Code 1957, § 3-4(b)) 
Sec. 28-73. - Issuance. 
    Provided the provisions of sections 28-56, 28-57, 28-71, 28-72 and 28-75 shall have been complied with and the sign or advertising structure will not violate any of the terms, conditions or provisions of this chapter or of any other law or ordinance, the building official shall issue a permit for each sign or advertising structure, retaining a copy thereof and a copy of plans of the advertising structure for his records. The copy of plans or records is to be retained by the building official for at least five years. Permits shall be numbered in the order of their issuance. 
(Code 1957, § 3-4(c)) 
Sec. 28-74. - Contents. 
    The permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Kind and size in square feet, and the height and width of the sign, advertising structure or high-voltage tube lighting authorized by such permit. 
(2)  The street address of the property on the which sign, advertising structure or high-voltage tube lighting is permitted to be located and name of the owner or lessee of the property. 
(3)  The location upon the property where the sign, advertising structure or high-voltage lighting is permitted. 
(4)  The name of the person installing structure. 
(5)  The estimated value of the sign. 
(6)  The amount of the fee paid for such permit. 
(7)  The date of issuance. 
(Code 1957, § 3-4(c)(1)-(7)) 
Sec. 28-75. - Fees. 
(a)  Permit fees for signs regulated by this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  For a valuation up to and including $500.00, the fee shall be $10.00. 
(2)  For a valuation over $500.00 up to and including $1,000.00, the fee shall be $20.00. 
(3)  For a valuation over $1,000.00, the fee shall be $20.00 for the first $1,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
(4)  A double fee shall be paid for any sign erected without a permit. 
(b)  The fee shall be in addition to any license, tax or other fee now or hereafter levied and assessed by the city. No fee shall be prorated to accommodate short-term publicity features. 
(Code 1957, § 3-4(g)) 
Sec. 28-76. - Revocation. 
    The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter, if it is found that there has been any false statement, concealment or misrepresentation as to any material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(Code 1957, § 3-4(e)) 
Secs. 28-77-28-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 28-91. - When required. 
    The contractor or owner securing the permit for any sign shall call the inspection office and request an inspection whenever any sign is being installed and before any concrete is poured. A final inspection shall be requested upon completion. At the time of a request for final inspection, a photograph of the completed sign shall be taken by the inspector. The photograph shall be a minimum size of 21/4 inches by 21/4 inches and maximum size of three inches by five inches for filing purposes. 
(Code 1957, § 3-4(d)) 
Sec. 28-92. - Reinspection; maintenance. 
(a)  The building official shall cause to be inspected annually, or at such other times as he deems necessary, each sign or advertising structure regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining if it is insecure or in need of repair or removal. 
(b)  All signs or advertising structures as regulated by this chapter together with all their supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be kept in repair and, unless of noncorroding metal, shall be thoroughly painted at least once every two years. The building official may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained as set forth in the provisions of this section. Such removal will be at the expense of the owner or lessee according to section 28-38. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every person maintaining any billboard within the city to keep the property within 20 feet of such billboards free of trash and debris; to cut the weeds and brush around the billboards; to paint or cover by shrubbery or latticework the frame of any sign visible from any street and to repaint all painted framework at least once in each year. 
(Code 1957, § 3-11) 
Secs. 28-93-28-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION STANDARDS 

Sec. 28-106. - Height of projecting structures generally. 
    Any signs projecting over private property, and located where motor trucks may be required to pass beneath them, shall be erected and maintained at a height not to be less than 14 feet. 
(Code 1957, § 3-7) 
Sec. 28-107. - Signs in residential, commercial, public and industrial districts. 
(a)  In districts zoned RS-5, RS-6, RS-8, RD-15, RML-12 and RM-15, no signs other than home nameplates shall be allowed; except that places of worship, schools and hospitals shall be permitted to install monument signs totaling not more than 32 square feet in area per street front, which shall not be placed within five feet from the property line. 
(b)  In RMH-15, RM-20, RMH-20, RH, commercial, industrial, downtown, OP, RO, CF and U zoning districts, no sign shall be placed within five feet from the property line. All signs in the aforementioned districts shall be not more than 42 square feet in area per street front. 
(1)  Signs erected by authorized city, county or state agencies within the CF zoning district or in public right-of-way, shall be not more than 175 square feet in area per street front. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(C)(1); Ord. No. 2152, § 3(A)(1) and (A)(2), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 4059, § 3, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 4078, § 2, 2-17-16) 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 31. 
Sec. 28-108. - General construction provisions. 
(a)  All signs shall be constructed and erected in accordance with the standards and requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Every sign shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 50 pounds per square foot. The increase in stresses for short-term loading shall not be applied to cantilevered projections, or where vibration or fluttering action can be anticipated. 
(c)  Letters, decorations and facings of signs constructed of noncombustible materials may be made of plastic approved by Fire Underwriters for the proposed use. Plastic used in signs shall be designed in accordance with the Plexiglas Handbook for Sign Shops, Bulletin No. PL-669, published by Rohm and Hass Company of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, dated March 1965, together with all current revisions, amendments and supplements, the design load on plastic face to be 50 pounds per square foot. 
(Code 1957, § 3-8) 
Sec. 28-109. - Real estate signs. 
    Real estate signs shall be permitted only for the purpose of advertising the land or building for rent or for sale and shall relate only to the premises upon which the sign is located. Only one sign, double-faced or single-faced, visible from one streetfront shall be permitted on each parcel of land located within any district. Such sign shall not exceed the number of square feet of sign area as shown in the table below. No permit shall be required for such temporary real estate signs. 
Maximum 
Sign Area 
(square feet) Total 
Aggregate Area 
(square feet) Within 
Distance of 
Residence 
(feet)  6 12  50 12 24 100 20 40 150 or more  
(Code 1957, § 3-6(a)) 
Sec. 28-110. - Construction signs. 
    Any sign erected on the site of construction displaying on the sign the name of the builder, contractor, developer, architect, engineer, painter, plumber or other persons or artisans interested in the construction shall be permitted only while construction is actually in progress and shall be removed within 30 days following completion or abandonment of work. Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet per sign face in area with an aggregate area of 64 square feet. One sign is permitted per construction site. No permit shall be required for such temporary construction signs. 
(Code 1957, § 3-6(c)) 
Sec. 28-111. - Illuminated signs. 
(a)  All persons shall install or maintain any illuminated sign within the city in accordance with the regulations contained in the city's electrical code and zoning code, as well as this chapter and any other applicable code. 
(b)  Focus beam illumination shall be shielded from the public right-of-way and adjacent residential districts. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(C)(3)) 
Sec. 28-112. - Point of purchase signs. 
    The number and size of point of purchase signs shall be governed by the percentages and limitations imposed in this chapter, excluding temporary or instructional signs, which may be in addition to the percentages under the conditions contained in this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(C)(2)) 
Sec. 28-113. - Instructional signs. 
    Instructional signs shall be exempt from the limitation on total sign area allowed per business and the requirement of 24 feet of setback from any common property line, but shall be at least five feet from any common property line. However, an instructional sign shall not be more than 31/2 feet in height, nor total more than five square feet in area. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(D)(1)(g)) 
Sec. 28-114. - Development signs. 
(a)  Single-family subdivisions, apartments, condominiums. Development signs advertising the sale or rental of single-family subdivisions, apartments or condominium developments shall not be permitted to exceed 32 square feet per sign face in area with an aggregate area of 64 square feet. One sign is permitted per development site. Upon final certificate of occupancy of a completed residential structure, the sign shall be removed or relocated in compliance with the size and distance requirements of a real estate sign. 
(b)  Commercial, industrial structures. Development signs advertising the sale or rental of commercial or industrial structures over 30,000 square feet of floor space and under construction upon the land which is being developed shall not be permitted to exceed 200 square feet in area, total aggregate area of 400 square feet. One such sign is permitted per each street frontage. Permits are required for development signs. Upon final certificate of occupancy of a completed commercial or industrial structure, the sign shall be removed or relocated in compliance with the size and distance requirements of a real estate sign. 
(Code 1957, § 3-6(d)) 
Sec. 28-115. - Freestanding signs. 
(a)  Where freestanding signs are permitted by this section, the property frontage must be 50 feet or more. The side setback line for a freestanding sign shall be 24 feet, except that in the triangular area made by the intersection of a property corner and points 20 feet from a corner, along a right-of-way line in each direction, one freestanding sign may be erected within such triangle. No sign shall be placed or erected in this triangle that is over 30 inches in height, unless it has a nine-foot clearance from the ground. 
(b)  The sign shall be supported by either one or two poles. Where a single pole is used, the maximum diameter of the pole shall be 12 inches. Where two poles are used, each pole shall have a diameter of eight inches or less and be spaced a minimum of four feet apart, measured from center to center. If a rectangular or square supported member is used, the width or breadth shall not exceed the above-specified diameter. 
(c)  There shall be a minimum of 48 feet between freestanding signs located in the same property. The number and size of freestanding signs permitted shall be determined only by the lineal footage adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
(d)  There shall be an allowable amount of copy area for front freestanding signs of one square foot for each lineal foot of property frontage. The owner shall declare one street as his frontage street. 
(e)  There shall be an allowable amount of copy area for freestanding signs along all other public rights-of-way calculated on the basis of one-half square foot for each lineal foot of property along such public rights-of-way. 
(f)  There shall be an allowable amount of copy area for freestanding signs along public rights-of-way adjacent to residentially zoned property calculated on the basis of one-quarter square foot for each lineal foot of property along such public rights-of-way. 
(g)  No freestanding signs shall be permitted within 24 feet of any common property line, except instructional signs which shall be as provided in section 28-113. 
(h)  No freestanding sign shall project over the public right-of-way, street, sidewalk or building setback line. 
(i)  Every freestanding sign in excess of 32 square feet in area shall be built of noncombustible material, except ornamental moulding, battens and decorative trim. 
(j)  No freestanding sign shall be erected to a height exceeding 30 feet above the ground or street level, except that on all interchanges of I-95 a point of purchase sign may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet within a distance of 750 feet measured from the point of intersection of the centerline of the right-of-way of the intersecting street or highway. On those interchanges which have a cloverleaf-type ramp, the 60-foot point of purchase signs may extend a distance of 1,000 feet from the point of intersection. Signs shall face oncoming traffic on I-95 only. Lighting reflectors may project beyond the face of the sign. 
(k)  In addition, a freestanding point of purchase sign not exceeding 30 feet in height may be erected in a shopping area with a gross leasable area of 30,000 square feet or more. Only one point of purchase sign 30 feet in height per shopping area will be permitted. 
(l)  Any person occupying any vacant lot or premises by means of a freestanding sign shall be subject to the same duties and responsibilities as the owner of the lot or premises, with respect to keeping the same clean, sanitary, inoffensive, free and clear of all obnoxious substances and unsightly conditions on the ground in the vicinity of such freestanding sign or the premises for which they may be responsible. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(D)(1)(a-f), (E)(1)) 
Sec. 28-116. - Roof signs. 
(a)  Roof signs shall not extend over public property. Roof signs shall be point of purchase signs only. A roof sign may be substituted for a permitted freestanding sign; however, the maximum allowable size shall not exceed one-half the allowable size of the freestanding sign for which it is substituted or shall not exceed the allowable amount of sign area for signs attached to facades as shown on the street facade sign area table and graph in sections 28-123 and 28-124, whichever is less. 
(b)  A roof sign shall not exceed 15 feet above the roof level, nor be less than six feet above the roof level; however, the six-foot minimum required height above the roof level may be waived by approval of the fire marshal, if in his judgment, the waiver will allow proper fire department maneuverability. 
(c)  The support members of any roof sign shall appear to be an architectural and integral part of the building, and shall appear to be free of any extra bracing angle iron, guy wires, cables, etc. 
(d)  Every roof sign shall be constructed entirely of noncombustible material, including the upright supports and braces. 
(e)  The bearing plates of all roof signs shall distribute the load directly to or upon masonry walls, steel, roof girders, columns or beams. The building shall be designed to avoid overstress of these members. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(E)(2)) 
Sec. 28-117. - Attached signs. 
(a)  Signs attached to building facades shall include wall, flat, painted, V-shaped and marquee signs. 
(b)  There shall be an allowable amount of sign area for signs attached to the frontage streets facade of a building not in excess of that percentage shown on the street facade sign area graph in section 28-124 and shall be on file in the department of building and zoning. 
(c)  There shall be an allowable amount of sign area for signs attached to facades other than the frontage street facade not in excess of 50 percent of that percentage on the street facade sign area graph in section 28-124. However, when the facade faces residentially zoned property, the allowable amount of sign area shall not exceed 25 percent of the area allowed as shown on the street facade sign area graph. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(D)(2)) 
Sec. 28-118. - Flat or wall signs. 
(a)  No flat, wall or V-shaped signs shall be erected at a distance of more than 18 inches beyond the face of any building, marquees being considered as a part of a building. The outside edge of wall signs on marquees shall not be closer than 24 inches from the curb line. 
(b)  Wall signs attached or applied to exterior walls of solid masonry, concrete or stone shall be safely and securely attached to the same by means of metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws of sufficient number, size and length to satisfy the structural requirements for properly mounting the sign. No wooden blocks shall be used for anchorage, except in the case of wall signs attached to buildings with walls of wood. No wall sign shall be supported by anchorages secured to an unbraced parapet wall. 
(c)  The surface of all wall signs shall be of noncombustible material, except nonelectrical signs of less than 33 square feet of solid area not over public property. 
(d)  No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any required wall opening, nor project beyond the top of the wall to which it is attached, except that such signs shall be permitted to project over the roof line an amount equal to that normally permitted for parapet heights as applied to such building, but not to exceed three feet. 
(e)  No wall sign shall project more than 18 inches over any public right-of-way or sidewalk. 
(f)  All bracing and/or lighting shall be hidden or covered so that it shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. The covered portion of the ends of such signs shall not be used for advertising purposes. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(E)(3)) 
Sec. 28-119. - Projecting signs. 
(a)  No projecting sign shall project over any public right-of-way. A projecting sign may be substituted for a permitted freestanding sign; however, the maximum allowable size for such a substitution shall be determined in accordance with subsection 28-116(a). 
(b)  All projecting signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or other noncombustible material and securely attached to a building or structure by metal supports such as bolts, anchors, supports, chains, guys or steel rods. No staples or nails shall be used to secure any projecting sign to any building or structure. The use of plastic material is permitted as approved in section 28-108. 
(c)  The dead load of projecting signs, not parallel to the building or structure, and the load due to wind pressure, shall be supported with chains, guys or steel rods, the working stress of which shall not exceed one-fifth of their ultimate strength. Such supports shall be erected or mounted at such angle as determined by an adequate stress analysis to meet the structural requirements of the particular structure in question. 
(d)  All supports shall be secured to a bolt or expansion screw that will develop the strength of the supporting chain, guys or steel rods. Turnbuckles of equivalent strength requirements shall be placed in all chains, guys or steel rods supporting projecting signs. The turnbuckles shall be locked in place after the desired tension has been attained. 
(e)  Chains, cables, guys or steel rods used to support the live or dead load of projecting signs shall be noncorrosive and may be fastened to solid masonry walls with expansion bolts or by machine screws in iron supports, but no such supports shall be attached to an unbraced parapet wall. Where the supports must be fastened to walls made of wood, the supporting anchor bolts must go through the wall and be plated or fastened on the inside in a secure manner. 
(f)  No projecting sign which is entirely dependent upon a wall for support shall be erected on the wall of any building so as to project above the roof or parapet wall, or above the roof level where there is no parapet wall. However, a sign designed by an engineer and erected at a right angle to the building the horizontal width of which sign, perpendicular to such wall, does not exceed 18 inches, may be erected to a height not exceeding two feet above the roof or parapet wall or above the roof level where there is no parapet wall. A sign attached to a corner of a building and parallel to the vertical line of such corner shall be deemed to be erected at a right angle to the building wall. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(E)(4)) 
Sec. 28-120. - Marquee signs. 
    Marquee signs shall be noncombustible and shall be constructed entirely of metal, approved plastic or other materials approved by the building official and may be attached to sides or front of a marquee, or hung under a marquee; and such sign, when hung under a marquee, shall be at least nine feet at its lowest level above the sidewalk or ground level; and further, no such sign shall extend nearer than 24 inches to the curbline. No marquee sign shall extend above, or be mounted upon, the top of the marquee. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(E)(5)) 
Sec. 28-121. - Pylon sign. 
(a)  No pylon sign shall project over any public right-of-way. 
(b)  A pylon sign may be substituted for a permitted freestanding sign; however, the maximum allowable size for such a substitution shall be determined in accordance with section 28-116(a). 
(c)  The structural members of all pylon signs will be tied into the building on which such signs are erected in such a way that they become a part of the overall structural framework of the building or its roof. 
(d)  Maximum height of pylon signs shall be 15 feet above the roof level. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(E)(6)) 
Sec. 28-122. - Billboards; off-premises signs. 
(a)  No billboard or off-premises sign shall be installed: 
(1)  Upon any property zoned used or classified for residential purposes. 
(2)  On submerged property in the waters of Lake Worth. 
(3)  Within five feet of the public right-of-way, street, sidewalk or building setback line. 
(4)  Within 24 feet of any side or rear property line. 
(5)  More than 1,000 feet distant from the property or business it advertises. 
(6)  On the roof of any building. 
(7)  In violation of applicable state or federal standards on any city street. 
(b)  The allowable sign area of a billboard shall be calculated in the same manner as a free-standing sign as set forth in section 28-115. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every person maintaining any billboard within the city to keep the property within 20 feet of such billboards free of trash and debris; to cut the weeds and brush around such billboards; to paint or cover, by shrubbery or latticework, the frame of any sign visible from any street, and to repaint all painted framework at least once in each year. 
(d)  A digital billboard may be permitted on new and existing off-site sign structures, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Permitted locations. 
a.  A digital billboard shall only be located within 500 feet of Interstate 95 (I-95). 
b.  No digital billboard shall be located on or within a distance of 250 feet of a residentially zoned parcel or area designated for residential use. 
c.  A digital billboard shall be considered a form of billboard when determining state permitting requirements. 
d.  A digital billboard must maintain a 2,500 foot separation requirement from any other digital billboard. 
(2)  Operational limitations. Digital billboards shall contain static, motionless messages only. Displaying any form of motion, or the optical illusion of movement, video or varying light intensity is prohibited. 
(3)  Minimum display time. Each message on a digital billboard must be displayed for a minimum duration of six seconds. 
(4)  Brightness. Digital billboards shall not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.3 foot candles above ambient light, as measured using a foot candle meter at a pre-set distance. This requirement is based on levels established by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) for Light Emitting Diode (LED) signage. Certification confirming that brightness levels are below the 0.3 foot candles threshold shall be provided to the city manager yearly. 
a.  Each digital display must have a light sensing device that will adjust the brightness in real-time as ambient light conditions change. 
b.  A digital billboard may be internally and/or externally illuminated. 
(5)  Photometric plan. Each application for a digital billboard shall be accompanied by a photometric plan. The photometric plan shall demonstrate the digital billboard's maximum light intensity, in foot candles above ambient light, at locations identified by the applicant or staff that may be impacted within 500 feet of the proposed digital billboard location. This plan may be reviewed by a third party lighting specialist selected by the city. Costs associated with this third party specialist shall be paid by the applicant to the city. 
(6)  Malfunction. The digital billboard shall have a default mechanism installed to either turn the display off or only show black on the display in the event of a malfunction. 
(7)  Display of public emergency and public service information. Owners of digital billboards shall coordinate with local public safety authorities to display emergency information and public service information important to the traveling public including, but not limited to Amber Alerts, Silver Alerts, Blue Alerts, traffic alerts, public safety messages and emergency management information. Digital billboard operators shall provide for regional emergency announcements and alerts to be displayed on the digital billboard without charge as requested by the city manager or designee. 
(8)  Personalized messages. The display of personalized "smart" messages, that are triggered or initiated by license plate recognition, facial recognition or by reading or analyzing electronic signals from traffic or an individual vehicle, such as but not limited to a radio station, is prohibited unless used in a public emergency or public service capacity. 
(9)  Message sequencing. The practice of using multiple sequential messages to present a single advertisement on an individual or combination of billboards shall be prohibited. 
(10)  Fees and penalties. A fee of $500.00 per day shall be assessed for a violation of this ordinance. 
(Code 1957, § 23-28(G); Ord. No. 3091, § 2, 5-18-11) 
Sec. 28-123. - Street facade sign area table. 
    The following is the street facade sign area table: 
Front Wall 
Area 
(in square feet) Percent of Front Wall Area Allowed For Signs Sign Area 
(in square feet)      0 12.00 0    100 11.95 11.95    200 11.85 23.70    300 11.80 35.40    400 11.70 46.80    500 11.65 58.25    600 11.60 69.60    700 11.50 80.50    800 11.45 91.60    900 11.35 102.15  1,000 11.30 113.00  1,100 11.25 123.75  1,200 11.20 134.40  1,300 11.125 144.62  1,400 11.075 155.05  1,500 11.00 165.00  1,600 10.925 174.80  1,700 10.875 184.875  1,800 10.80 194.40  1,900 10.75 204.25  2,000 10.70 214.00  2,100 10.625 223.125  2,200 10.55 232.10  2,300 10.50 241.50  2,400 10.45 250.80  2,500 10.40 260.00  2,600 10.235 267.45  2,700 10.25 276.75  2,800 10.20 285.60  2,900 10.15 294.35  3,000 10.10 303.00  3,100 10.00 310.00  3,200 9.975 319.20  3,300 9.95 328.35  3,400 9.90 336.60  3,500 9.85 344.75  3,600 9.80 352.80  3,700 9.75 360.75  3,800 9.70 368.60  3,900 9.65 376.35  4,000 9.60 384.00  4,100 9.525 390.525  4,200 9.475 397.95  4,300 9.425 405.275  4,400 9.375 412.50  4,500 9.325 419.25  4,600 9.275 426.65  4,700 9.225 433.575  4,800 9.20 441.60  4,900 9.175 449.575  5,000 9.125 456.25  5,100 9.00 459.00  5,200 8.975 466.70  5,300 8.925 473.075  5,400 8.875 479.25  5,500 8.825 485.375  5,600 8.80 492.80  5,700 8.75 498.75  5,800 8.70 504.60  5,900 8.65 511.35  6,000 8.60 516.00  6,100 8.575 523.075  6,200 8.525 528.55  6,300 8.50 535.50  6,400 8.45 540.80  6,500 8.40 546.00  6,600 8.35 551.10  6,700 8.30 555.10  6,800 8.25 561.00  6,900 8.20 565.80  7,000 8.175 572.25  7,100 8.125 576.875  7,200 8.10 583.20  7,300 8.05 587.65  7,400 8.00 592.00  7,500 7.975 598.125  7,600 7.925 602.30  7,700 7.90 608.30  7,800 7.85 612.30  7,900 7.825 618.175  8,000 7.80 624.00  8,100 7.775 629.775  8,200 7.725 633.45  8,300 7.70 639.10  8,400 7.675 644.70  8,500 7.65 650.25  8,600 7.625 655.75  8,700 7.60 661.20  8,800 7.55 664.40  8,900 7.50 667.50  9,000 7.475 672.75  9,100 7.45 677.95  9,200 7.425 683.10  9,300 7.40 688.20  9,400 7.375 693.25  9,500 7.35 698.25  9,600 7.325 702.20  9,700 7.30 708.10  9,800 7.25 710.50  9,900 7.225 715.275 10,000 7.20 720.00 10,100 7.175 724.675 10,200 7.125 726.75 10,300 7.10 731.30 10,400 7.075 735.80 10,500 7.05 740.25 10,600 7.025 744.65 10,700 7.00 749.00 10,800 6.975 753.30 10,900 6.95 757.55 11,000 6.925 761.75 11,100 6.90 765.90 11,200 6.875 770.00 11,300 6.85 774.05 11,400 6.825 778.05 11,500 6.80 782.00 11,600 6.775 785.90 11,700 6.75 788.75 11,800 6.725 793.55 11,900 6.70 797.30 12,000 6.675 801.00 12,100 6.65 804.65 12,200 6.625 808.25 12,300 6.595 811.185 12,400 6.585 815.54 12,500 6.575 821.875 12,600 6.565 827.19 12,700 6.55 831.85 12,800 6.50 832.00 12,900 6.475 835.375 13,000 6.45 883.50 13,100 6.425 841.675 13,200 6.40 844.80 13,300 6.395 850.535 13,400 6.375 854.25 13,500 6.355 857.925 13,600 6.335 861.56 13,700 6.315 865.155 13,800 6.30 869.40 13,900 6.285 873.615 14,000 6.265 877.10 14,100 6.245 880.545 14,200 6.225 883.95 14,300 6.20 886.60 14,400 6.185 890.64 14,500 6.165 893.925 14,600 6.145 897.170 14,700 6.125 900.375 14,800 6.10 902.80 14,900 6.090 907.41 15,000 6.075 911.25 15,100 6.06 915.06 15,200 6.045 918.84 15,300 6.030 922.59 15,400 6.015 926.31 15,500 6.00 930.00 15,600 5.995 934.22 15,700 5.980 938.86 15,800 5.965 942.47 15,900 5.950 946.05 16,000 5.935 949.60 16,100 5.920 953.12 16,200 5.905 956.61 16,300 5.90 961.70 16,400 5.890 966.60 16,500 5.875 969.375 16,600 5.860 972.76 16,700 5.845 976.115 16,800 5.830 979.44 16,900 5.815 982.735 17,000 5.80 986.00 17,100 5.795 990.945 17,200 5.780 993.16 17,300 5.765 997.345 17,400 5.750 1,000.50 17,500 5.735 1,003.625 17,600 5.720 1,006.78 17,700 5.705 1,009.785 17,800 5.70 1,014.60 17,900 5.695 1,019.405 18,000 5.680 1,022.40 18,100 5.665 1,025.365 18,200 5.650 1,028.30 18,300 5.635 1,031.205 18,400 5.620 1,034.08 18,500 5.605 1,036.925 18,600 5.60 1,041.60 18,700 5.5925 1,045.7975 18,800 5.5850 1,049.98 18,900 5.5775 1,054.1475 19,000 5.5725 1,058.775 19,100 5.5650 1,062.915 19,200 5.5575 1,067.04 19,300 5.55 1,071.15 19,400 5.545 1,075.73 19,500 5.5375 1,079.8125 19,600 5.530 1,083.88 19,700 5.5225 1,087.9325 19,800 5.5150 1,091.97 19,900 5.5075 1,095.0025 20,000 5.50 1,100.00  
(Code 1957, § 3-10) 
Sec. 28-124. - Street facade sign area graph. 
    The following depicts the street facade sign area in graph form. 

(Code 1957, § 3-15) 
Sec. 28-125. - Programmable digital signs. 
    A digital sign may be permitted subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Permitted locations. 
a.  Digital signs shall be located only within the community facility (CF) Zoning District. The digital sign and its messages must be associated with a public use. 
b.  Only one digital sign is permitted per development site, measuring no more than 100 square feet in area per street front. 
c.  No digital sign shall be located within 250 feet of a residentially zoned parcel or residential structure. 
d.  No digital sign shall be placed within a visibility triangle which shall be measured 30 feet from intersecting street right-of-way lines. 
e.  Digital signs shall be located in a manner that will not adversely interfere with the visibility or functioning of traffic signals and traffic signage, by taking into consideration the physical elements of the digital sign and the surrounding area, such as physical obstructions, line of sight issues, sign brightness and visual obstruction or impairment issues. 
(2)  Operational limitations. 
a.  Digital signs shall contain static, motionless messages only. 
b.  Displaying any form of motion, or the optical illusion of movement, video or varying light intensity is prohibited. 
c.  Each message on a digital sign must be individually complete and shall not continue on a subsequently displayed message. 
d.  Audio mechanisms, producing sounds, messages or music are prohibited. 
(3)  Display time. 
a.  Each message on a digital sign must be displayed for a minimum duration of six seconds. 
(4)  Brightness. Digital signs shall not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.3 foot candles above ambient light, as measured using a foot candle meter at a pre-set distance. This requirement is based on levels established by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) for Light Emitting Diode (LED) signage as amended from time to time. Certification confirming that brightness levels are below the 0.3 foot candles threshold shall be provided to the city every two years. 
a.  Each digital sign must have a light sensing device that will adjust the display brightness in real-time as ambient light conditions change so that at no time a sign shall exceed a brightness level of three tenths (0.3) foot candles above ambient light. 
(5)  Photometric plan. Each application for a digital sign shall be accompanied by a photometric plan. The photometric plan shall demonstrate the digital sign's maximum light intensity, in foot candles above ambient light, at locations identified by the applicant or city staff that may be impacted within 300 feet of the proposed digital sign location. This plan may be reviewed by a third party lighting specialist selected by the city. Costs associated with third party review shall be paid by the applicant to the city. 
(6)  Malfunction. Digital signage shall have a default mechanism installed to either turn the display off or only show black on the display in the event of a malfunction. 
(7)  Display of public emergency and public service information. Owners of digital signs shall coordinate with local public safety authorities to display emergency information and public service information important to the traveling public including, but not limited to Amber Alerts, Silver Alerts, Blue Alerts, traffic alerts, public safety messages and emergency management information. Digital sign operators shall provide for regional emergency announcements and alerts to be displayed on the digital sign without charge as requested by the city manager or designee. 
(8)  Personalized messages. The display of personalized "smart" messages, that are triggered or initiated by license plate recognition, facial recognition or by reading or analyzing electronic signals from traffic or an individual vehicle, such as but not limited to a radio station, is prohibited unless used in a public emergency or public service capacity. 
(9)  Message sequencing. The practice of using multiple sequential messages to present a single advertisement on an individual or combination of digital signs shall be prohibited. 
(10)  Fees and penalties. A fee of $500.00 per day shall be assessed for a violation of this section. 
(11)  Exceptions. Fuel price digital signs shall be permitted as part of a monument sign, subject to the following: 
a.  Location. Must be part of a monument sign located at a self- serviced fueling station within the city. 
b.  Maximum area. Shall only utilize 50 percent of allowable sign area to display digital fuel prices. 
c.  Maximum size. Numerals shall not be greater than 16 inches in height. 
d.  Limitations. 
i.  Digital portion shall only display numerals for fuel prices. 
ii.  The numerical values displayed for fuel prices shall only be illuminated in white numbers. No amber, red, green, or other colors shall be permitted to be illuminated on the fuel price digital signs. 
iii.  Fractions or portions of a whole number shall be at least half the size of the largest whole number for fuel prices per Florida Statutes § 526.111, or as amended. 
iv.  Fuel price shall be advertised with the tax included per Florida Statutes § 526.111. or as amended. 
v.  Fuel price shall be the same for the same grade of gasoline dispensed from one pump than from another pump supplied from a common storage at the same location. This shall not prohibit price differential between cash sale and credit sale per Florida Statutes § 526.121, or as amended. 
e.  Typical fuel price sign example. The image below shall be used as a design reference for the typical fuel price signs; see Figure 11(e)(1). 
Figure 11(e)(1): Typical fuel Price Sign 

(Ord. No. 4059, § 4, 2-14-15; Ord. No. 4073, § 3, 12-16-15) 
Sec. 28-126. - Marina Upland Area sign overlay district. 
(a)  Objectives of this section: 
(1)  Promote the use and redevelopment of the Marina Upland Area, in association with the Marina District Master Plan, by providing for a variety of unique sign options. 
(2)  Allow the installation of signs which provide for wav-finding and facilitate the efficient flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the Marina Upland Area. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the Marina Upland Area Sign Overlay District shall be defined as follows. Beginning at the northwest point of the intersection of Broadway and East 17th Street, travel east to Avenue "C," south down Avenue "C" to the northernmost property line of Bicentennial Park, east to the Intracoastal Waterway, south to the southernmost Municipal Marina property line, west along the southernmost Municipal Marina property line to Avenue "C," south along Avenue "C" to East 11th Street, west along East 11th Street to the westernmost right-of-way line for Broadway, north along said line to West 13th Street, west along the southernmost boundary of 13th Street to the western boundary of Avenue "E," north to the northern boundary of West 13th Street, east along the northern boundary of West 13th Street to Broadway, then north to the point of beginning. 

(c)  The sign types described and defined below, may be permissible within the Marina Upland Area Sign Overlay District, in addition to all other signage types in accordance with Chapter 28 "Signs." 
(1)  Landmark sign: One prominent master development sign, not to exceed 25 feet in height and 10 feet in width, shall be permitted within the Marina Upland Area sign overlay district. 
(2)  Vehicular directional sign: Signage not to exceed ten feet in height nor ten feet in width, typically providing for site identification and way-finding along roadways or right-of-way. 
(3)  Monument sign: Signage not to exceed ten feet in height nor ten feet in width, typically providing information about or identification of a specific location or facility at the same location where the sign is constructed. 
(4)  Pedestrian wall sign: Wall signage not to exceed 20 square feet in area; adaptable signage typically intended for pedestrian wav-finding of Marina District Upland Area amenities. 
(5)  Regulatory sign: Typically uniform traffic signage required to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public which shall meet all applicable code requirements. and when possible, fit within the character of the Marina District Upland Area by use of ornamental features and color schemes. 
(6)  Parking sign: Signage not to exceed eight feet in height nor five feet in width, typically identifying available vehicular parking areas. 
(7)  Pedestrian sign: Signage not to exceed 15 feet in height nor six feet in width, providing for pedestrian way-finding and identification of on-site amenities. 
(8)  Other signs: Other similar signage may be permitted so long as the height and width dimensions proposed do not exceed the aforementioned limitations. 
(d)  Except as stated above, signs within the Marina District Upland Area shall meet all other sign installation requirements as provided within Chapter 28, "Signs," as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 4082, § 2, 7-6-16) 
Chapter 28.5 - STORMWATER CONTROL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28.5-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the City of Riviera Beach Stormwater Control Ordinance, and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(art. 1.0), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Riviera Beach. This chapter is intended to comply with federal and state laws and regulations regarding water quality. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(1.1), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-3. - Definitions. 
    Administrator means the city manager or his designee. 
    Authorizing official means any employee or agent of the City of Riviera Beach authorized in writing by the administrator to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
    Discharge means any direct or indirect entry of any solid, liquid or gaseous matter. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, institution, or other entity. 
    Site of industrial activity means any area or facility used for manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage, as defined under 40 CFR Section 122.26(a)(14) of regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, as amended. 
    Stormwater means any stormwater runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater system means the system of conveyances used for collecting, storing, and transporting stormwater in the City of Riviera Beach but not including any facilities intended to be used in accordance with applicable law for collecting and transporting sanitary or other wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(1.2), 11-5-97) 
Secs. 28.5-4-28.5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY 

Sec. 28.5-26. - General prohibitions. 
    Any discharge into the stormwater system in violation of any federal, state, county, municipal, or other law, rule, regulation or permit is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(2.1), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-27. - Specific prohibitions. 
    By adoption of industrial activity stormwater regulations or by issuance of industrial activity stormwater permits, or both, the administrator may impose reasonable limitations as to the quality of stormwater discharged into the stormwater system from sites of industrial activity. The administrator may designate the maximum level of pollutants that may be discharged into the system. This designation will be based on the requirements of the state and federal environmental protection agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(2.2), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-28. - Administrative orders. 
    The administrator may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge determined by the administrator to be in violation of any provision of this chapter, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(2.3), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-29. - National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permits. 
    No person shall discharge stormwater from any site of industrial activity without an NPDES permit. Any person who holds an NPDES permit shall provide a copy of such permit to the administrator no later than 60 days after the effective date of this chapter or 60 calendar days after issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(2.4), 11-5-97) 
Secs. 28.5-30-28.5-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES 

Sec. 28.5-46. - General prohibitions. 
    Except as set forth under section 28.5-48 of this chapter or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(3.1), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-47. - Specific prohibitions. 
    Any discharge to the stormwater system containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste materials, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, orders or permits, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(3.2), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-48. - Authorized exceptions. 
    Unless the administrator determines that it is not properly managed or otherwise is not acceptable, the following discharges are exempt from the general prohibition set forth under section 28.5-46 of this chapter: flows from fire fighting, water line flushing and other contributions from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, direct infiltration to the stormwater system, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washings, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and dechlorinated swimming pool contributions. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(3.3), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-49. - Illicit connections. 
    No person may maintain, use or establish any direct or indirect connection to the stormwater system that results in any discharge in violation of this chapter. This prohibition is retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit, or other authorization, or whether permissible under laws or practices applicable or prevailing at the time the connection was made. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(3.4), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-50. - Administrative order. 
    The administrator may issue an administrative order to any person to immediately cease any discharge, or any connection to the stormwater system, determined by the administrator to be in violation of any provision of this chapter, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(3.5), 11-5-97) 
Secs. 28.5-51-28.5-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPILLS AND DUMPING 

Sec. 28.5-66. - General prohibitions. 
    Except as set forth under section 28.5-48 of this chapter or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(4.1), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-67. - Specific prohibitions. 
    Any discharge to the stormwater system containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste materials, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, order, or permits, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(4.2), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-68. - Notification of spills. 
    As soon as any person has knowledge of any discharge to the stormwater system in violation of this chapter, such person shall immediately notify the administrator by telephoning (561) 845-4010, and if such person is directly or indirectly responsible for such discharge, then such person shall also take immediate action to ensure the containment and clean up of such discharge and shall confirm such telephone notification in writing to the administrator at 600 West Blue Heron Boulevard, Riviera Beach, Florida 33404 within three calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(4.3), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-69. - Administrative order. 
    The administrator may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge, or connection to the stormwater system, determined by the administrator to be in violation of any provision of this chapter, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(4.4), 11-5-97) 
Secs. 28.5-70-28.5-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTION 

Sec. 28.5-86. - Prohibition of illicit connection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any stormwater connection which shall be defined as a connection to a stormwater drainage system, i.e., swales, pipes, catch basins, etc. without first obtaining approval by the city, which shall not be given unless proof is shown that all federal, state, and local rules and regulations have been met for the system and the discharge quality. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(5.0), 11-5-97) 
Secs. 28.5-87-28.5-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 28.5-101. - Civil penalties. 
    Any violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any regulation or order issued hereunder, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500.00 per day for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(6.1), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-102. - Criminal penalties. 
    Any intentional or willful violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any regulation or order issued hereunder, shall be subject to a criminal penalty as set forth by the environmental protection agency. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(6.2), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-103. - Injunctive relief. 
    Any violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any regulation or order issued hereunder, shall be subject to injunctive relief if necessary to protect the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(6.3), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-104. - Continuing violation. 
    A person shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation for each and every day during any continuing violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any regulation order, or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(6.4), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-105. - Enforcement actions. 
    The administrator may take all actions necessary, including the issuance of notices of violation and the filing of court actions, to require and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(6.5), 11-5-97) 
Secs. 28.5-106-28.5-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - INSPECTIONS AND MONITORING 

Sec. 28.5-121. - Authority for inspections. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or regulation or permit issued hereunder, or whenever an authorized official has reasonable cause to believe there exists any condition constituting a violation of any of the provision of this chapter, or regulation or permit issued hereunder, any authorized official may enter any property, building or facility at any reasonable time to inspect the same or to perform any duty related to enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any regulations or permits issued hereunder provided that: 
(1)  If such property, building or facility is occupied, such authorized official shall first present proper credentials and request permission to enter; and 
(2)  If such property, building or facility is unoccupied, such authorized official shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the property, building or facility, and request permission to enter. 
    Any request for permission to enter made hereunder shall state that the owner or person in control has the right to refuse entry, and that in such event that entry is refused, the authorized official may enter to make inspection only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. If the owner or person in control refuses permission to enter after such request has been made, the authorized official is hereby authorized to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining entry. Routine or area-wide inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter, including but not limited to random sampling and sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, nonstormwater discharges, or similar factors. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(7.1), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-122. - Authority for monitoring and sampling. 
    Any authorized official may establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering of discharges to the stormwater system. During any inspections made to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or regulations or permits issued hereunder, any authorized official may take any samples deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(7.2), 11-5-97) 
Sec. 28.5-123. - Requirements for monitoring. 
    The administrator may require any person engaging in any activity or owning any property, building or facility (including but not limited to a site of industrial activity) to undertake such reasonable monitoring of any discharge(s) to the stormwater system and to furnish periodic reports. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1(7.3), 11-5-97) 
Chapter 29 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Code enforcement, § 2-311 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; restrictions on location of alcoholic beverage establishments, § 3-5; drinking alcoholic beverages on streets, public ways or places prohibited, § 3-10; animals, ch. 4; riding, walking, etc., of certain animals on streets, sidewalks and other public ways restricted, § 4-2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; depositing of tree trunks, limbs and other debris prohibited on streets and sidewalks, § 7-3; nuisances, ch. 11; shrubbery and other visual obstructions at intersections, § 11-10; parks and recreation, ch. 13; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 19; U-turns on certain streets, § 19-21; play streets, § 19-22; railroad cars blocking streets designated as fire crossings prohibited, § 19-26; stopping, standing and parking, § 19-56 et seq.; parades and processions, § 19-201 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; numbering of property, § 22-1; coastal construction, ch. 23; community redevelopment, ch. 24; flood prevention and protection, ch. 25; signs, ch. 28; subdivisions, ch. 30; curb and gutter requirements for subdivisions, § 30-65; streets in subdivisions, § 30-71; zoning, ch. 31; off-street parking and loading regulations, § 31-566 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 29-1-29-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 29-31. - Appeals. 
    Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved by any decision of the city engineer or the director of community development and environmental control in the enforcement of this article to the zoning board of adjustments and appeals as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2616, § 2(17-10), 12-1-93; Ord. No. 2971, § 8, 6-16-04) 
Secs. 29-32-29-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREETS 

Sec. 29-61. - Minimum requirements for roads, streets and avenues. 
    The following specifications set out in this division are the minimum requirements for construction of roads, streets and avenues within the corporate limits of the city. Unless the content indicates otherwise, street, road, avenue, etc., are synonymous. 
(Ord. No. 2616, § 2(17-1), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 29-62. - Base and surface specifications. 
    Streets shall include a subgrade, base and wearing surface. Local streets shall be paved with 11/4 inches of type I asphaltic concrete surface course on eight-inch primed limerock base, or equivalent material having a structural value of 2.1, with a stabilized subgrade producing 75 pounds Florida bearing value. Collector streets shall be paved with 11/2 inches of type I asphaltic concrete surface on an acceptable base with a stabilized subgrade producing 75 pounds Florida bearing value. Acceptable base material shall be limerock having eight-inch compacted thickness or the equivalent of sand asphalt plant mix. All other streets of higher classification shall meet the design requirement of the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 2616, § 2(17-2), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 29-63. - Minimum width, depth and grade. 
(a)  Pavements. The minimum requirement for pavements is 26 feet in width where curb and gutter is required, and 24 feet without curb and gutter. Where use of swale is permitted, the pavement shall have a six foot wide stabilized shoulder on each side. Stabilized shoulders shall be made of three inches of new shellrock, mixed with existing shoulder to a depth of six inches. 
(b)  Grades. Street grades shall be determined in relation to the drainage installations for adjacent property. Street grades shall not exceed 2.5 percent unless adequate protection for erosion is provided, or be less than 0.30 percent in swale and guttered sections unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(c)  Crown. The crown of the street shall be one inch for each four feet in width of the paving measured from the center to the edge of the road. 
(d)  Intersections. At all intersections the concrete headers shall have a 25-foot radius, which shall be 12 inches wide, ten inches deep, and reinforced with two one-half-inch steel rods. 
(e)  Subgrade and base. All subgrades, grades, right-of-way clearing, lines and construction shall be subject to approval of the city engineer. A core test, density test or such examination as required by the city engineer shall be taken. Final acceptance and approval shall be made by the city engineer and the city council. 
(f)  Swale. 
(1)  If use of swale is permitted, there shall be a four-inch depth from the edge of the pavement (or header) to the bottom of the swale. 
(2)  No trees, shrubs, fences, posts or any other obstruction will be permitted in the swale area, and it shall be unlawful for any person to place, allow, suffer or permit any such obstruction in any swale areas. If any street within the city limits is widened or the swale and/or sidewalk area is developed, and there are trees or shrubbery or other obstruction in the swale area, the city engineer will give written notice to the property owner of record thereof, requiring such owner to remove such trees and/or shrubbery or other obstruction within 30 days and advising such owner that unless same be removed, the city will not be responsible for the safety of the articles left in the swale. If the owner of such land fails within a period of 30 days from mailing of notice mentioned in this subsection, the city shall remove such trees and shrubbery and other obstructions, and such trees and shrubbery shall not be preserved. 
(g)  Road right-of-way. See subsection 30-71(e). 
(h)  Designated streets. See subsection 30-71(f). 
(Ord. No. 2616, § 2(17-3), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 29-64. - Digging up or excavating streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up or excavate any street, alley, avenue or other public way within five years after such street, avenue, alley or other public way has been paved or repaved. In cases of extreme emergency or a break or leak in water, sewer or gas mains, such permission is granted; the person granted such permission shall be required to pay (city utilities department exempted) to the city, in addition to the actual cost of renewing the pavement surface, the sum of $200.00 for damage suffered by the city by the tearing up of such pavement. Permit application for digging up or excavating any street shall be made to the city engineer. The fee for this permit shall be $100.00 and may be amended by a resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2616, § 2(17-8(5)), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 29-65. - Street design standards for the community redevelopment area. 
(a)  General street design standards. All new streets and reconstructed streets within the community redevelopment area shall be designed to promote all forms of travel including non-vehicular modes. In order to encourage walking, cycling, and the use of mass transit options, downtown streets shall be designed to maintain a steady, calm flow of vehicular traffic, while establishing a pleasant walking and cycling environment. New streets and reconstructed streets shall incorporate the following characteristics: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of the street; 
(2)  On-street parking shall be installed whenever possible within the downtown core and neighborhood mixed use districts to support businesses, calm vehicular traffic, and to protect pedestrians; 
(3)  Street trees and pedestrian-scaled lighting shall be installed to provide a safe, pleasant, and aesthetically pleasing environment; 
(4)  A dedicated bicycle route shall be installed on Avenue E, from 12th Avenue to 24th Avenue, and on Avenue F between 24th Avenue to the City limits. 
(b)  Street types map. As redevelopment occurs within the CRA, new streets and alleys will be installed and existing infrastructure will be improved. To guide the appropriate design of cross-section of new streets and alleys, detailed street designs have been developed for specific streets and for general rights-of-way. Since the downtown is a diverse area, a large pallette of street designs has been developed, and more than one design may appropriate for certain locations. The street types map assigns a street type to each thoroughfare in the downtown area. Each street type is comprised of one or more specific street design, based on the size of the right-of-way, anticipated building uses, and location in the downtown. Table 29-65(a) identifies the specific street designs appropriate for each street type. 
Table 29-65(a) 
Street Types Table 
Street Type Appropriate Street Design Broadway Broadway-1 Avenue E Avenue E-1, Avenue E-2, Avenue E-3, Avenue E-4, Avenue E-5 13th Street 13th Street (East of Broadway) 11th Street 11th Street Downtown Mixed Use Downtown Street 50-1, Downtown Street 50-2 Downtown Residential Downtown Residential Street 50-1, Downtown Residential Street 50-2, Downtown Residential Street 40, Downtown Residential Street 58 Alley Alley-22, Alley-24 State Roadway Not Applicable  
(c)  The street designs are coordinated with the development standards for private development in this code, including building setbacks, frontage types, and building height to establish a cohesive, superior public realm. The street design for new and reconstructed streets in the community redevelopment area shall be consistent with the following typical sections.(See the following illustrations). In the event that site features including the location of existing buildings or utilities, limited right-of-way width or transitions to existing streets, restrict the full implementation of the downtown street designs, the community development director, in consultation with the city engineer and adjoining property owners, may administratively adjust the street designs. The following acronyms are used on each illustration: 
bl: bicycle lane pl: property line c: curb and gutter pvmnt: pavement g: grass planting strip row: right-of-way med: median s: sidewalk min: minimum sb: setback p: parking  
(Ord. No. 3002, § 1, 1-18-06; Ord. No. 4038, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13) 
Broadway-1 

Broadway-1 is a street design for Broadway. This avenue is the downtown main street and the street design of this thoroughfare is critical to the overall revitalization of the downtown area. The first phase of improvement of this corridor entails installing a central median with regularly spaced trees as well as new street trees in grates on either side. As redevelopment occurs, the building setbacks will allow the face of curb to be moved back to provide an on-street parking lane, as shown on the right side of the diagram. On-street parking calms traffic, provides easy access to local businesses, and shields the pedestrian area from moving traffic. Shade trees are installed in grates and the adjacent building setbacks augment the sidewalk area to establish a superior pedestrian environment. At the time parking is installed, the trees will also be moved or planted within the setback area. To implement this design, the right-of-way, which is generally 80 feet wide, will expand to at least 100 feet, requiring a dedication or easement of at least 10 feet on each side. 
Avenue E-1 

Avenue E-1 is the preferred street design for Avenue E between 12th Street and 24th Street. Currently, a mix of uses occurs along the street including local businesses and residences. The ultimate vision for the street is a neighborhood main street. In this area, Avenue E is also a link in the downtown bicycle route. In order to best meet the needs of these various conditions, the street design has dedicated bicycle lanes, on-street parking, and wide sidewalks shaded by street trees planted in grates. To implement this design, the right-of-way, which is generally 50 feet or 60 feet wide, will expand to 66 feet, requiring a dedication or easement of three to nine feet on each side, which may be accommodated using the building setback area. 
Avenue E-2 
Avenue E-3 

Avenue E-2 depicts a street design for Avenue E between 12th Street and 24th Street for use when the acquisition of additional right-of-way is impractical due to constraints such as the location of existing buildings, parking, or utilities. Though not ideal for commercial uses by not incorporating the on-street parking lanes in Avenue E-1, Avenue E-2 accommodates the bicycle route and wide, shaded sidewalks within the existing right-of-way. This section is also appropriate along lots with existing single-family homes. 
Avenue E-3 depicts a condition that may result if the preferred design (Avenue E-1) and the Avenue E-2 design are combined. This may occur when one side of the street redevelops and can easily accommodate the expanded right-of-way needs, while the other side has constraints. In this case, on-street parking can be implemented on one side, with bicycle lanes, street trees and wide sidewalks on both sides. In order to achieve this, nine feet may need to be dedicated on one side while as little as one foot may be needed on the other side. 
Avenue E-4 
Avenue E-5 

Avenue E-4 depicts a street design for Avenue E between 10th Street and 12th Street and between 24th Street and 28th Street. The design reflects a neighborhood main street design. The bike lanes are not included as the route has transferred over to Avenue F. This street design accommodates dedicated on-street parking on both sides of the street. In order to implement this design, an ultimate right-of-way width of 58 feet is necessary, requiring in some locations approximately four feet of dedication or easement on each side. In areas with 60 feet of existing right-of-way, no easements are needed and the sidewalk area could be slightly wider. 
Avenue E-5 depicts a street design for Avenue E north of 28th Street. In this location, the surrounding area transitions from a mixed-use to a multi-family residential area. On-street parking lanes are accommodated on both sides of the street and regularly spaced street trees are installed in planting strips. In order to implement this design, an ultimate right-of-way width of 58 feet is necessary, requiring approximately four feet of dedication or easement on each side. In the event that there are existing single family homes, the on-street parking could be removed and the swale expanded. 
13th Street (East of Broadway) 

The street section above depicts a street design for 13th Street east of Broadway. Traffic will be calmed by providing a wide median with regularly spaced street trees. On-street parking provides an easy option to stop and visit businesses and shields the highly active pedestrian area from through traffic. Street trees are installed every 25 feet and the adjacent building setbacks augment the sidewalk area to establish a superior pedestrian environment. 
11th Street 

This street design is appropriate for 11th Street in the downtown area. This street is flanked on one side by industrial uses and on the other side by a mix of neighborhood commercial and residential uses. The travel lanes are wide here to easily accommodate larger vehicles. The addition of on-street parking is vital to support the surrounding businesses. In order to provide a transition between the two sides and to visually enclose the street, a median is proposed with regularly spaced trees. Street trees are installed in a planting strip adjacent to a continuous sidewalk. The sidewalk is augmented by the adjacent building setbacks to establish a wider pedestrian pathway and environment. 
Downtown Street-50-1 
Downtown Street-50-2 

Downtown Street 50-1 depicts a street design for streets within mixed-use districts in the downtown. On-street parking is provided on both sides of the street. The setback requirements for the Downtown Core and Downtown General Neighborhood districts ensure the area between the building facades and the curb can easily accommodate pedestrian pathways and street trees. Existing 50 feet wide rights-of-way require the dedication or easement of five feet on each side of the street. Street trees are uniformly spaced and installed within tree grates. 
Downtown Street 50-2 depicts a street design without on-street parking. This design is appropriate when constraints such as the location of existing buildings, parking lots, utilities, or diverse ownership patterns require the accommodation of the full pedestrian pathway and street trees within the right-of-way without the benefit of using the setback area of adjacent buildings. This design may be used in conjunction with Downtown-50-1 to complete a street improvement when a redevelopment project does not comprise an entire block length or both sides of a street. 
Downtown Residential Street-50-1 
Downtown Residential Street-50-2 

Downtown Residential Street-50-1 is a street design appropriate for the residential neighborhoods in the downtown area. Vehicular travel is the slowest in these areas, with parking occurring sporadically in front of single-family houses, without a formal parking lane. On-coming cars may have to yield, which naturally calms traffic. This design is not recommended for areas accommodating townhouses or multi-family housing. Shade trees are regularly spaced in planting strips next to standard sidewalks. 
Downtown Residential 50-2 is a street design appropriate for the residential districts in the downtown area, where on-street parking is not a high priority. Shade trees are regularly spaced in planting strips next to standard sidewalks. 
Downtown Residential Street-40 
Downtown Residential Street-58 

Downtown Residential Street-40 is a street design appropriate for thoroughfares that are 40 feet wide within residential districts in the downtown area. Shade trees are regularly spaced in planting strips between sidewalks and travel lanes. 
Downtown-58 is a street design appropriate for the residential districts in the downtown area and in redevelopment design areas, where new streets are anticipated. This street design is preferred for projects proposing new townhouses or multi-family buildings. This street design requires 58 feet of right-of-way; existing rights-of-way that are 50 feet wide will require expansion through the dedication or easement of four feet on each side of the street. Shade trees are regularly spaced in planting strips between sidewalks and parking lanes. 
Alley-24 
Alley-22 

Alley 24 is a street design for existing alleys or for Future Alley connections designated on the Regulating Plan. The alley runs through a block, providing vehicular access to multiple lots. Alleys provide vehicular access to the rear of lots, which optimizes the pedestrian quality of the street in the front of the building. 
Alley 22 is a street design for existing alleys or for Future Alley connections designated on the Regulating Plan. This design incorporates the alley into parking lots as a standard drive aisle, which allows for efficient parking lot design, rear access to multiple lots, and allows for vehicular connectivity between the parking lots of adjacent parcels. 
Sec. 29-66. - Relocation and use of public rights-of-way. 
    In order to preserve and enhance the existing, interconnected street and block structure in downtown Riviera Beach, public rights-of-way shall not be abandoned. The commission may consider requests for the relocation or use of pubic rights-of-way using the following criteria: 
(1)  The proposed relocation resolves existing incompatibilities such as conditions where the fronts of some parcels face the backs of other parcels due to shifts in the block structure and street grid; 
(2)  The subject right-of-way is an alley or designated as a secondary street. Primary streets are not eligible for relocation or re-orientation unless a new primary street is provided; 
(3)  The applicant provides a new route within the project that is parallel to the subject right-of-way, establishes a potential (future) street connection on the zoning map, or creates greater connectivity within the city's street network; 
(4)  The proposed relocation maintains or increases public access to the waterfront; 
(5)  The relocation will not create a block with a perimeter measuring more than 2,000 feet. 
(6)  The proposed relocation supports a marine industry, whereby vessel size necessitates increased dimensions of the parcel. Approval of the use of public rights-of-way for marine industry is conditional upon maintaining the industry as the primary use; permits shall stipulate that rights-of-way revert to the city upon the redevelopment of parcels for primarily residential or commercial uses. 
(7)  Permits shall stipulate that commencement of construction shall occur within two years of approval; otherwise use of the subject right-of-way shall revert to the city. 
(8)  Requests to use public rights-of-way for sidewalk encroachments for frontage conditions such as arcades, galleries, or balconies will be considered on a case by case basis. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13) 

Secs. 29-67-29-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 29-91. - Sidewalk and driveway specifications. 
    The following specifications control the construction of all sidewalks and driveways within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)  Grade. Elevation of finished sidewalk grade on the streets without curb and gutter will be at the same elevation of the crown of the road, with a slope toward the road of one-quarter inch per foot. Where curb and gutter is used, the slope shall be one-quarter inch per foot, upward from the top elevation of the concrete curb. 
(2)  Excavation. Excavation or fill shall be made to the depth or fill required to bring to grade indicated in subsection (1) of this section; subgrade or base shall be compacted to a firm and even surface, true to grade and cross section by means of watering and/or tamping and rolling. 
(3)  Forms, width and thickness. Sidewalk forms can be either wood or metal. Forms shall be straight, free of warps or bends, and shall be of sufficient strength when staked to withstand the pressure of the concrete without springing. If wood, they shall be of two-inch surfaced lumber; if metal, they shall be of approved type sections and shall have a flat surface on top. Forms shall have depth of at least four inches. Width of the sidewalk shall be four feet when fronting on local streets, and five feet when fronting on collector or arterial streets. Block lengths shall be five feet. Thickness shall be at least four inches. 
(4)  Composition of concrete. The concrete shall have a compressive strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch at 28 days. The slump cylinder compressive test shall be from three to five inches. No mesh will be required unless specified by the city engineer based on technical justification or when the sidewalk is part of a driveway, then six-by-six, six-gauge, wire mesh will be placed in driveway and sidewalk area, and concrete thickness shall be six inches. 
(5)  Joints. Joints shall be open type. The joint shall be formed by staking a metal bulkhead in place and placing the concrete on both sides of it. After the concrete has set sufficiently to preserve the width and shape of the joint, the bulkhead shall be removed. After the sidewalk has been finished over the joint, the slot shall be opened and edged with a tool having a one-half inch radius. When the concrete has hardened and become dry, the slot shall be thoroughly cleaned of all debris and loose material for the full section of the sidewalk. Where the plans call for a one-half inch joint between the sidewalk and the curb, the joint shall be cleaned as provided in this subsection, then filled to within one inch of the finished surface and then sealed with a bituminous joint sealer or a preformed joint filler. 
(6)  Finishing. All surplus water, latency and inert material shall be worked off the surface of the concrete with a ten-foot straightedge, or by some other method equally satisfactory, as approved by the city engineer. The concrete shall then be given a broom finish. The surface variations shall not be more than one-fourth inch under a ten-foot straightedge. The edge of the sidewalk shall be finished with an edging tool having a radius of one-half inch. 
(Ord. No. 2616, § 2(17-5), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 29-92. - Sidewalks required. 
(a)  Generally; exceptions. Sidewalks shall be required to be installed on both sides of local, collector and arterial streets and on one side of marginal access streets. A required sidewalk may be waived by the city engineer in industrial zoning or where adequate pedestrian circulation is provided by pedestrian and bicycle paths. 
(b)  Continuity. The city council may by resolution cause the construction of sidewalks along any street face where it is deemed in the interest of public safety, regardless of the nature or extent of existing development, and may assess adjoining property owners in accordance with F.S. ch. 170. 
(Ord. No. 2616, § 2(17-6(1), (4)), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 29-93. - Prerequisites to building permit and certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Generally. Before a building permit shall be issued for the erection of any structure upon any plot of land, the plans for such construction must include plans for concurrent construction of a sidewalk running adjacent to the entire length of the property line which fronts any street lines. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any structure unless and until the completion of such sidewalk has been reviewed and approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Applicability of subsection (a) in case of building repair. The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall also apply to permits for the repairs of existing structures upon any plot of land not improved by existing paved and usable sidewalk where the total cost of such repairs, as determined by the building official, shall equal or exceed 33 1/3 percent of the last assessed county tax valuation of the structure to be repaired. 
(Ord. No. 2616, § 2(17-6(2), (3)), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 29-94. - Cash bond required before issuance of building permits where sidewalks exist. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building, or for any additions or major repairs or remodeling to an existing building, on any lot or parcel of land fronted by an approved sidewalk or curb until the owner of record of such property, the agent of such owner or the contractor retained to perform the work of building, repairing or remodeling has first posted with the office of the city clerk a cash bond in the amount of $250.00. 
(b)  The city clerk shall hold the cash bond in escrow until such time as a certificate of occupancy and approval has been issued by the building inspection division certifying that construction on the property or parcel of land has been completed and that damages to the sidewalk, if any, have been repaired in an approved manner. If inspection reveals damages to the sidewalk or curb, the building inspection division shall serve notice in writing, listing all unrepaired damages to the person responsible for posting the cash bond. Such notice shall provide that if repairs are not completed within ten days, the repairs will be authorized by the city engineer, the cost of which shall be deducted from the cash bond deposited with the city clerk. 
(c)  Anything in the city's procurement ordinance, which is on file in the city clerk's office, to the contrary notwithstanding, if the city does not then have a continuing contract, the city engineer shall receive three separate proposals from licensed contractors and at the end of the ten-day period authorize the contractor with the most reasonable bid to make the necessary repairs. After the satisfactory completion of repairs, the remainder of the cash bond, if any, shall be returned to the bonded person or persons. 
(Ord. No. 2616, § 2(17-7), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 29-95. - Driveways. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall change the grade of any sidewalk, swale or curb for the purpose of providing a driveway across such sidewalk, or construct any driveway across city property, except upon complying with provisions of this article and upon obtaining a permit from the city. 
(b)  Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the city engineer by the owner or agent of the owner of the abutting premises. Such application shall set forth the points at which such driveway shall begin and end, as measured from the property lines, and shall be accompanied by a plan indicating existing and proposed elevations. 
(c)  Specifications. The width of such driveway in residential zoning shall not exceed 24 feet and shall not exceed 35 feet in commercial and industrial zoning. Circular driveways shall have a minimum inside turning radius of 15 feet. The width of any single driveway shall not be less than ten feet, or 18 feet for double driveways. Driveways shall not be closer than five feet to any property lines. The length of driveways in single-family residential shall not exceed 60 feet. The driveway for corner lots shall be from the minor street. Single-family residentials shall not have two separate driveways. Driveways shall be concrete having a minimum thickness of six inches or four inches of concrete reinforced with six-by-six, six-gauge wire mesh. 
(d)  Dangerous and abandoned driveways. Should the use of any driveway be discontinued or abandoned, or found dangerous to pedestrians in the opinion of the city engineer, then the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the owner of record of the abutting property to restore such curb and sidewalk within 30 days to the original or proper condition. 
(Ord. No. 2616, § 2(17-8(1)-(3)), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 29-96. - Failure to pave or restore. 
    In case any driveway, curb or sidewalk shall not be paved, repaved, repaired or restored according to the provisions of this article, the city engineer may order the same to be done under his direction and for the owners' account, and the expense thereof, until paid, shall be a lien upon the abutting property and be filed for public recording. 
(Ord. No. 2616, § 2(17-8(4)), 12-1-93) 
Sec. 29-97. - Deposit to ensure proper construction. 
    The city is authorized to require a deposit of an amount equal to the city engineer's estimate of costs of the curb and gutter, sidewalk or pavement, to be altered, but not less than $250.00 to ensure proper construction; such deposit to be returned on approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2616, § 2(17-8(6)), 12-1-93) 
Chapter 30 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Platting board, art. IV, § 5. 
Cross reference- Code enforcement, § 2-311 et seq.; shrubbery and other visual obstructions prohibited at intersections, § 11-10; parks and recreation, ch. 13; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; coastal construction, ch. 23; community redevelopment, ch. 24; flood prevention and protection, ch. 25; planning, ch. 27; comprehensive plan, § 27-106; signs, ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; zoning, ch. 31. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The words "person," "developer," "subdivider" and "owner" include a corporation, unincorporated association, partnership, or legal entity as well as an individual. The word "structure" includes "building" and shall be construed to be followed by the phrase "or part thereof." 
    Final plat means the final tracing map, drawing, or chart on mylar or material of higher quality on which the subdivider's plan or subdivision is presented to the governing body for approval, and which, if approved, will be submitted to the county clerk for recording. The drawing shall be to scale and not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet. 
    Plat of record means a plat which conforms to the requirements of the applicable laws of the state and ordinances of the city, which has been accepted by city council and placed in the official records of the county. 
    Preliminary plat means a tracing, map, drawing and/or chart indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision submitted for approval. 
    Sketch plat means a tracing, map, drawing or chart in sufficient form to indicate conceptually the intended use, size and layout of the proposed subdivision. 
    Streets. 
(1)  Collector street means a street which carries traffic from local streets to arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such development. 
(2)  Cul-de-sac means a local street with only one outlet terminating at one end with a turnaround. 
(3)  Expressway means a street which is used only for the movement of vehicles providing for no vehicular or pedestrian access to abutting property, except for street access by grade separated interchanges. 
(4)  Local street means a street used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
(5)  Major arterial means a street used primarily for traffic traveling considerable distances within or through an area not served by an expressway. 
(6)  Marginal access street means a dual street which is parallel and adjacent to an expressway or arterial street and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. A marginal access street may also be called a frontage street. 
(7)  Minor arterial means a street of higher classification than a local or collector street and serves to carry traffic from collector street to expressways and major arterials. 
(8)  Private street means any street or trafficway which has not been dedicated for public use and not accepted for ownership or maintenance by the city. 
    Subdivider means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under this chapter to affect the subdivision of land in the city. The term "subdivider" includes the term "developer," even though the person involved in successive stages of the project may vary. 
    Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land, whether improved or unimproved, into two or more contiguous lots or parcels of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership, leasing or building development, or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision of land heretofore divided or platted into lots, sites or parcels. 
    Thoroughfare plan means the map adopted by the city council showing the streets laid out and additions thereto resulting from the acceptance of deeded land, from the abandonment of plats and the approval of subdivision plats by the city council, and subsequent filing of such plats. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-4), 12-15-93) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-2. - Jurisdiction. 
    These platting and subdivision regulations shall apply to all subdivisions, plats and replats and land developments as defined herein, after December 15, 1993, located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-2), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-3. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  To establish procedures and standards for the development and subdivision of land within the city. 
(3)  To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the city's adopted comprehensive plan. 
(4)  To ensure proper legal description, identification, monumentation and recording of real estate boundaries. 
(5)  To protect the character and the social and economic stability of the city. 
(6)  To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the city and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflict among the uses of land and buildings. 
(7)  To ensure safe and convenient traffic circulation and pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines. 
(8)  To minimize the pollution of air and waterways and assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water quality; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the community. 
(9)  To provide for open space for recreation through the most efficient design and layout of the land. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-3), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-4. - Administration. 
(a)  The city engineer, under the direction of the director of community development and environmental control, shall be the administrative officer of this chapter. 
(b)  In all cases where this chapter requires approval of a subdivision or land development site plan, the city planning and zoning board shall take into consideration the following: 
(1)  The public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  The comfort and convenience of the public in general and of the residents of the proposed development in particular. 
(3)  Consistency with the immediate surrounding area. 
The planning and zoning board may prescribe such appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be required in order that the result of its action shall further the public interest in general and the accomplishment of the purpose of this chapter set forth hereinbefore in particular. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-5, 17A-6), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-5. - Security requirement. 
    Before any plat of a subdivision in the city shall be submitted for recording, good and sufficient security shall be furnished for the completion of the required improvement. The security shall be a cash, surety or personal bond, as the city attorney may determine to be good and sufficient, payable to the city in the amount of 120 percent of the actual contract or 130 percent of the estimated cost. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-16), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-6. - Enforcement provisions; compliance with chapter. 
(a)  Within the jurisdiction of this chapter, no subdivision shall be made, platted or recorded, nor shall any building permit be issued, unless such subdivision meets all requirements of this chapter and has been approved in accordance with the requirements as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  No owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the city council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county. 
(c)  The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease with the intent of evading this chapter shall not be permitted. All such subdivisions shall be subject to all the requirements contained in this chapter. 
(d)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  The city council shall enforce the improvement bond by resorting to legal and equitable remedies if required improvements have not been satisfactorily installed within one year after the final plan or plat is approved, unless extended by the city council for cause, and provided the surety consents to the extension. Any owner or agent of the owner who falsely represents to a prospective purchaser of real estate that roads and streets, sewers, water systems or drainage facilities will be built, constructed or maintained by the city shall be deemed guilty of a civil violation, punishable as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-17), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-7. - Appeals. 
    Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved by any decision of the city engineer or the director of the department of community development and environmental control in the enforcement of this chapter to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-18), 12-15-93) 
Secs. 30-8-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION, IMPROVEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 30-31. - Standard procedures for zoning and unsuitable lands. 
(a)  Prior to final approval of any proposed subdivision or land development under the terms of this chapter, the area to be subdivided or developed must have the appropriate zoning required for the intended use. 
(b)  Unless adequate methods of correction are formulated and approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, land which is determined to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to poor soil quality, flooding for drainage or other features likely to be harmful to the health, safety and general welfare of future residents shall not be subdivided or developed. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-7), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-32. - Land divisions that are not subdivisions. 
(a)  The division of land into parcels of more than five acres not involving any change in street lines or public easements of whatsoever kind is not a subdivision. 
(b)  The definition of subdivision shall not apply in instances where lots measuring 50 feet or less in width exist in a plat of records, and the owner thereof desires to change the inside lot lines of such existing lots in order to create larger lots; provided, however, there is no increase in the number of lots in such block created by the change of such lot lines by such owner. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-8), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-33. - Building or repair permits issued for buildings on lands in unimproved and unrecorded plats. 
(a)  The building official of the city shall not issue building or repair permits for any structure on land that has not been platted and recorded in the manner prescribed by the ordinances of the city. 
(b)  The building official is authorized to issue to an applicant a building permit for the repair on or an addition to a building existing as of December 15, 1993, provided that a survey of the tract or parcel of land which shall show the site of each structure existing and proposed additions thereof is submitted together with an engineering development plan providing for but not limited to adequate storm drainage facilities easements, sewage disposal facilities, water distribution systems, fire protection facilities and rights-of-way to serve the subject property or adjacent lands. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-9), 12-15-93) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 
Sec. 30-34. - Required improvements. 
    A state registered professional engineer shall be employed to design all required improvements. Required improvements covered by this section include: 
(1)  Bridges and culverts. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed or develops canals, watercourses, lakes, streams, waterways or channels, bridges or culverts shall be provided as necessary to facilitate the proposed street system. 
(2)  Curbs and gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be provided on both sides of all streets in all subdivisions and land developments, except in industrial zoned districts. 
(3)  Drainage and stormwater treatment. Adequate drainage and stormwater treatment shall be required in all subdivisions and land developments as prescribed in sections 30-66 and 30-70. 
(4)  Fire hydrants. As required by local ordinance and the fire chief, fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions and land developments in accordance with city standards and as directed by the fire marshall. 
(5)  Monuments and permanent control points. Monuments and PCPs shall be set prior to official acceptance of improvements as prescribed by F.S. ch. 1277. 
(6)  Sanitary sewage and water distribution. Complete sanitary sewage collection and water distribution systems shall be provided in all subdivisions and land developments. The systems shall be appropriately connected to the city sewage and water supply systems. 
(7)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with section 29-31 et seq. 
(8)  Streets, street signs and markings. All streets and related facilities required to serve proposed subdivisions and land developments shall be constructed by the developer. The construction shall consist, but not be limited to, street grading, base preparation and surface course, along with drainage as required under this chapter. Street signs shall be provided at each intersection of a proposed subdivision or land development in the type, size and location required by the city standards. Street name signs shall carry the street name approved on the final plat. Streets obviously in alignment with existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street markings and regulatory signs such as channelization, stop signs, stop bars and pedestrian crossings shall be provided as required by the city engineer. All subdivisions and land developments shall indicate location of street lighting fixtures and of street lighting easements, if any. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-10), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-35. - Sanitary sewage system. 
(a)  All proposed subdivisions and land developments shall be connected to the public sanitary sewage system. All proposed systems, extensions and connections shall be subject to the approval of the city department of utilities and shall be in accordance with city standards governing their installation prior to obtaining a construction permit from the city. 
(b)  The sanitary sewage system shall be designed by a registered engineer and shall conform to all requirements of state, county and city authorities. The appurtenances to the system shall be equal to or exceed the minimum requirements of the city standards. Upon submittal of construction plans for a sewage system as prescribed by this chapter, the design engineer shall supply data, calculations and analyses showing important features affecting design, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Number of units served by proposed sewage system. 
(2)  The character of units and expected population or estimated flow of sewage from any unit designed for nonresidential use. 
(3)  A flowchart indicating the number of proposed connections to the system and the anticipated flow of sewage to the sewer plant. 
(4)  Any other meaningful information necessary to arrive at estimates of amounts and character of sewage pertinent to the design. 
(c)  Pipe materials used for sewer and water lines will be in accordance with the city standards. Whenever any pressure or force mains are located underneath pavement or curbs with cover of less than 36 inches, the mains shall be of ductile iron for pipe diameter of four inches or more, and polyvinyl chloride for pipe diameter under three inches. Only approved PVC cement will be permitted. Where service lines pass under paving, they must be installed through appropriately sized ductile iron pipe casing normally two inches or larger in diameter. Galvanized steel pipe will not be acceptable. 
(d)  All connections to existing facilities shall be made under the direction of the utilities department. 
(e)  Manholes capable of withstanding the AASHO H-20 wheel load shall be constructed at all changes in grade or alignment, at all junctions (except service laterals), at the end of any sewer and every 400 linear feet or less. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-12), 12-15-93) 
Cross reference- Wastewater disposal system, § 20-141 et seq. 
Sec. 30-36. - Water supply system. 
(a)  The water supply system shall be designed by a registered engineer and shall conform to all county and city requirements. The system shall be designed with minimum six-inch mains. Water mains shall be required on all streets and shall be looped. Materials and methods of construction shall be approved by the director of utilities prior to obtaining a construction permit from the city. 
(b)  The distribution system shall provide connections to each lot shown in the plat, to each public facility and where median strips are developed. Construction design shall meet or exceed the city standards. 
(c)  All connections to existing facilities shall be made under the direction of the utilities department. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-13), 12-15-93) 
Cross reference- Water, § 20-36 et seq. 
Sec. 30-37. - Natural features preservation. 
(a)  Generally. The design and development of all subdivisions and land developments shall preserve, whenever possible, natural features such as the natural terrain of the site, woodland areas, large trees, natural watercourses and bodies of water, wetlands, rock outcroppings and scenic views. Waterfront preservation and lake, stream, canal and ocean frontage shall be preserved as open space whenever possible. Access points to water and maintenance easement areas shall be provided at intervals of no more than one-half mile. These access points shall be no less than 25 feet in width. 
(b)  Preservation and planting. Except for prohibited species, trees eight inches or more in diameter (measured at a height 41/2 feet abovegrade) should be preserved or relocated within the site. Trees located within the proposed cartway or sidewalk portion of a street right-of-way, within 15 feet of the foundation area of a new building, within a utility easement, or within an area where regrading is necessary to achieve acceptable site development should be relocated within the site. Where possible, existing open areas should be utilized for such facilities to minimize unnecessary disturbance of existing wooded areas. Areas in which trees are retained shall remain undisturbed and at the original grade level wherever possible. 
(c)  Topography. The natural terrain of the proposed subdivision or land development tract will be retained wherever possible. Cut and fill should be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve acceptable street grades, parking areas or building sites where no feasible alternative exists or where it will be used to enhance the site, such as berms or swales, which add visual interest or perform a function such as drainage or screening. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-14), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-38. - Construction of required improvements. 
(a)  After construction plans have been approved and filed, the subdivider shall construct the required improvements, subject to obtaining the required permits from the appropriate agencies. 
(b)  Construction shall be performed under the supervision of the appropriate city agencies and shall at all times be subject to inspection by the director of utilities for utilities and the city engineer for all other engineering requirements. However, this in no way shall relieve the subdivider, his engineer and contractor of close field supervision and final compliance with the approved plans and specifications. 
(c)  In accordance with city standards, the appropriate agencies shall require the subdivider to employ a registered engineer for periodic inspection of the construction or installation of the improvements involved, and may require progress reports and a final certificate of the construction or installation from such engineer. The appropriate agencies shall establish detailed regulations governing the inspections to be furnished by the developer or his engineer and may refuse to accept work which has been done without proper inspection. No construction work shall be undertaken prior to obtaining the required permits. 
(d)  When construction is complete in accordance with the approved plan and specifications and complies with the provisions of this chapter, the subdivider shall obtain written final approval and acceptance from the city in the form of a city council resolution. Final as-built mylar drawings for the utilities shall be submitted to the director of utilities and for all other work to the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-15), 12-15-93) 
Secs. 30-39-30-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 30-61. - Compliance; conflicts; adjacent development. 
(a)  All required improvements for subdivision and land developments shall be designed in accordance with the provisions outlined in this article and shall be equal to or exceed the city standards. Whenever other city ordinances or regulations impose more restrictive standards and requirements than those contained in this article, those other regulations shall be complied with. 
(b)  Consideration shall be given to applicable provisions of the city and county comprehensive plan as they pertain to future school sites, recreation and parks, water supply and sewage treatment systems, highway alignments and other public facilities. Any conflict therewith shall be addressed on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  Development of proposed subdivisions shall take into consideration relevant features of existing adjacent development. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-11(1)-(3)), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-62. - Access. 
(a)  The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot with satisfactory and permanent access to an existing public street. Residential lots having direct access to an arterial street shall have adequate turnabout space, or other access control measure as deemed necessary. In general, subdivisions shall be designed to accomplish access to the lots by the use of local street. 
(b)  Access to townhouse clusters may be via parking lots and/or driveways designated on the plat as access or parking tracts, providing the length of such access does not exceed 600 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-11(4)), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-63. - Block layout. 
(a)  The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed. 
(2)  Zoning requirements. 
(3)  Requirements for safe convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including the reduction of intersection with arterial streets. 
(4)  Solar energy and shading factors. 
(b)  The longer side of a residential block shall ordinarily be no less than 500 feet, nor more than 1,500 feet in length. Where practicable, blocks along arterial and collector streets should be no less than 1,000 feet long. Lesser or greater lengths may be approved by the city engineer. 
(c)  Lots with double frontage shall be avoided, and no lot shall have an area or width less than required by any zoning ordinance. No lot shall have an average width of less than 60 feet. Where corner lots back upon lots facing the side street, the corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the establishment of front building lines. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-11(5)), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-64. - Bridges. 
    Bridges shall be designed in general accordance with current department of transportation practices and shall include planning for utility installation. They shall be reinforced concrete; however, other low-maintenance material may be used upon request and approval; they shall have a clear roadway width between curbs two feet in excess of the pavement width in each direction and shall provide six feet wide sidewalks on each side. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-11(6)), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-65. - Curbs and gutters. 
(a)  Subdivisions and land developments shall have all streets paved and drained, utilizing curb and gutter construction. Where driveway separation of at least 150 feet can be assured, roadside drainage swales may be utilized. 
(b)  The width of curb and gutter shall be a minimum of 24 inches. Approved mountable median curb may be used around median dividers on the high side of pavement. All curb designed to handle water shall incorporate an approved gutter design. There shall be a stabilized to FBV of 50 pounds subgrade beneath all curbs and one foot beyond the back of the curb. 
(c)  Water valve boxes, meters, portions of manholes or other appurtenances of any kind relating to any underground utilities shall not be located in any portion of a curb and gutter section. 
(d)  The minimum allowable flow line grade of curbs and gutters shall be 0.3 percent, except in intersections where flatter grades may be allowable. The tolerance for ponded water in curb construction is one-fourth inch maximum; if exceeded, the section of curb shall be removed and reconstructed to grade. 
(e)  Plastering shall not be permitted on the face of the curb. Joints shall be sawed (unless an alternate method is used) at intervals of ten feet, except where shorter intervals are required for closures, but in no case less than four feet. After concrete has set sufficiently, but in no case later than three days after construction, the curbs shall be backfield. 
(f)  Use of cross-street valley gutters shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-11(7)), 12-15-93) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 29. 
Sec. 30-66. - Drainage. 
(a)  All subdivisions and land developments shall have drainage systems designed using acceptable engineering principles to protect all future buildings from a 100-year, three-day storm. The design data of the drainage system shall be submitted along with the construction plans in a report form prepared by the developer's engineer, indicating the method of control of stormwater and groundwater, including the method of drainage, existing water elevations, recurring high water elevations, proposed design water elevations, drainage structures, canals, ditches and other pertinent information pertaining to the system. 
(b)  The runoff coefficients used in the design of the subdivision shall be those applicable after complete development has occurred and shall be calculated on sample areas of each type of ultimate use. The drainage system shall be designed for long life, low cost and ease of maintenance. 
(c)  The drainage system shall provide for the necessary maintenance of groundwater levels to prevent overdrainage for the intended land use. The storm sewers shall be designed for rainstorms of maximum intensity predicted for the city area at three-year intervals according to the charts and data from the South Florida Water Management District. The system shall provide for drainage of lots, streets, roads and other public areas, including surface waters which drain into or through the property. The design for drainage of the subdivision must be adequate to provide for surface water drainage of adjacent contributory areas. 
(d)  The minimum pipe used within a storm sewer system shall be 15 inches in diameter. Distance between termination or intermediate structures shall not exceed those required by state standards for the construction of maintenance inlets or manholes. Minimum grades for swale sections shall be designed so that the elevation of the hydraulic gradient is never higher than the grate elevation of any inlet in the system. The pipe shall be sloped and structure channeled to develop sufficient scouring to minimize sediment. 
(e)  The pipe used in the system shall be reinforced concrete. Concrete pipe shall have gasket joints meeting the requirements of AASHTO. Drainage pipe shall be fitted with headwalls, endwalls, inlets and other appropriate terminating and intermediate structures. Structure design shall meet or exceed the city standards. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-11(8)), 12-15-93) 
Sec. 30-67. - Easements. 
    Easements for installation of water and sanitary sewer lines shall be 12 feet or wider as determined by the director of utilities. Easements for storm sewers and other utilities shall be provided as determined necessary by the city engineer. A minimum of 12 feet shall be provided for underground storm drainage installations, and where canals or ditches are permitted the width shall be adequate to accommodate facilities plus 20 feet on one side for maintenance purposes, with an overall width not exceeding 60 feet. Drainage easements shall not be fenced or landscaped unless prior approval has been obtained from the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-11(10)), 12-15-93) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 20. 
Sec. 30-68. - Fire flow and hydrants. 
(a)  Fire hydrants shall be provided in all water distribution systems and extensions thereof. Fire hydrants shall be spaced every 300 feet in all developments. Fire hydrants shall be provided at the specified spacing on both sides of any divided highway. Location of all hydrants shall be subject to the approval of the fire marshal, director of utilities and the city engineer. 
(b)  Lines to which hydrants are connected shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter in residential areas and eight inches in diameter for other development. All mains shall be looped on the minimum size required for the area when practical. Each branch shall be provided with a gate valve located as close as possible to the main and shall be restrained with adequate thrust blocks. 
(c)  A fire flow test must conclusively demonstrate that engineering and construction standards have, in fact, produced the requisite fire flows prior to occupancy of the structure. The minimum fire flow must be 1,000 gallons per minute with 20 psi residual pressure in single-family residential areas and 1,500 gallons per minute with 20 psi residual pressure for other developments for a period of four hours. Any corrective action required within a 1,000-foot radius of the proposed development will be at the developer's cost and in accordance with these standards and chapter 6. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-11(11)), 12-15-93) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 6. 
Sec. 30-69. - Lots. 
(a)  Within the requirements of chapter 31, the size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. Lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide satisfactory and desirable building sites. 
(b)  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. However, different lot shapes may be permitted if they can be shown to be necessary or desirable to provide better site utilization and building relationship. 
(c)  All lots shall have frontage on an existing or proposed public street or on a private street if it meets the street design requirements of this chapter. Lots not having full frontage on a street, such as in cluster developments, shall have an accessway of at least 24-foot width and suitable for access by emergency vehicles. Lots on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum front length of 40 feet. When a subdivision is proposed upon land with existing structures that are proposed to be retained, lots shall be designed so as not to cause such existing structures to become nonconforming with respect to building area or lot size. 
(d)  Corner lot lines at intersecting right-of-way lines shall be the long chord of a 25 foot radius, or of a greater radius where deemed necessary. The corner lots shall be designed to facilitate a safe intersection with respect to a sight distance, and a restriction shall be placed on the lot and defined on the plat prohibiting construction or plantings over 2.5 feet high within the site plan established in the design of the lot or adjacent street, based on the crown elevation of the street. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-11(12)), 12-15-93) 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 31. 
Sec. 30-70. - Stormwater treatment. 
(a)  Rainstorm runoff, surface waters and groundwaters shall be managed in subdivisions to minimize degradation of water quality, nutrients, turbidity, debris and other harmful substances, and to maximize percolation and detention to promote reuse of the water. 
(b)  Parcels should be developed to maximize the amount of natural rainfall which is infiltrated into the soil and to minimize direct overland runoff into adjoining streets and watercourses. 
(c)  Storm drainage systems shall be provided in all subdivision and land developments and designed to retain and/or detain rainfall amounts in accordance with the South Florida Water Management District for the entire site prior to outfalling into receiving waters. Street drainage computations shall be based upon a five-year storm frequency. Tracts of land with an impervious area of two acres or more shall obtain a drainage permit from the South Florida Water Management District. The impervious area shall not exceed 88 percent of any tract of land after development. 
(d)  Runoff from driveways, roofs or other impervious surfaces shall be diverted so as to flow over grassed areas prior to flowing into any drainage system whenever possible. Pervious areas should be covered with vegetation requiring periodic cutting and removal. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-11(9)), 12-15-93) 
Cross reference- Wastewater disposal system, § 20-141 et seq. 
Sec. 30-71. - Streets. 
(a)  Generally. Proposed streets shall be in accordance with the city's thoroughfare plan and should be coordinated with provisions of the county thoroughfare plan ordinance, where applicable. Streets shall be designed to provide adequate vehicular access to all lots or parcels, with consideration given to projected volumes of traffic, and further subdivision possibilities in the area. 
(b)  Design of system. The street system of a proposed subdivision or land development shall be designed to create a hierarchy of street functions and so as to minimize street intersections and pedestrian vehicular conflict points. 
(c)  Local streets. Proposed local streets shall be designed so as to discourage through traffic and excessive speeds. Adequate consideration shall be given to provide for the extension and continuation of proposed streets into and from adjoining properties where appropriate. 
(d)  Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs designed to be permanent shall not be longer than 1,200 feet in industrial development and 600 feet in all other developments, or shall not furnish access to more than 25 dwelling units. At the closed end, a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter twice the width of the right-of-way shall be provided. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a turnaround may be required and provision made for future extension of the street into adjoining property as may be required by the city engineer. 
(e)  Rights-of-way; pavement widths. Street rights-of-way and pavement widths in proposed subdivisions and land developments shall be as follows: 
Street Type Right-of-Way 
(in feet) Pavement Collector with median 80 4-12 foot 
lanes Local 50 26 feet Nonresidential 60 26 feet  
Right-of-way for expressways and major and minor arterials within the city shall meet the state department of transportation specifications. 
(f)  Collector streets. The following streets are hereby designated as collector streets: 
Avenue E 
Avenue F 
Avenue J 
Avenue O (from Silver Beach Road to Blue Heron Boulevard) 
Avenue S 
Avenue U 
Lake Drive 
Lake Shore Drive 
Park Avenue 
13th Street (from U.S. Highway 1 to Avenue P) 
(g)  Private streets. Private streets shall be approved only if they meet design and improvement standards set forth in this chapter. 
(h)  Street grades. Street grades shall be determined in relation to the drainage installations for the subdivisions. Street grades shall not exceed 2.5 percent, unless adequate protection for erosion is provided or be less than 0.30 percent in swale and guttered sections unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. Road grades shall be shown on the development plans by the direction, percent of fall and with a centerline lineal distance between control points. 
(i)  Street intersection and alignment. Streets shall intersect at right angles whenever practicable. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets shall be prohibited. The point of curvature of any local street shall not be closer than 200 feet to a curve at any intersection. All intersections shall be designed to provide adequate stopping and sight distance in accordance with the current edition of AASHTO standards. When the centerline of a local street deflects by more than ten degrees, it shall be curved with a radius adequate to assure safe sight distance and driver comfort. Where the algebraic difference in grade lines equals or exceeds one, a vertical curve shall be used. Property lines at street intersections shall be the long chord of a 25-foot or greater radius and street pavement radii shall be a minimum of 35 feet and designed to facilitate the intended use. 
(j)  Street markers and names. One street marker of standard design as prescribed by the city standards shall be provided at each intersection. A street sign shall be placed at a point eight feet from the edge of the pavement on a radial line that bisects the intersection radius curve. Proposed streets which are in alignment with other existing and named streets shall bear the same name of the existing street. All street names shall have a suffix, and in no case, except as indicated in the preceding sentence, shall the name of the proposed street duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, regardless of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc. No person shall name or change the name of any street without the consent of the city council. 
(k)  Regulatory signs. Stop signs shall be required at every street intersection as a condition for acceptance of the subdivision. Paving and drainage improvements shall be in place prior to final inspection. The developer shall furnish and erect regulatory signs as required by the city engineer. Regulatory signs must conform to the specifications in the city standards and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Locations of signs shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. 
(l)  Street jogs prohibited. Local street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 200 feet are prohibited. 
(m)  Marginal access streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing limited access highway, freeway or arterial street, an access is desired to adjoining property other than street connections and a marginal access street to afford separation of through and local traffic will be required. 
(n)  Half streets. The creation of new half streets in a proposed subdivision or land development is prohibited unless it is part of an adopted right-of-way map. The developer shall provide the entire required right-of-way within his property. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2(17A-11(13)), 12-15-93) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 29. 
Chapter 31 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Zoning ordinance, art. IV, § 8. 
Cross reference- Deposit of cost of notice required with applications for permits, § 2-1; code enforcement, § 2-311 et seq.; adult entertainment code, ch. 2.5; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; alcoholic beverage establishments to comply with use requirements of zoning ordinance, § 3-4; restrictions on location of alcoholic beverage establishments, § 3-5; drinking alcoholic beverages on streets, public ways or places prohibited, § 3-10; animals, ch. 4; keeping of livestock and poultry prohibited in the city, § 4-4; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10; noise regulations, § 11-141 et seq.; measurement standards for control of noise, § 11-171 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 13; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; coastal construction, ch. 23; wetlands protection, § 23-81 et seq.; community redevelopment, ch. 24; flood prevention and protection, ch. 25; minority employment and affordable housing opportunity plan, ch. 26; planning, ch. 27; comprehensive plan, § 27-106; signs, ch. 28; sign regulations for zoning districts, § 28-107; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29; subdivision regulations, ch. 30; lot requirements in subdivisions, § 30-69. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 31-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building or structure means a subordinate building, the use of which is clearly incidental and related to that of the principal building or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal building or use. 
    Accessory use means a use that is customarily incidental to the principal use and so necessary or commonly to be expected that it cannot be supposed that the Code intended to prevent it. Accessory uses, unless otherwise provided, shall be located on the same premises as the principal use. 
    Advertisement means a form of communication used to persuade potential customers to purchase or consume a particular brand, product or service. Common methods used for advertising may include, but are not limited to: banners, billboards, business cards, brochures, electronic communication, fliers, the internet, letter head, magazines, mailings, newspapers, phone books, prints, publications, radio, signage, stamps, and television. 
    Affordable housing means an owner-occupied or rental dwelling unit with a purchase cost, value, or monthly rental, as applicable, equal to or less than the amounts established by the applicable standards for those individuals whose income is at or below 60 percent of area median income as published by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and certified by the department of community and economic development. 
    Alley means a right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon and is not intended or used for general traffic circulation, and is not over 20 feet in width. 
    Alterations, building means any change in the structure which will increase the number of dwelling units, the floor area or the height of the structure, or change the occupancy of the structure as established in the city's building code. 
    Apartment means a room or a suite of rooms occupied, or which is intended or designed to be occupied, as the home or residence of one individual, family or household, for housekeeping purposes. 
    Baling means to tightly compress and secure into bales by wires, hoops, cords, or the like. 
    Bars, saloons, taverns, cocktail lounges, or nightclubs means any premises used primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor by the drink for on-site consumption and where food may be available for consumption and where food may be available for consumption on the premises as accessory to the primary use. 
    Boardinghouse or lodging house means a building other than a hotel, where lodging or meals or both are served for compensation. 
    Building means any structure having a roof impervious to weather designated and suitable for the habitation or shelter of human beings or animals and the shelter or storage of properties or for use in any occupation for some purpose of trade and manufacture. 
    Building façade means an exterior building wall facing a street, path, or park. 
    Building frontage means the percentage of the total width of a lot which is required to be building façade(s). 
    Building, principal means a building for which the main or principal use of the lot on which the building is situated is contracted. 
    Briquetting means a molded block of any material. 
    CDD means the community development department. 
    Child care facility means an establishment, including any child care center or child care arrangement, other than a family day care home or large family child care home, which provides care to any number of children, which receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operating for profit. 
    Church means an enclosed structure for public or semipublic religious worship, irrespective of denomination. For the purposes of this code, churches include synagogues, mosques, temples, etc. 
    Coastal construction setback control line means a line established by the state department of environmental protection to prevent or reduce beach erosion and damage to coastal life and property pursuant to F.S. ch. 161. 
    Community garden means a defined area of land utilized collectively by a group of people to grow plant material including flowers or produce for profit or not-for-profit, including supplementary uses and structures associated with gardening and community gathering spaces. 
    Community residential home means a dwelling unit licensed to serve residents who are clients of the Department of Elderly Affairs, the Agency for Persons with Disabilities, the Department of Juvenile Justice, or the Department of Children and Family Services or licensed by the Agency for Health Care Administration which provides a living environment for seven to 14 unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care by supportive staff as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of the residents. 
    Construction demolition debris recycling means the separation of reusable commodities (e.g. rebar) from those construction waster materials (concrete rubble, wood scraps, pieces of drywall, etc.) that remain after demolition and must be disposed of at a sanitary landfill. 
    Contiguous means lands which abut each other, or if separated by streets, ways, easements, pipelines, power lines, conduits and rights-of-way, are under one ownership. 
    Density means the total number of residential dwelling units per acre of land as specified within and limited by this chapter. 
    Development order means any order granting, denying or granting with conditions an application for a development permit. 
    Development permit means and includes any building permit, zoning permit, subdivision approval, rezoning, certification, special exception, variance, or any other official action of local government having the effect of permitting the development of land. 
    Driveway means the standard means of ingress and egress from private properties to public rights-of-way. 
    Dune means a ridge, mound or hill of sand which extends parallel to the shoreline along sandy coasts formed by wind and waves. 
    Dune, crest of means the highest point of a dune, or a line formed by such points. 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including trailers, mobile homes, hotels, motels, motor lodges, boardinghouses and lodging houses, tourist courts or tourist homes. 
    Dwelling, duplex means a building designed for two-family occupancy. 
    Dwelling, multiple family means a building designed for three or more families. 
    Dwelling, single-family means a building designed exclusively for one-family occupancy. 
    Dwelling unit (DU) means a room or suite of two or more rooms suitable and designated for residential use and not occupied by more than one family doing its own cooking therein and having only one kitchen facility, located within a building. 
    Easement means a grant to the general public, a corporation or a certain person for use of a strip or parcel of land for a specific purpose. 
    Expression line means a continuous line on a building façade expressed by a variation in material or by a cornice or molding. 
    Family means one or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit exclusive of household servants. 
    Family day care home means an accessory use conducted in an occupied residence in which custodial care is regularly provided to one to six children, inclusive, and for which the owner or operator receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operating for profit. 
    Ferrous metal means any metals containing significant quantities of iron or steel. 
    Filling (service) stations means any building or plot of land used or designed to be used for the storage and retail sale of automotive fuels and lubricants and which may include facilities for washing, polishing, greasing, waxing, tire repairing and other minor repairs. No major vulcanizing, tire recapping or other major mechanical repairs shall be included in the operation of a filling station. 
    Floor area ratio (F.A.R.) means the total floor area built on a zoning lot, divided by the total lot area of that zoning lot. 
    Floor area, total means the sum of the areas of the several floors of the structure, as measured by the exterior faces of the walls, including fully enclosed porches and the like as measured by the exterior limits thereof, but excluding garage space which is in the basement or lower floors of a building. Carports, garages, breezeways and porches shall be excluded from the computation of floor area when a minimum floor area is specified in these provisions. 
    Floor footprint means the total indoor and outdoor footprint of a building at any given story. The 100-percent floor footprint is calculated by multiplying the maximum lot coverage by the overall size of the parcel. Some districts may limit the floor footprint by percentage at certain stories. 
    Garage, private means an accessory building or a portion of a main building designed or used for the storage of automobiles of the occupants of the main building. A carport would be considered a private garage. 
    Garage, public means a building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for the storage, servicing, repairing and equipping of motor vehicles. 
    Garage, storage means a building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for the storage or parking of automobiles. Services, other than storage, shall be limited to refueling, lubrication, washing, waxing and polishing. 
    Height of building means the vertical distance measured from the minimum required floor or base flood elevation or 18 inches above the crown of the road, whichever is less, to (a) the highest point of a flat roof; (b) the deck line of a mansard roof; (c) the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs; or (d) the average height between high and low points for a shed roof. 

    Home occupation means a business activity which: 
(1)  Has its primary location in a residential dwelling unit; 
(2)  Is conducted entirely within the dwelling by the occupants; 
(3)  Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes; and 
(4)  Does not change the residential character of the dwelling. 
    Hotel means any building containing principally sleeping rooms in which transient guests are lodged with or without meals, with no provision made for cooking in any individual room or suites. Such building would, structurally and for purposes of safety, be obliged to conform to the laws of the state regulating hotels. 
    Industrial equipment means farm tractors and implements, bulldozers, drag lines, cranes, derricks, heavy earth moving equipment normally used in farming, excavation and/or heavy construction activities. 
    Large family child care home means an occupied residence in which custodial care is regularly provided for up to 12 children, and for which the owner or operator receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operated for profit, and which has at least two full-time child care personnel on the premises during the hours of operation. 
    Laundry, self-service means a business rendering a retail service by renting to the individual customer equipment for the washing, drying and otherwise processing of laundry, with such equipment to be serviced and its use and operation supervised by the management. 
    Liner building means a building or part of a building constructed to shield parking, manufacturing, or industrial uses from the street that contains active uses with doors and windows opening onto the sidewalk to create an attractive, pedestrian-friendly, safe environment. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one main building and its accessory building with such openings and parking spaces as are required by the provisions of this chapter and having its principal frontage upon a street. 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area within the boundary lines of the lot. 
    Lot, corner means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot coverage means the percentage of the total area of a lot covered by all principal and accessory buildings, or portions thereof, unless otherwise specified in this Code. The method of measuring lot coverage shall be by measurements to the outside face of exterior walls and shall include carports, garages, breezeways and porches unless otherwise specified. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot front means and shall be construed to be the portion nearest the streets. For corner lots, the lot front shall be the narrowest portion abutting the street unless determined otherwise by the director of the CDEC. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the required front yard line and parallel to the front street line. 

    Low-THC cannabis means a plant of the genus Cannabis, the dried flowers of which contain 0.8 percent or less of tetrahydrocannabinol and more than 10 percent of cannabidiol weight for weight; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; or any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant or its seeds or resin that is dispensed from a medical marijuana treatment center as defined in F.S. § 381.986. 
    Major recreational vehicle means any travel trailer, pickup camper or coach designed to be mounted on motorized vehicles, motorized dwelling or motor home, tent trailer, popout camper, case or box used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not, any boat and boat trailer. 
    Marijuana means all parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin, including low-THC Cannabis, which are dispensed from a medical marijuana treatment center for medical use by a qualified patient as defined in F.S. § 381.986. 
    Marina means a facility or structure which provides mooring, docking, anchorage, fueling, repairs or other services for watercraft. 
    Mean high water means the average height of the high waters over a 19-year period. For shorter periods of observation, mean high water means the average height of the high waters after corrections are applied to eliminate known variations and to reduce the result to the equivalent of a mean 19-year value. 
    Mean high water line means the intersection of the tidal plane of mean high water with the shore. 
    Medical cannabis has the same meaning provided at F.S. § 381.986(1)(f), titled "Marijuana". 
    Medical marijuana cultivation facility has the same meaning as "cultivation facility" as provided at Rule 64-4.001(11)(a), Florida Administrative Code, and includes any area approved by the state department of health for the cultivation of medical Cannabis. 
    Medical marijuana dispensary has the same meaning as "dispensing facility" as provided at Rule 64-4.001(11)(c), Florida Administrative Code, and includes any area approved by the state department of health for the dispensation of medical Cannabis. 
    Medical marijuana processing facility has the same meaning as "processing facility" as provided at Rule 64-4.001(11)(b), Florida Administrative Code, and includes any area approved by the state department of health for the processing of medical Cannabis. 
    Medical marijuana treatment center (MMTC) and/or medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facility (MMTC-DF) means a retail establishment, licensed by the state department of health as a "medical marijuana treatment facility," facility established by a licensed "medical marijuana treatment center," "dispensing organization," "dispensing organization facility," or similar use, that sells and dispenses marijuana, products containing marijuana, or related supplies, but does not engage in any other activity related to preparation, wholesale storage, distribution, transfer, cultivation, or processing of any form of marijuana, marijuana products, or related supplies, and does not allow on-site consumption of marijuana or marijuana products. 
    Mezzanine means an open and unobstructed floor level (except for railings for low walls not more than 42 inches tall) within a story, not exceeding one-third of the floor area of space in which it is located. 
    Mobile home, house or coach means a manufactured detached, transportable, single-family dwelling unit designed for long-term occupancy and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a complete dwelling unit, containing all conveniences and facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to approved utility systems. To retain mobility, under-carriage and axles must remain attached to the unit. 
    Mobile home park or camp means any area where one or more mobile homes can be parked, designed or intended to be used as living quarters of one or more families. The site plan and all sanitary facilities of a mobile home park must conform to the requirements of the state and county health authorities. 
    Motel, tourist court or automobile court means a group of two or more attached, detached or semi-detached buildings, containing guest rooms or apartments with automobile storage or parking space provided in connection therewith, designed for use primarily by automobile transients. 
    Nonconforming building or structure means a building or structure or portion thereof existing at the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, which was designed, erected or structurally altered in such a manner that characteristics of the building or structure, other than use regulations, do not meet the provisions of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming use means the lawful use of land which use does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located because the use existed prior to March 17, 1982. 
    Nonferrous metals means metals not containing significant quantities of iron or steel, including, without limitation, copper, brass, aluminum, bronze, lead, zinc, nickel, and alloys thereof. 
    Open space means that part of a lot, including courts and yards, which: 
(1)  Is open and unobstructed from its lowest level upward; 
(2)  Is accessible to all residents on the lot without restrictions except as may be required for safety; and 
(3)  Shall, in general, be available for entry and use by the occupants of the building or buildings on the premises; 
but may include space located and treated to enhance the amenity of the development by providing landscaping, screening for the benefit of the occupants or neighboring area, or a general appearance of openness. 
    Outdoor storage area means an area permitted by the City of Riviera Beach, utilized for the permanent storage of goods, wares, merchandise, commodities, supplies or materials as an accessory use to an enclosed primary building. 
    Overlay zoning means a zoning district which is superimposed over another zoning district. The provisions of the overlay district are controlling if there is a conflict between the underlying zoning district and the overlay zoning district. 
    Parking lot means a durably surfaced area or plot of ground used for the storage or parking of more than four motor vehicles, either for compensation or as an accessory service to a business, industrial or residential use. 
    Patio home means a single-family dwelling unit designed with one windowless zero lot lined exterior site wall site planned to accommodate cluster development creating a sheltered, private outdoor living area for each dwelling unit. 
    Pawn shop means an establishment that is regularly engaged in the business of loaning money with products being used as collateral for a loan, but does not include financial institutions or any person who regularly loans money or any other thing of value on stocks, bonds, or other securities. 
    Place of worship means a special purpose building such as a church, synagogue, temple, or mosque that is used for religious observance by persons of similar beliefs, and that is architecturally designed and particularly adapted for the primary use of conducting, on a regular basis, formal religious services by a religious congregation. 
    Planned unit development (PUD) means a land area under unified control designed and planned to be developed in a single operation or by a series of prescheduled development phases according to an officially approved final master land use and site plan which does not necessarily correspond to the property development and use regulations of the zoning district in which the development is located. 
    Platted lot size means the minimum size of a buildable lot. For single family residential, see minimum property size per zoning classification, and for fee-simple town home (or similar type) multifamily residential the minimum platted lot size is 15 feet × 50 feet. For other multifamily residential, see minimum property size per zoning classification. Properties developed according to these standards shall be required to establish a property owners association for the continued maintenance of common areas. Note: Applicable density and setback regulations are regulated per specific zoning classification. 
    Private passenger vehicles means that type of vehicle primarily used to transport not more than nine persons. The term does not include such vehicles as campers, recreation vehicles, motor homes, or any other type of vehicle other than private passenger vehicles. 
    Professional office means a place used for conducting a business, profession, service, or government. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, offices of attorneys, engineers, architects, physicians, dentists, accountants, banks, financial institutions, real estate companies, insurance companies, financial planners, or corporate offices, and exclude manufacturing activities. 
    Property line means the boundary line surrounding a lot. 
    Recess line means a continuous building setback occurring at a prescribed height. 
    Recycling means to treat or process used or waste materials so as to make suitable for reuse. 
    Recycling center means a facility solely for the collection and sorting and/or separating of recyclable materials from the general public. On-site storage containers and bins used solely for the recycling of material such as aluminum, food and beverage containers, glass, paper, and plastic generated by residential property and business offices may be placed on the site. 
    Recycling facility means a facility for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials with on-site storage containers or processing facilities used solely for the recycling of materials. These materials include aluminum, glass, paper, plastic, and excluding toxic and heavy metals such as but not limited to lead, cadmium, mercury, chromium, nickel, copper, arsenic, ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers generated by residential property, business or light manufacturing and are not recycling centers for the purposes of this section. 
    Retail establishment means a place of business providing the sale and display of goods and/or sale of services directly to customers, with goods available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the customer. Retail goods include, but are not limited to, clothing, food, furniture, pharmaceuticals, books, art objects and the like. Retail services include, but are not limited to, barber shops, beauty salons, travel agencies, dry cleaning, health clubs, photo studios, funeral homes (no embalming on premises), pet care, repair establishments, and employment offices. For the purposes of this definition, retail establishments exclude adult entertainment, weapons sales, and the sale and servicing of vehicles or watercraft with engines larger than 50 horsepower. 
    School means any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. 
    Scrap metal processing means a process by which metal materials ferrous or nonferrous, which would otherwise become solid waste, are collected, separated or processed, and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials for efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning or remanufacturing of products. 
    Setback means the minimum distance required between buildings or buildings and property lines, to provide for the required open space. All setbacks shall be measured at a right angle from the property lines or building lines as the case may be. 
    Setback line means a line marking the minimum horizontal distance between the property line and the beginning point of the required setback or the buildable area, as this chapter may require in each particular case. All setback lines shall run parallel to the relevant property lines. 
    Shredding is a process by which metal is smashed, split, ripped, ground and cut into smaller pieces. 
    Site plan means a presentation drawing drawn to scale illustrating a proposed development and prepared in accordance with this chapter. Specific requirements for site plan approval submission are included in appropriate districts. 
    Smelting is a metallurgical thermal processing operation in which the metal or matte is separated in fused form from nonmetallic materials or other undesired metals with which it is associated. 
    Special exception means a use, structure or PUD that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a particular zoning district, but would, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relocation to neighborhood, be appropriate. 
    Storefront church means the temporary or permanent use of space in a multi-tenant commercial building for public or semipublic religious worship. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it. If there is no floor above it, then space between the floor and the ceiling is a story. 
    Street means a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Street line means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and the contiguous street right-of-way. 
    Streetwall means a low wall or hedge used to screen surface parking lots from view. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, fences and pergolas. 
    Structure alterations means any change, except for repair or replacement, in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, floor joists or roof joists. See also Building alterations. 
    Temporary labor employment office means an establishment engaged in providing temporary labor for the construction or industrial trades. 
    Timesharing means a form of ownership of property where use of the property is limited to certain time periods for varied individuals; also known as "interval ownership." 
    Toxic and heavy metals are metals that are poisonous, such as lead or mercury also metals that form poisonous soluble compounds and are not essential minerals, or are in a form that can negatively impact persons health. 
    Trailer means any portable structure or vehicle designed so as to be used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways, containing a self-contained plumbing system which is not connected to an external sewerage and constructed in such a manner so as to permit occupancy thereof for dwelling or sleeping purposes. 
    Trailer coach means all types of mobile homes, self-propelled trucks or buses which have been converted or equipped with living and/or sleeping quarters, such as pickup trucks with living quarters installed, and converted buses. However, this excludes suburbans and other similar types of automobiles for private use which have been equipped with camping equipment and relocated materials. 
    Trailer court, camp or park means an area where one or more automobile trailers can be parked, designed or intended to be used as temporary living quarters of one or more families and intended primarily for automobile transients. The site plan and all sanitary facilities of a trailer camp must conform to the requirements of the state and county health authorities. 
    Use means any purpose for which buildings or other structures or land may be arranged, designed, intended, maintained or occupied; or any occupation, business, activity or operation carried on or intended to be carried on in a building or other structure or on land in accordance with this chapter. 
    Variance means a relaxation of certain regulations contained in this chapter where such variance shall not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant or owner, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
    Vegetation line means a line, as identified by the state department of environmental protection, of the first appearance of permanent vegetation west of the Atlantic Ocean. 
    Warehouse means a structure, or part of a structure, for storing goods, wares and merchandise, whether for the owner or for others; and whether it is a public or private warehouse. 
    Yard means a required open space clear from the ground upward, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure, except for fences, walls and vegetation as provided herein. 
    Yard, front means a yard across the full width of the lot extending between the front line of the lot and the main building. 
    Yard, ocean means any yard abutting the Atlantic Ocean. 
    Yard, rear means a yard across the full width of the lot extending between the rear line of the lot and the main building. 
    Yard, side means a yard extending between the side line of the lot and the main building and between the front yard setback line or the lot lines in absence of setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 2(23.AA-1), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2314, § 1, 9-3-86; Ord. No. 2624, § 1, 2-16-94; Ord. No. 2772, § 1, 1-21-98; Ord. No. 2814, § 1, 4-21-99; Ord. No. 2863, § 1, 1-3-01; Ord. No. 3021, § 1, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 3070, § 2, 10-7-09; Ord. No. 3071, § 2, 10-7-09; Ord. No. 3072, § 2, 10-7-09; Ord. No. 3092, § 1, 5-18-11; Ord. No. 4026, § 2, 9-4-13; Ord. No. 4038, 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13, Ord. No. 4109, § 2, 5-2-18; Ord. No. 4114, § 2, 9-5-18) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 31-2. - Purposes, authority for adoption of plan. 
    In order to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; and to conserve the value of buildings and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the corporate area of the city, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan, there is hereby adopted and established an official zoning plan for the city. This plan is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred upon the city by former F.S. ch. 176. 
(Code 1957, § 23-3) 
Sec. 31-3. - Interpretation and effect of chapter. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1957, § 23-5) 
Sec. 31-4. - Hearings generally; notice; deposits. 
(a)  The planning and zoning board shall sit as a zoning board to hear all applications for the determination, establishment, amendment, supplementing or changing of zoning classifications and regulations. The zoning board shall recommend the boundaries of the various original districts and the appropriate regulations to be enforced therein. The zoning board shall make a preliminary report and hold public hearings thereon as required by law before submitting its final report; the city council shall not hold its public hearings or take action until it has received a final report of the planning and zoning board. 
(b)  Notice of all public hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be advertised as required by F.S. § 166.041, as may be amended. 
(c)  In addition to the notice requirements of subsection (b) above, all non-city initiated rezoning petitions shall be subject to the following additional notice requirements: 
(1)  Mail notice. 
a.  Petitioners shall mail notice of the public hearing to all property owners within 300 feet of the property affected by the proposed rezoning at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. 
b.  The list of property owners shall be derived from the most recent official tax roll of Palm Beach County, and the applicant shall provide an affidavit attesting to the completeness of the property owner's list. 
c.  Notice shall be provided by first class U.S. Mail, with the proper amount of postage attached to ensure delivery. 
d.  At a minimum, the notice shall contain the time, date and location of the public hearing, the location of the property affected and the substance of the proposed rezoning. 
(2)  Posting of property. 
a.  The petitioner shall post signs on the property at least 15 days prior to any public hearing. 
b.  The signs posted on the property shall be subject to criteria for size, contents and visibility established by the community development director. 
c.  Signs shall be able to withstand normal weather events, and at least one sign shall be posted per 500 lineal feet of all property located along a public right-of-way, with a minimum of one sign per frontage. 
d.  An affidavit, including photographs, attesting to the date of installation and number of signs installed shall be provided at least five days prior to the required public hearing. 
(d)  The petitioner shall be responsible for payment of all advertising, mailing and posting costs required by this section. Petitioner shall deposit funds with the community development department in accordance with City of Riviera Beach's adopted fee schedule, as amended from time to time, prior to the date of the advertisement and mailing and shall pay the balance of the costs, if any, before the matter is heard by the appropriate board. 
(Code 1957, § 23-4.1; Ord. No. 2969, § 2, 6-2-04) 
Sec. 31-5. - Modifications; protest; minimum vote; notice. 
    The determination, establishment, amendment, supplementation or change of zoning classifications, regulations or boundaries, may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed. In case, however, of a protest against such change signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending 500 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending 500 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the city council. The provisions of section 31-4 relative to public hearings and official notice shall apply equally to all changes or amendments. 
(Code 1957, § 23-4.1) 
Sec. 31-6. - Zoning regulations authorized; special exceptions, variances. 
    For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the city, the city council may, by ordinance, regulate the location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, and the uses of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, business, residence or other purposes. Such ordinance may provide that the zoning board of appeals may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate principles, standards, rules, conditions and safeguards set forth in the ordinance, make special exceptions to the terms of the zoning regulations in harmony with their general purposes and intent. Such ordinance may provide that the zoning board of appeals may authorize variances from the strict application of the regulations in such situations and subject to such limitations as may be set forth in the ordinance. 
(Code 1957, § 23-5.1) 
Sec. 31-7. - Plot plans required. 
    Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape and location of the building to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this chapter. A record of such applications and plots shall be kept in the office of the city clerk. Where application is made to enlarge an existing nonconforming use, the application shall be accompanied by an affidavit giving the description of the premises owned at the date of the passage of Ordinance No. 422, dated June 26, 1957. 
(Code 1957, § 23-10) 
Sec. 31-8. - Violations, penalty. 
    Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or the owner of any buildings or premises or part thereof where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent or person employed in connection therewith and who shall be found guilty of having assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. Each day that any violation of this chapter shall exist or continue shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1957, § 23-11) 
Secs. 31-9-31-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT SPECIAL MAGISTRATE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, adopted Dec. 3, 2014, repealed former Art. II, §§ 31-36-31-41, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to the board of adjustment and derived from Ord. No. 2459, §§ 1-A-1-F, 9-20-89; Ord. No. 2971, § 9, 6-16-04, Ord. No. 2882, § 1, 12-20-00. 

Sec. 31-36. - Establishment of development special magistrate. 
(a)  Establishment of development special magistrate. Pursuant to its home rule power provided in Chapter 166, Florida Statutes, and other constitutional and statutory authority, the City of Riviera Beach hereby establishes a development special magistrate, who shall have the powers and duties as set forth herein. Whenever the terms "board of adjustment," "zoning board of adjustment," "zoning board of appeals" or "zoning board of adjustment and appeals" or other similar terms of reference are used in the City of Riviera Beach Code of Ordinances, the term "development special magistrate" shall apply unless otherwise noted. 
(b)  Appointment; removal; qualifications. 
(1)  Appointment and removal. The city council shall appoint one or more development special magistrates to conduct all hearings and appeals contemplated by this article. The development special magistrate shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed by the city council at any time, with or without cause. 
(2)  Qualifications. The development special magistrate shall be an attorney, who is a member of the Florida Bar in good standing, and who is knowledgeable in land development and zoning laws and issues. 
(Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-14) 
Sec. 31-37. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  The development special magistrate shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To conduct hearings regarding applications for variances and for relief from requirements of the city's land development code and to make final decisions either granting, conditionally granting, or denying such applications in accordance with this article; and 
(2)  To hear and decide administrative appeals concerning allegations of an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the community development director in the enforcement of any regulations in the land development code, including, but not limited to, the zoning code, the sign code and the subdivision code, of the City of Riviera Beach. 
(b)  The development special magistrate shall have all powers necessary to conduct any hearings or appeals assigned to the development special magistrate pursuant to this article or any pending hearings or appeals before the zoning board of adjustment at the time the ordinance from which this article derives is enacted. 
(c)  The development special magistrate may obtain the issuance and service of subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses or the production of evidence at the hearings. Subpoenas may be issued by the development special magistrate at the request of the applicant, city staff, or an affected party involved in the hearing. The development special magistrate may also administer oaths and take testimony and evidence as provided in this article. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the development special magistrate to inquire fully into the facts of each case and to offer the property owner, city staff, and an affected party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard on any matter or issue relevant to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-14) 
Sec. 31-38. - Standing for variance hearings or appeals before the development special magistrate. 
(a)  Standing for variance or relief from requirements of the land development code. Any property owner of real property located in the City of Riviera Beach or authorized applicant if he or she meets the qualifications in section 31-39 below, shall have standing to apply for a variance or relief from the requirements of the land development code, and request a hearing before the development special magistrate. 
(b)  Standing for appeals before the development special magistrate. Any person or business seeking redress for a decision of the community development director directly and specifically affecting the person or business may appeal to the development special magistrate concerning an interpretation or the administration of the city's land development code, including, but not limited to, the zoning code, the sign code and the subdivision code, of the City of Riviera Beach. 
(Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-14) 
Sec. 31-39. - Procedures for applications for variances or relief from land development code; procedures for appeal of an interpretation; staying of work on property. 
(a)  Procedures for applying for variances and relief from land development code, and amending or withdrawing such pplications. 
(1)  Applications. All applications for variances or relief from the land development code to the development special magistrate shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the community development department and signed by the applicant. If the applicant is not the record title owner of the real property involved, then the record title owner shall also sign the application, and the applicant's interest in the real property shall be disclosed. Every application shall be sufficiently detailed to accurately inform the development special magistrate of the variance or relief requested, the reasons for the variance or relief requested and the relevant applicable provisions of the land development code. 
(2)  Amendment to application. An application for a variance or relief from the land development code may be amended up to and during the public hearing of the application, provided that the amendment does not materially alter the application as published in the public notice described in section 31-40(b) of this article. If the proposed amendment renders the request misleading or requests a greater variance and is made after the public notice of the hearing has been sent for publication or mailed pursuant to section 31-40(b) of this article, then a new hearing date shall be set and the community development department shall publish an amended public notice. The applicant shall pay an additional fee equal to the city's costs of publishing and mailing the amended public notice. 
(3)  Withdrawal of application. An applicant may voluntarily withdraw his or her application for a variance or relief from the land development code at any time prior to the commencement of a determination by the development special magistrate of the application, or amended application, and such withdrawal shall be without prejudice. A voluntary withdrawal must be made in writing and filed with the community development department unless it is announced at a public hearing. 
(b)  Procedures for appeal of an interpretation or administration of the land development code. 
(1)  All administrative appeals concerning allegation(s) of an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the community development director in the enforcement of any regulations in the land development code, including, but not limited to, the zoning code, the sign code and the subdivision code must be made by filing a written appeal with the community development department within 30 days after the rendition of the written order, requirement, decision, or determination from which the appeal is being made. 
(2)  All appeals must be made in writing, specifying the grounds for the appeal, and must be made in the form prescribed by the community development department. 
(3)  The community development director from whom the appeal is taken shall, upon notification by the community development department of the filing of the appeal and prior to the hearing date, transmit to the development special magistrate all papers and materials constituting the record of the action or decision that is being appealed, together with the materials, if any, to support the administrative action or decision. 
(c)  Stay during proceedings. An application for a variance or relief from the land development code or the filing of an appeal made pursuant to this article shall stay all work on the property unless the city manager certifies to the development special magistrate, that, by reason of the facts stated in the certification, such a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. Such work or proceedings, so certified by the city manager, shall not be stayed except by a restraining order granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-14) 
Sec. 31-40. - Notice for hearings on variances. 
(a)  Date of the hearing. The community development department shall set the application for a variance for hearing within a reasonable time from the date of the application generally not to exceed 60 days from the application or appeal to the development special magistrate. 
(b)  Public notice. 
(1)  Public notice of the hearing shall be made by the community development department and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The date, time and place of the hearing. 
b.  A brief description of the matter to be heard. 
c.  A legal description of the property for which the request is being made, together with any other appropriate information identifying the property. 
(2)  The public notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, not less than ten days before the date of the development special magistrate proceeding. 
(3)  A courtesy notice of the hearing shall be mailed by first class mail to the applicant and to all property owners within 300 feet in all directions from the property involved in the application, as shown in the current records of the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser. Notices shall be sent at a minimum of ten days before the published development special magistrate proceeding date. Failure of receipt of such mailed notice by individuals shall not affect the validity of any action or decision of the development special magistrate. 
(4)  The property owner shall post a notice of the hearing on the real property, for which the requested proceeding is being made, not less than ten days before the date of the proceeding. Such notice shall be on a sign approved by the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-14) 
Sec. 31-41. - Conduct of hearing on application for variances. 
(a)  Format of hearing. 
(1)  At the hearing, the development special magistrate shall offer the property owner, city staff, affected parties, and other interested parties, a reasonable opportunity to be heard on any matter or issue that is relevant to the proceeding. Affected parties shall be those businesses or property owners located within 300 feet in all directions of the property involved in the application. Interested parties shall be members of the public. The property owner, city staff, affected parties, or interested parties may appear at the hearing in person or through an attorney or other designated representative. Failure of any person to appear at any scheduled hearing in accordance with this article shall constitute waiver of that person's right to a hearing. 
(2)  The applicant, city staff, and affected parties may present relevant testimony and exhibits. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(3)  After hearing and upon consideration of such evidence, the development special magistrate shall make a decision upon the application for a variance or relief from the requirements of the land development code. 
(b)  Rendition of decisions. Each decision, resolution or order of the development special magistrate shall be in writing and contain findings of fact, conclusions of law, and state the relief granted the applicant, if any. Such decisions, resolutions or orders shall be deemed rendered when signed by the development special magistrate. Decisions, resolutions or orders shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-14) 
Sec. 31-42. - Grounds and criteria for approving applications for variances; imposing time limits on such approvals; prohibited variances. 
(a)  Generally. The development special magistrate may approve an application for a variance or relief from the land development code where such variance or relief is not contrary to the public interest, when owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the land development would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. The development special magistrate may grant such variance or relief only where all criteria are met by the applicant. 
(b)  Specifically. The development special magistrate may grant an application for a variance or relief from the land development code based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Mandatory specific criteria for approving variances or relief. In order to authorize any variance or relief under the terms of this article, the development special magistrate must find all of the following specific criteria: 
a.  Existence of special conditions or circumstances. That a special condition or circumstance exists which is peculiar to the lands, structures, or building involved in the application. 
b.  Conditions not created by applicant. That the special condition or circumstance did not result from the actions or inaction(s) of the applicant. 
c.  Special privileges not conferred. That granting the variance or relief requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied to other lands, building or structures. 
d.  Hardship conditions exist. That literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant and would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of existing ordinances. 
(2)  Supplementary criteria to be used in any approval of a request for a variance or relief from the land development code. The development special magistrate shall also use the following standards when granting a requested variance or relief from the land development code: 
a.  Minimum variance only to be granted. That the variance granted shall be the minimum variance that will make possible the requested use of land, building, or structure. 
b.  Variances to lot minimum requirements. Where a lot area, lot width or lot depth variance is applied for, no such variance may be granted provided vacant land is available, adjacent to the lot in question, sufficient to make the variance unnecessary. However, where the acquisition of such property would cause the adjacent property or structures to become nonconforming, then the acquisition option is invalid. The applicant for such variances or relief shall provide an affidavit with the application for variance stating that the above-mentioned conditions exist with respect to the acquisition of additional property. 
c.  Not injurious to public welfare or intent of ordinance. The grant of the variance or relief shall be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan and the land development code, and that such variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
d.  Conditions and safeguards may be imposed. In granting any variance or relief from the land development code, the development special magistrate may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the land development code. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall run with the land and shall be deemed a violation of the ordinance. 
(c)  Time limit for variances. The development special magistrate may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be begun, or completed, or both. A variance granted by the development special magistrate shall automatically expire under the following conditions: 
(1)  The variance shall expire 180 days from the date of the rendition of the written decision, resolution or order of the development special magistrate granting the variance if a building permit has not been issued in accordance with the plans and condition upon which the variance was granted. 
(2)  The variance shall expire if a building permit issued in accordance with the plans and conditions upon which the variance was granted expires and is not renewed pursuant to the applicable provisions regarding renewal of building permits. 
(3)  A variance may be extended up to 180 days at the discretion of the development special magistrate. 
(4)  Variances shall not become operative until the applicant has fully complied with all conditions in the development special magistrate's order(s). 
(d)  Prohibited variances. 
(1)  Use variances prohibited. The development special magistrate shall not grant under any circumstances a variance that either (1) permits a use that is not generally or by special exception permitted in the zoning district involved, or (2) permits any use that is expressly or by implication prohibited by terms of the land development ordinance in the subject zoning district. Furthermore, no nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning districts, and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other zoning districts shall be considered grounds for the authorization of a variance or request for relief from the land development code. 
(2)  Density variances prohibited. Under no circumstances shall the development special magistrate grant a variance which has the effect of increasing the density and the number of dwelling units to be allowed on residential property as defined in the applicable sections of the land development code. 
(Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-14) 
Sec. 31-43. - Rehearings for variances. 
    Whenever the development special magistrate has denied a request, he or she shall not consider any further application for the same request for a period of six months from the date of such action, except as follows: 
    An applicant or affected party may not request a rehearing or reconsideration of his or her application unless the applicant or affected party files a written motion for rehearing of the decision rendered by the development special magistrate with the community development department within ten days of the date the rendered decision, as defined in section 31-41(b) of the Code, and the motion for rehearing shall show good and specific cause for the requested rehearing based on the following grounds: 
(1)  Newly discovered evidence which by due diligence could not have been discovered in time to present at the hearing. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or other misconduct of any person who submitted evidence to the development special magistrate. 
(3)  Mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect. 
(4)  The development special magistrate has overlooked or misinterpreted any material points of law or fact. 
    The development special magistrate may grant or deny such motion for rehearing, without a hearing, upon consideration of the applicant's motion and any written response by the city. Such response by the city shall be made in writing and filed with the development special magistrate within ten days of applicant's filed motion for rehearing. If the development special magistrate grants a motion for rehearing, the development special magistrate shall advise all parties in writing. The rehearing of the matter shall be scheduled by the community development department and public notice of the rehearing shall be made pursuant to this article. All administrative costs of the city for a rehearing, including but not limited to, the mailing and publication costs of the required notice, shall be borne by the applicant or affected party. Only one request for a rehearing shall be made and/or granted. 
(Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-14) 
Sec. 31-44. - Notice for hearings on appeals; format of hearing. 
(a)  Date of the hearing. The community development department shall set the appeal to the special magistrate for hearing within a reasonable time from the date of that the office received the appeal, said date to generally not exceed 60 days. 
(b)  The person appealing/applicant shall be given notice of the hearing in writing. 
(c)  Format of hearing. 
(1)  At the hearing, the development special magistrate shall offer the applicant and city staff a reasonable opportunity to be heard on any matter or issue that is relevant to the proceeding. Either party may appear at the hearing in person or through an attorney or other designated representative. Failure of any person to appear at a scheduled hearing in accordance with this article shall constitute waiver of that person's right to a hearing. 
(2)  The applicant and city staff may present relevant testimony and exhibits. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(3)  After hearing and upon consideration of such evidence, the development special magistrate shall make a decision upon the appeal concerning an interpretation or administration of the land development code, including but not limited to, the zoning code, the sign code, and the subdivision code. 
(Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-14) 
Sec. 31-45. - Grounds for granting an appeal for interpretation. 
    Upon consideration of all of the relevant testimony and evidence presented by the applicant and city staff at the hearing, the development special magistrate may approve an appeal upon his or her findings of fact and conclusion of law that an error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination was made by the community development director in the enforcement of any regulations in the land development code, including but not limited to, the zoning code, the sign code, and the subdivision code, as applicable. The development special magistrate's decision shall be in writing. either party may appeal the development special magistrate's decision in accordance with section 31-46, below. 
(Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-14) 
Sec. 31-46. - Appeals from decisions of the development special magistrate. 
    An aggrieved person may appeal a final decision of the Development special magistrate within 30 days of a decision or order, rendered under this article, by seeking judicial review of the final decision. Aggrieved persons may include the applicant, an affected party, or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-14) 
Sec. 31-47. - Fees, changes and expenses. 
    The city council shall establish by resolution the appropriate schedule of fees, charges, and expenses, and shall establish a collection procedure for appeals, actions, requests, and other matters pertaining to the development special magistrate hearings. The city manager shall have the authority to expend any funds so appropriated by the city council for purposes and activities authorized herein or by any such ordinance(s). 
(Ord. No. 4054, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-14) 
Secs. 31-48-31-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SITE PLAN REVIEW[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; coastal construction, ch. 23; planning, ch. 27; comprehensive plan, § 27-106 et seq.; signs, ch. 28. 

Sec. 31-56. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide standards for site plan review and special exceptions in the interim period prior to adoption of final development review procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-27), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85) 
Sec. 31-57. - Purpose of site plans. 
    The purpose of site plan review shall be to ascertain that the proposed new development is in conformity with the comprehensive plan, is not detrimental to the neighboring land use; that an efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic system including proper means of ingress and egress to the streets is provided for, and that the proposed project shall be a viable addition to the community. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-27.I.A), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85) 
Sec. 31-58. - General classification. 
    Site plan review is required as set forth in the general requirements for the various districts. For further clarification, site plan review is required as follows: 
(1)  Single-family districts. Required for all nonresidential buildings. 
(2)  RM-15, RMH-15, RM-20, RMH-20. Required for all permitted uses, except residential development up to and including five units. 
(3)  CN. Required for all nonresidential development. Residential development shall comply with requirements for RM-15 districts. 
(4)  CG. Required for sites 10,000 square feet or greater. 
(5)  IL, IG. Required for sites one acre or greater. 
(6)  OP, CM, RO, CF, U. Required for all development. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-27.I.B), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85) 
Sec. 31-59. - Review package. 
    Each site plan review package shall include: 
(1)  Brief narrative. A written description of project programming, socio-economic characteristics of residents and planned amenities; financing, rental or sale prices and examples of previous work by the developer. 
(2)  Presentation drawings: 
a.  Topographic survey depicting existing elevations, all physical features and percolation characteristics of the soil. 
b.  All lot dimensions and area. 
c.  All building dimensions. 
d.  Calculated densities, floor area ratios and parking counts. 
e.  Utility plans, including stormwater drainage based upon soil percolation data. 
f.  Landscaping plan. 
g.  Points of ingress and egress. 
h.  Easements for public access. 
i.  Typical floor plans and front elevations of all buildings. 
j.  Placement and sizes of all signs. 
k.  Ground floor elevation in relation to mean sea level. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-27.I.C), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85) 
Sec. 31-60. - Automatic termination of site plan approval. 
(a)  Every site plan approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall automatically expire within 18 months of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived unless the owner of the property to which the site plan is applicable has received a validly-issued building permit and has initiated site plan improvements other than site preparation, land clearing, land filling and soil compaction. 
(b)  Every site plan approved by the city council after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall automatically expire within an 18-month period after such approval, unless the owner of the property to which the site plan is applicable has received a validly-issued permit and has initiated site plan improvements other than land clearing, land filling, soil compaction and other site preparation improvements. 
(c)  Thirty days prior to the expiration of the 18-month period referenced in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, a property owner may apply for an extension to commence development by filing a petition therefor with the director of community development and environmental control on forms provided by the city. Such petition shall be granted by the director of community development and environmental control by finding that the applicant has: 
(1)  Made a diligent and good faith effort to comply with all conditions and requirements for site plan approval, to acquire a building permit and to commence the construction of site improvements. 
(2)  Been precluded from doing so for reasons beyond the control of the property owner. 
(d)  The city shall not grant more than one extension with respect to a particular project for the improvement of land, and such extension shall not exceed a six-month period, respectively. 
(e)  Notice of the decision of the director of community development and environmental control shall be provided to the applicant by certified mail within 15 days from the date of application. 
(f)  If an extension is denied by the director of community development and environmental control, the applicant may appeal. 
(g)  This section shall in no way be construed to impair or divest any rights granted pursuant to F.S. §§ 163.3220 and 380.06. 
(Ord. No. 2520, § 1, 1-2-91) 
Sec. 31-61. - Review procedures for special exceptions. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is intended to address the review procedures for those uses which have been designated as special exceptions within the permitted uses of the applicable zoning district. The city council shall decide only upon such special exceptions that are specifically authorized by the terms of this chapter, i.e., to grant special exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this chapter or to deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose, intent and requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Public hearings required . A public hearing shall be held by the planning and zoning board and city council in accordance with the public hearing procedures and notice requirements in section 31-4, prior to any decision regarding a request for special exception. 
(c)  Submission. A site plan shall be submitted concurrently with the special exception. For special exceptions, the grant of the special exception shall expire if a building permit is not issued within two years from the date the special exception was granted by the city council. 
(d)  Fees. The fees for special exceptions are set out in section 31-691 of this code, which references the land development application fee schedule. 
(d)  Payment plan option. A payment plan option is available for the three following special exception uses: community residential home, large family child care home, and place of worship. The aforementioned uses may choose to utilize the payment plan option as follows: 
(1)  Half of the required fees due to apply for a special exception use approval (including special exception fees, site plan fees and advertising fees) may be submitted in lieu of full payment when a complete special exception application packet is officially submitted to staff. This payment will provide for review by both staff and the planning and zoning board. The remainder of fees due shall be provided by the applicant prior to application review by the city council within one year of planning and zoning board review or the application shall expire and officially be considered withdrawn. 
(2)  Partial payment of fees submitted through this payment plan option are non-refundable and does not guarantee a final use approval. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-27.II.A, B), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2366, § 2, 4-6-88; Ord. No. 2969, § 3, 6-2-04; Ord. No. 4028, § 1, 9-4-13) 
Sec. 31-62. - Standards for granting special exceptions. 
    A special exception shall not be recommended by the planning and zoning board unless and until: 
(1)  The planning and zoning board shall make findings that the granting of the special exception, with any appropriate conditions and safeguards that the board may deem necessary, will not adversely affect the public interest. 
(2)  In reaching its conclusion and in making the findings required in subsection (1) of this section, the planning and zoning board shall consider and weigh, among others, the following factors, where applicable and shall show in the record such factors as were considered and the disposition made thereof. Further, the board shall find in the case of any of these factors, where they may be relevant and applicable, that the purposes and requirements of granting the special exception have been met by the applicant and are reflected in the site plan approved concurrently with the granting of the special exception: 
a.  Ingress to and egress from the property and the proposed structures thereon, if any, including such considerations as automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe. 
b.  Off-street parking and loading areas, where required, including consideration of relevant factors in subsection (2)a. of this section, and the economic, noise, glare or odor effects of the location of such areas on adjacent and nearby properties and properties generally in the district. 
c.  Refuse and service areas, including consideration of relevant factors in subsections (2)a. and b. of this section. 
d.  Utilities, including such consideration as hookin locations and availability and compatibility of utilities for the proposed use or structure. 
e.  Screening, buffering and landscaping, including consideration of such relevant factors as type, dimensions and character to preserve and improve compatibility and harmony of use and structures between the proposed special exception and the uses and structures of adjacent and nearby properties and properties generally in the district. 
f.  Signs, or outside displays, if any, and proposed exterior lighting, if any, with reference to glare, traffic safety and economic effects of same on properties in the district. 
g.  Required yards and open spaces. The board shall make such recommendations as it deems necessary, guided by the factors that may be described in this zoning district, based on the nature of the request and its effect. 
h.  Other applicable requirements such as those found in sections 31-481 et seq., 31-566 et seq. and 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-27.II.C), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-63. - Expedited permitting program. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The expedited permitting program provides qualifying projects an efficient process to resolve issues in a timely manner through face-to-face meetings with a city representative without sacrificing any requirements established in this chapter. The expedited permitting program is available to qualifying companies that are expanding operations or moving into the city so that value-added employment may be created at a faster pace. 
(b)  Applicability. The following criteria shall be used to determine whether a company qualifies for the targeted expedited permitting program: 
(1)  The property must be properly zoned and platted for the intended use to be eligible. 
(2)  The company or business must fall into one of the following industry clusters to be eligible for targeted expedited permitting: 
a.  Bioscience, Medical, and Pharmaceutical; 
b.  Aerospace and Engineering; 
c.  Information Technology; 
d.  Business and Financial Services; 
e.  Marine Businesses and Fishing Equipment Manufacturing; 
f.  Corporate Headquarters; 
g.  Alternative Energy Manufacturing/Development; and 
h.  Education relating to the above industry clusters. 
(3)  The company must demonstrate the capability to create at least 30 new jobs in the City of Riviera Beach and to hire Riviera Beach residents to the maximum extent possible within the first two years of operation, or expand its operation within the city as a result of creating at least 30 new jobs in the two years prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the new facilities; or a combination thereof. 
(4)  Jobs created must be considered value-added employment based on the average wages and/or compensation paid by the employer. Value-added employment is defined when the average compensation package of positions created is at least 15 percent higher than the current per capita income level in the city. 
(5)  Companies must pass the city's due diligence process to establish solvency and credibility prior to acceptance into the program. Due diligence reports (1) shall include a Dun & Bradstreet report and (2) must be reviewed by the city manager, community development director, and finance director for the city. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the criteria above, a company may qualify for the targeted expedited permitting program if the company is a sanctioned project by the State of Florida or other officially sanctioned economic development organization (e.g. Office of Tourism, Trade and Economic Development (OTTED), Enterprise Florida, Riviera Beach CRA, or Business Development Board of Palm Beach County). 
(c)  The program. Companies that have been accepted into the expedited permitting program shall receive the following benefits: 
(1)  The city manager shall appoint a single point of contact at the city who shall be kept apprised of all developments relating to the review of the project by the city's staff in order to keep the project on track and provide a periodic status report to the company's project manager; 
(2)  The community development department shall inform the applicant of the necessary steps required for project approval in a pre-application meeting; 
(3)  The project shall receive priority at every phase of the review process by city staff, including face-to-face meetings; 
(4)  The city's development review committee shall review and provide comments to the applicant within ten business days of submission of plans by the applicant; 
(5)  In the case that major issues arise at any point during the development review process, a face-to-face meeting of all concerned parties will be called within three business days so that a resolution may be found in a timely and efficient manner; and 
(6)  An economic section provided by the applicant will be included in the staff report for the project for the planning and zoning board and city council hearings. 
(Ord. No. 3077, § 1, 4-7-10) 
Secs. 31-64-31-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 31-76. - Buildings. 
    The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the passage of Ordinance No. 422, dated June 26, 1957, may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter; and such use may be extended throughout the building, provided no structural alterations, except those required by law or ordinance or ordered by an authorized officer to assure the safety of the building, are made therein. No such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. If such nonconforming use of such building is discontinued for a continuous period of not less than 180 days, every future use of such premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 23-27(a)) 
Sec. 31-77. - Land. 
    The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of Ordinance No. 422, dated June 26, 1957, although such use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, may be continued; provided, however, no such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor shall any nonconforming use be extended to occupy a greater area of land than that occupied by such use at the time of the passage of Ordinance No. 422, dated June 26, 1957. If such nonconforming use is discontinued for a continuous period of not less than 180 days, any future use of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Provided, however, where land which is not used for a use excluded from the district in which such land is located and such use is not an accessory to the use of a main building located on the same lot or grounds, such nonconforming use of land shall be discontinued and all material completely removed by its owner not later than three years from the date of the passage of Ordinance No. 422, dated June 26, 1957. 
(Code 1957, § 23-27(b)) 
Sec. 31-78. - Change in use. 
    If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use may be changed to a use of the same or higher classification according to the provisions of this chapter. When a district shall hereafter be changed, any then existing nonconforming use in such changed district may be continued or changed to a use of a similar or higher classification, provided all other regulations governing the new use are complied with. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has been discontinued or changed to a higher classification or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use of a lower classification. 
(Code 1957, § 23-27(c)) 
Sec. 31-79. - Restorations. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be taken to prevent the restoration of a lawfully permitted and constructed building and any accessory structures, including but not limited to garages, swimming pools and decks, which all may be reconstructed with layout and elevation as they existed prior to damage or destruction, by fire, explosion, natural disaster, act of God, or other casualty as long as the following conditions are satisfied. 
(1)  In order to be eligible to receive building permit approval for building restorations pursuant to this section, a complete building permit application for restorations must be submitted to the city within 18 months of the date on which the qualifying event occurred. 
(2)  All approved restoration construction must be completed and obtain either a certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy within three years from the date the first building permit was issued approving said restoration construction. 
(3)  All restorations shall comply with current building and fire codes at the time of reconstruction. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be taken to prevent the continued occupancy or use of such building or part thereof which existed at the time of such damage or destruction unless deemed structurally unsafe by the city's building official. 
(Code 1957, § 23-27(d); Ord. No. 4062, § 2, 5-6-15) 
Sec. 31-80. - Nonconformities in the downtown zoning districts. 
    To implement the 2010 Riviera Beach Community Redevelopment Plan and Citizens' Master Plan, the City of Riviera Beach established Downtown Zoning Districts and made other modifications to this code. As a result of these changes: 
(a)  Certain uses of buildings or land may no longer be permitted in their new zoning districts, and certain existing buildings may no longer comply with all physical standards. Such uses and/or buildings that lawfully existed prior to December 18, 2013, but which do not conform with the new provisions adopted on that date shall be deemed to be legally nonconforming and shall not be required to be altered or conform with the new regulations until redevelopment occurs. Nonconforming uses are governed by the relevant requirements of sections 31-76 through 31-78 above. Nonconforming buildings can be repaired, altered, or enlarged, either laterally or vertically, so long as they remain otherwise lawful and the enlargement is in accordance with this Code. 
(b)  Certain existing lots may no longer meet the minimum requirements in their new zoning districts and thus will be considered legally nonconforming lots. Legally nonconforming lots may be built upon as if they conformed to the minimum requirements. Abutting nonconforming lots may be combined to create larger dimension lots as long as such recombination includes all parts of all lots; under these conditions the new lots do not need to meet this code's minimal dimensional requirements for new lots. 
(Ord.No. 4038, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13) 
Secs. 31-81-31-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 31-96. - Designation of districts. 
    In order to classify, regulate and restrict the uses of the land and buildings; to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings; to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings; and to regulate the intensity of land use, the city is hereby divided into classes of districts to be known as follows: 
RS-5 single-family dwelling district 
RS-6 single-family dwelling district 
RS-8 single-family dwelling district 
RD-15 two-family dwelling district 
RML-12 low density multiple-family dwelling district 
RM-15 multifamily dwelling district 
RMH-15 multifamily/hotel district 
RM-20 high density multifamily dwelling district 
RMH-20 high density multifamily/hotel district 
OP office and professional district 
CN neighborhood commercial district 
CG general commercial district 
TLI transitional limited industrial district 
IL limited industrial district 
IG general industrial district 
RO recreation/open space district 
CF community facility district 
U utilities district 
MH mobile home district 
PUD planned unit development district 
DC downtown core district 
DG downtown general district 
DR downtown residential district 
DI downtown industrial district 
DM downtown marine district 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-2), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2314, § 2, 9-3-86; Ord. No. 2529, §§ 6, 7, 3-20-91; Ord. No. 2530, § 1, 5-1-91; Ord. No. 4038, 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13) 
Sec. 31-97. - Official zoning map and zoning district boundaries. 
(a)  The zoning districts and boundaries thereof are shown upon the map adopted, referred to herein and made a part hereof, copies of which map are filed with the city clerk; such map being designated as the "Zoning Map of Riviera Beach, Florida." Such map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the information set forth on such map were all fully described and set out herein. 
(b)  In the creation by this chapter of the respective districts, the city council has given due and careful consideration to the peculiar suitability of each and every district for the particular regulations applied thereto, and the necessary proper and comprehensive groupings and arrangements of the various uses and densities of dwelling units and population in accordance with a well considered plan for the development of the city. 
(c)  The boundaries of the districts shown upon the map adopted by this chapter or amendments thereto are hereby adopted and approved and the regulations of this chapter governing the use of land and buildings, the height of buildings, building site areas, the sizes of yards about buildings and other matters as set forth in this chapter, are hereby established and declared to be in effect upon all land included within the boundaries of each and every district shown upon such map. 
(d)  Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any district shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where such district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street lines, alley lines, waterways or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  In unsubdivided property, waterways or where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(3)  Where a district boundary divides the area of a lot unequally, the district classification and regulations of the larger portion shall apply to the remaining smaller portion of the lot. 
(4)  Where any public street or alley is hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to each parcel of abutting property shall apply to the portion of such street or alley added thereto by virtue of such vacation or abandonment. 
(5)  In case any further uncertainty exists, the legislative body shall interpret the intent of the map as to the location of such boundaries. 
(e)  The city council may, from time to time, amend, change or repeal district boundaries in the manner prescribed in this chapter, upon recommendation by the planning and zoning board. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-3), 3-17-82) 
Charter reference- Official map, art. IV, § 6. 
Sec. 31-98. - Effect of annexation on zoning. 
    Whenever property is annexed to the city from another unit of local government, the district most similar to prior local government zoning as determined by the city council at the time of annexation shall be assigned. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-4), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-99-31-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RS-5 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-116. - Purpose. 
    The RS-5 single-family dwelling district is intended to promote and preserve single-family dwellings as the principal use and uses incidental or accessory thereto. Large lot uses are required to maintain a low density of population. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-5.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-117. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the RS-5 single-family dwelling district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(2)  Home occupations. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses are permitted by special exception in the RS-5 single-family dwelling district: None. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-5.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2624, § 2, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 31-118. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the RS-5 single-family dwelling district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size: 8,000 square feet, except any lake, pond, wetland, marsh, lagoon, estuary, bottomland, etc., that is filled after December 6, 1989, shall require a minimum dry lot size of one acre. 
(2)  Minimum property width: 75 feet at the building line. 
(3)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 25 feet. 
b.  Side: ten percent of width of lot or 71/2 feet; 121/2 feet corner lots street side. 
c.  Rear: 15 percent of the length of the lot. 
(5)  Minimum floor area: 1,200 square feet, exclusive of attached garages, carports, terraces, breezeways and porches. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-5.III), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2478, § 1, 12-6-89) 
Sec. 31-119. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the RS-5 single-family dwelling district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-5.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-120. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the RS-5 single-family dwelling district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-5.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-121. - Nonconforming lots and structures. 
(a)  Lots. If a vacant lot in the RS-5 single-family dwelling district has an area or width, or both, less than the above minimum and was a lot of record at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article was derived, the lot may be occupied by a single-family dwelling and its accessory uses, provided the minimum yard regulations of the district are conformed with. 
(b)  Structures. All nonconforming structures in the RS-5 district which legally existed prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be allowed to expand within the required setback lines without the necessity of first obtaining a variance. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-5.VI), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83) 
Secs. 31-122-31-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RS-6 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-136. - Purpose. 
    The RS-6 single-family dwelling district is intended to promote and preserve single-family dwellings as principal uses and uses incidental or accessory thereto together with recreational, religious and educational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-6.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-137. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the RS-6 single-family dwelling district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(2)  Parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities under the supervision of the city. 
(3)  Home occupations. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses are permitted by special exception in the RS-6 single-family dwelling district: Churches and their educational buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-6.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2624, § 2, 2-16-94; Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 31-138. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the RS-6 single-family dwelling district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size: 6,500 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum property width: 60 feet at the building line. 
(3)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 25 feet. 
b.  Side: ten percent of width of lot or 71/2 feet; 121/2 feet on street side. 
c.  Rear: 15 percent of the length of the lot; need not be more than 25 feet. 
(5)  Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet exclusive of attached garages, carports, terraces, breezeways and porches. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-6.III), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-139. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the RS-6 single-family dwelling district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-6.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-140. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the RS-6 single-family dwelling district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-6.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-141. - Nonconforming lots and structures. 
(a)  Lots. If a vacant lot in the RS-6 single-family dwelling district has an area or width, or both, less than the above minimum and was a lot of record at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article was derived, the lot may be occupied by a single-family dwelling and its accessory uses, provided the minimum yard regulations of the district are conformed with. 
(b)  Structures. All nonconforming structures in the RS-6 district which legally existed prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be allowed to expand within the required setback lines without the necessity of first obtaining a variance. 
(c)  Congregate living facilities. Any adult congregate living facility (ACLF), developmental services group home, adult foster home or foster home for children under applicable rules of the state department of health and rehabilitative services in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived and which meets the other requirements contained in this division shall be a permitted use; provided, however, that the occupancy levels permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived shall not be increased, unless specifically authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-6.VI), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2169, § 2, 7-21-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83) 
Sec. 31-142. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review in accordance with section 31-56 et seq. is required for the uses permitted by section 31-137(a)(2) and (a)(3). 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-6.VII), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-143-31-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RS-8 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-156. - Purpose. 
    The RS-8 single-family dwelling district is intended to provide areas within which single-family dwellings with accessory uses can thrive as a principal use and can be protected from the more intense activities or land uses. Recreational, religious and educational facilities shall also be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-7.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-157. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the RS-8 single-family dwelling district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(2)  Parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities under the supervision of the city. 
(3)  Libraries, community centers; buildings or land used exclusively by the federal, state, county or city governments for public purposes. 
(4)  Home occupations. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses are permitted by special exception in the RS-8 single-family dwelling district: Churches and their educational buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-7.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2624, § 2, 2-16-94; Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 31-158. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the RS-8 single-family dwelling district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum property width: 50 feet at the building line. 
(3)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(4)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 20 feet. 
b.  Side: seven feet; 121/2 feet on street side abutting street. 
c.  Rear: 15 percent of the length of the lot; need not be more than 20 feet. 
(5)  Minimum floor area: 800 square feet exclusive of attached garages, carports, terraces, breezeways and porches. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-7.III), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-159. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the RS-8 single-family dwelling district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-7.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-160. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the RS-8 single-family dwelling district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-7.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-161. - Nonconforming lots and structures. 
(a)  Lots. If a vacant lot in the RS-8 single-family dwelling district has an area or width, or both, less than the above minimum and was a lot of record at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article was derived, the lot may be occupied by a single-family dwelling and its accessory uses, provided the minimum yard regulations of the district are conformed with. 
(b)  Structures. All nonconforming structures in the RS-8 district which legally existed prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be allowed to expand within the required setback lines without the necessity of first obtaining a variance. 
(c)  Open carport. An open carport may be built to within five feet of the property line on one side of a residence in a subdivision that has 75 percent or more of the lots with houses existing and on lots 50 feet in width in existing subdivisions of record; provided, however, a clear distance of ten feet is maintained between the eaves of the carport and the eaves of the building on the adjoining property. Carports set closer than seven feet from the property lines shall not be enclosed. 
(d)  Congregate living facilities. Any adult congregate living facility (ACLF), developmental services group home, adult foster home or foster home for children under applicable rules of the state department of health and rehabilitative services in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived and which meets the other requirements contained in this division shall be a permitted use; provided, however, that the occupancy levels permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection was derived shall not be increased, unless specifically authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-7.VI), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2169, § 1, 7-21-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83) 
Sec. 31-162. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review in accordance with section 31-56 et seq. is required for the uses permitted by section 31-157(a)(2)-(a)(4). 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-7.VII), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-163-31-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RD-15 TWO-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-176. - Purpose. 
    The RD-15 two-family dwelling district is intended primarily for development and preservation of duplex residential structures and their incidental or accessory uses. Recreational, religious and educational facilities, if found to be appropriate, shall also be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-8.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-177. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the RD-15 two-family dwelling district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(2)  Dwelling structures for two-family use (duplex). 
(3)  Parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities under the supervision of the municipality. 
(4)  Group homes and adult congregate living facilities. 
(5)  Home occupations. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses are permitted by special exception in the RD-15 two-family dwelling district: Churches and their educational buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-8.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2624, § 2, 2-16-94; Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 31-178. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the RD-15 two-family dwelling district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size: 
a.  Single-family dwelling: 5,000 square feet. 
b.  Two-family dwelling: 5,500 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum property width: 50 feet at building line. 
(3)  Maximum building height: 35 feet or two stories. 
(4)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 25 feet. 
b.  Side: seven feet; 121/2 feet on street side abutting street. 
c.  Rear: 20 feet. 
(5)  Minimum floor area: 700 square feet for each multiple-family unit and 800 square feet for single-family units, exclusive of attached garages, carports, terraces, breezeways and porches. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-8.III), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-179. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the RD-15 two-family dwelling district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-8.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-180. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the RD-15 two-family dwelling district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-8.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-181. - Nonconforming lots and structures. 
(a)  Lots. If a vacant lot in the RD-15 two-family dwelling district has an area or width, or both, less than the above minimum and was a lot of record at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article was derived, the lot may be occupied by a single-family dwelling and its accessory uses, provided the minimum yard regulations of the district are conformed with. 
(b)  Structures. All nonconforming structures which legally existed prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be allowed to expand within the required setback lines without the necessity of first obtaining a variance. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-8.VI), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83) 
Sec. 31-182. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review in accordance with section 31-56 et seq. is required for the uses permitted by section 31-178(a)(3) and (a)(4). 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-8.VII), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83) 
Secs. 31-183-31-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RML-12 LOW DENSITY MULTIFAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-186. - Purpose. 
    The RML-12 district is intended to provide for development of multifamily dwellings, and allows a low density of population. The district is basically residential in character, although customary accessory uses and amenities are permitted as subordinate use to main structure. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 6, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-187. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the RML-12 multiple-family dwelling district: 
(1)  Any of the permitted uses in the RS-8 single-family dwelling district. 
(2)  Multifamily dwelling units. 
(3)  Community residential home. 
(4)  Family day care home. 
(5)  Home occupations (see section 31-545). 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses are permitted by special exception in the RML-12 multiple-family dwelling district: 
(1)  Community care facility. 
(2)  Day care center. 
(3)  Churches and their educational buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 6, 3-20-91; Ord. No. 2624, § 2, 2-16-94; Ord. No. 2657, § 2, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 31-188. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards for the RML-12 multiple-family dwelling district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size. 
a.  Single-family dwelling: 6,500 square feet. 
b.  Two-family dwelling: 7,500 square feet. 
c.  Multiple-family: minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet and maximum density of 12 dwelling units per acre. 
(2)  Minimum property width. 
a.  One- and two-family dwellings: 60 feet. 
b.  Multiple-family dwellings: 100 feet. 
(3)  Maximum building height: 35 feet or three stories. 
(4)  Minimum building setbacks. 
a.  Front: 20 feet. 
b.  Side for one-story structure: seven feet, except ten feet where the rear of units face the side yard. 
c.  Side for two-story structure: ten feet. 
d.  Side for corner lot: 121/2 feet. 
e.  Rear: 15 percent of the length of the lot or 20 feet, whichever is less. 
(5)  Minimum floor area: 
a.  One-bedroom apartments: 650 square feet. 
b.  Two-bedroom apartments: 750 square feet. For each additional bedroom, total square footage shall increase by 100. 
c.  Single-family homes: 800 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 6, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-189. - Parking. 
    The parking requirements for the RML-12 multiple-family dwelling district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 6, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-190. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements for the RML-12 multiple-family dwelling district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 6, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-191. - Nonconforming lots and structures. 
    Regulations governing nonconforming lots and structures in the RML-12 multiple-family dwelling district shall be the same as those for the RS-6 single-family dwelling district. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 6, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-192. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review shall be required for all permitted uses in the RML-12 multiple-family dwelling district except the following: 
(1)  Residential developments with up to and including five units. 
(2)  Community residential home. 
(3)  Family day care home. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 6, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-193. - Special side yard provision diagram. 
RML-12 SPECIAL SIDE YARD PROVISION 
10-foot side yard when back doors face the side yard 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 6, 3-20-91) 
Secs. 31-194, 31-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RM-15 MULTIFAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-196. - Purpose. 
    The RM-15 multifamily dwelling district is intended to provide for development of multifamily dwellings, and allows a medium density of population. The district is basically residential in character, although customary accessory uses and amenities are permitted as a subordinate use to the main structure. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-9.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-197. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the RM-15 multifamily dwelling district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the RS-8 single-family dwelling district. 
(2)  Multifamily dwelling units. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses are permitted by special exception in the RM-15 multifamily dwelling district: 
(1)  Residential planned unit developments (R-PUD). 
(2)  Day care centers. 
(3)  Mobile home parks. 
(4)  Boardinghouses or lodging houses. 
(5)  Guest houses or tourist homes. 
(6)  Nursing or convalescent homes. 
(7)  Adult congregate living facilities (ACLF). 
(8)  Group homes. 
(9)  Churches and their educational buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-9.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2386, § 1, 9-7-88; Ord. No. 2624, § 2, 2-16-94; Ord. No. 2657, § 3, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 31-198. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the RM-15 multifamily dwelling district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size/density: 
a.  Single-family dwelling: 5,000 square feet. 
b.  Two-family dwelling: 5,500 square feet. 
c.  Three-family dwelling: 7,000 square feet. 
d.  Four-family dwelling: 8,500 square feet. 
e.  Five or more units shall be density based, and shall be expressed in terms of maximum number of residential dwelling units permitted per acre of land. Maximum permitted density shall be 15 dwelling units per acre. 
(2)  Minimum property width: 
a.  One-family and two-family: 50 feet at the building line. 
b.  Three-family and four-family dwellings: 60 feet at the building line. 
c.  Five-family units and greater: 70 feet at the building line. 
(3)  Maximum building height: 35 feet or three stories. 
(4)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 20 feet. 
b.  Side: seven feet; 121/2 feet on street side. 
c.  Rear: 15 percent of the length of the lot or 20 feet, whichever is less. 
(5)  Minimum floor area: 
a.  Efficiencies: 400 square feet. 
b.  One-bedroom apartments: 650 square feet. 
c.  Two-bedroom apartments: 750 square feet. For each additional bedroom, total square footage shall increase by 100. 
d.  Single family homes: 800 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-9.III), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 3021, § 2, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 31-199. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the RM-15 multifamily dwelling district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-9.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-200. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the RM-15 multifamily dwelling district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-9.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-201. - Nonconforming lots and structures. 
    Regulations governing nonconforming lots and structures in the RM-15 multifamily dwelling district shall be the same as those for the RS-8 single-family dwelling district. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-9.VI), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-202. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review shall be required for all permitted uses in the RM-15 multifamily dwelling district except residential developments with up to and including five units. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-9.VII), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-203-31-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - RMH-15 MULTIFAMILY/HOTEL DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-221. - Purpose. 
    The RMH-15 multifamily/hotel district is similar to the RM-15 multifamily dwelling district except that hotels and motels and their customary accessory uses, as found to be appropriate, may be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-10.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-222. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the RMH-15 multifamily/hotel district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multiple family dwellings. 
(4)  Hotels, motels, apartment hotels. 
(5)  Restaurants and shops accessory to hotels or motels, which uses shall not have signs or displays visible from the public street. 
(6)  Private clubs as accessory to the residential uses. 
(7)  Any use commonly accessory to the above uses. 
(8)  Home occupations. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses are permitted by special exception in the RMH-15 multifamily/hotel district: 
(1)  Residential planned unit development (R-PUD). 
(2)  Timesharing. 
(3)  Nursing and convalescent homes and ACLFs. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-10.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 9-7-88; Ord. No. 2624, § 2, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 31-223. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the RMH-15 multifamily/hotel dwelling district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size/density: 
a.  Single-family dwelling: 5,000 square feet. 
b.  Two-family dwelling: 5,500 square feet. 
c.  Three-family dwelling: 7,000 square feet. 
d.  Four-family dwelling: 8,500 square feet. 
e.  Five or more units shall be density based, and shall be expressed in terms of maximum number of residential dwelling units permitted per acre of land. Maximum permitted density shall be 15 dwelling units per acre. Hotel/motel units shall be permitted at a density of 30 units per acre. 
(2)  Minimum property width: 
a.  One-family and two-family: 50 feet at the building line. 
b.  Three-family and four-family dwellings: 60 feet at the building line. 
c.  Five-family units and greater: 70 feet at the building line. 
(3)  a.  Maximum building height: 35 feet or three stories. 
b.  For projects of five units or more, the maximum building height may be increased to 45 feet if the project utilizes ground floor parking underneath the main structure, allowing the provision of increased landscape area along the street (minimum of 20 percent increased plant materials required). 
(4)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 20 feet. 
b.  Side: seven feet; 121/2 feet on street side. 
c.  Rear: 15 percent of the length of the lot or 20 feet, whichever is less. 
(5)  Minimum floor area: 
a.  Efficiencies: 400 square feet. 
b.  One-bedroom apartments: 650 square feet. 
c.  Two-bedroom apartments: 750 square feet. For each additional bedroom, total square footage shall increase by 100. 
d.  Single-family homes: 800 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-10.III), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 3021, § 3, 11-15-06) 
Sec. 31-224. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the RMH-15 multifamily/hotel district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-10.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-225. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the RMH-15 multifamily/hotel district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-10.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-226. - Nonconforming lots and structures. 
    Regulations governing nonconforming lots and structures in the RMH-15 multifamily/hotel district shall be the same as those for the RS-8 single-family dwelling district. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-10.VI), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-227. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review shall be required for all permitted uses in the RMH-15 multifamily/hotel district except residential development with up to and including five units. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-10.VII), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-228-31-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - RM-20 HIGH DENSITY MULTIFAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-241. - Purpose. 
    The RM-20 high density multifamily dwelling district is intended to provide for development of multifamily dwellings and allows a high density of population with a proportional increase in amenities as the density rises. The district is basically residential in character and promotes a high quality environment through aesthetically oriented property development standards. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-11.I), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85) 
Sec. 31-242. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the RM-20 high density multifamily dwelling district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multiple family dwellings. 
(4)  Townhouses. 
(5)  Condominiums and cooperatives. 
(6)  Private clubs as accessory to the residential uses. 
(7)  Home occupations. 
(8)  Any use commonly accessory to the above uses. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses are permitted by special exception in the RM-20 high density multifamily dwelling district: 
(1)  Residential planned unit developments (R-PUD). 
(2)  Mobile home parks. 
(c)  Uses prohibited. No use, building or structures of a commercial nature, except that which provides for access to the public beach, shall be permitted east of the coastal construction control line. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-11.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85; Ord. No. 2624, § 3, 2-16-94; Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 4-1-98) 
Sec. 31-243. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the RM-20 high density multifamily dwelling district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size/maximum density: 
a.  Single-family dwellings: 8,000 square feet. 
b.  Multifamily dwellings: maximum permitted density shall be 20 residential dwelling units per acre including the density bonus referred to in subsection (2) of this section. If the density bonus provision is not applied for, the maximum permitted density shall be 17 units per acre. 
(2)  Bonus density: the bonus density shall be as established in chapter 26, entitled, Minority Employment and Affordable Housing Opportunity Plan. 
(3)  Density transfers: calculation of total site area to derive appropriate density transfer shall be computed as follows: 
a.  Total land area on Singer Island from the westernmost property line, east of the right-of-way of S.R. 703 (A1A) to the 1997 coastal construction setback line as established by the State of Florida shall be computed at 100 percent of the total dry land area between those two points. 
b.  Total land area east of the 1997 coastal construction control line to the mean high water line or the easternmost property line, whichever is less, shall be calculated at 50 percent of the total land area between those two points. 
c.  Total area of wetlands, marshes, lagoons and known mangrove habitat shall not be computed for density transfer purposes. 
d.  No area of submerged land on Lake Worth shall be computed for density transfer purposes. 
(4)  Maximum building height: 20 stories or 200 feet, excluding mechanical facilities, ornamental towers, antennas, and similar non-habitable building elements, which shall not exceed 20 feet in additional height. Such non-habitable building elements shall be screened and set back from the roof line in such a way as to avoid increasing the building's offsite ground-level shadow. 
(5)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 
1.  Main structures more than two stories in height, 100 feet. 
2.  Main structures two stories or less in height, 50 feet. 
3.  Accessory structures, e.g., parking garages, recreational decks, boiler and generator rooms, etc., 50 feet. This regulation does not apply to ornamental walls and gatehouses, which shall set back 15 feet from the front property line. 
b.  Side: 
1.  Ten percent of the lot or 20 feet, whichever is greater, shall be maintained for all structures, excluding accessory structures two stories or less. 
2.  The accessory structures, e.g., parking garages, recreational decks, boiler and generator rooms, etc., which are two stories or less, shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet. 
c.  Rear: 15 percent of the lot, but not to exceed 100 feet. 
d.  Ocean: the 1997 Coastal Construction Control Line. 
e.  High-rise setback: all buildings in excess of two stories shall provide two feet additional setback from each property line (with exception of the ocean side setback line for property on Singer Island) for each additional story of height. 
f.  For property located west of Lake Worth, minimum setbacks are as follows: 
1.  Front: 20 feet. 
2.  Side: seven feet; 121/2 feet on side street. 
(6)  Rear: 15 percent of the length of the lot or 20 feet, whichever is less. 
(7)  High-rise setback: all buildings in excess of two stories shall provide two feet additional setback from each property line for each additional story of height. 
(8)  Floor area ratio: the ratio of all aggregate residential floor area to site area shall not exceed 1.3:1. 
(9)  Maximum lot coverage: 70 percent of the aggregate site area computed in subsection (3) of this section, density transfer, for all structures inclusive of accessory structures, i.e., parking structures, recreational decks, boiler and generator rooms, etc. 
(10)  Maximum north/south width: 110 feet for main structures. For the purposes of this regulation the accessory structures, e.g., parking garages, etc., two stories or less in height shall not be considered as part of the main building. 
(11)  Minimum recreation facilities and amenities: 
a.  Outdoor: one swimming pool, one tennis court or comparable recreational space and a designated area for sunning, picnics, etc., for residents of the project. Additionally, the following amenities are optional: putting greens, shuffleboard courts, wading pools, observation decks, exercise paths, etc. 
b.  Indoor: one multipurpose room for parties, games and group assembly and an exercise room. Additionally, the following amenities are optional: billiard room, library, sauna, etc. 
c.  Note: a pavilion may be provided, either inside or outside, as a substitute for one of the above minimum requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-11.III), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85; Ord. No. 2774, §§ 2, 3, 4-1-98; Ord. No. 2803, § 1, 2-17-99; Ord. No. 2899, § 1, 6-20-01; Ord. No. 4061, § 2, 5-20-15) 
Sec. 31-244. - Parking. 
(a)  The required off-street parking requirements for an RM-20 high density multifamily dwelling district should conform to section 31-566 et seq. 
(b)  Seventy-five percent of all required parking shall be placed under a permanent structure in a manner to effectively conceal such parking facility from the public right-of-way by landscaping and other means. 
(c)  Bonuses shall be as established in chapter 26, entitled, Minority Employment and Affordable Housing Opportunity Plan. 
(d)  The maximum height for a parking garage shall be 60 feet. 
(e)  Parking garages shall be concealed from S.R. 703 (A1A) using buffer landscaping and utilizing facade treatments which blend the parking garage structure with the main high-rise structures. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-11.IV), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85; Ord. No. 4061, § 2, 5-20-15) 
Sec. 31-245. - Landscaping. 
    In addition to the requirements of section 31-596 et seq., the following landscaping criteria shall be provided: 
(1)  Twenty percent of all gross vehicular use areas shall be landscaped. 
(2)  For every 12 parking slips, a landscaped island five feet in width shall be provided. 
(3)  Where environmentally sensitive land, wetlands and other conservation or preservation areas abut or are located within the site, at minimum there shall be a ten-foot wide landscape buffer surrounding said areas planted with ecologically appropriate native vegetation. 
(4)  All property lines shall be provided with a sufficient landscape strip at least five feet in width, with one tree for every 50 linear feet. 
(5)  Where the dune has been destroyed or depleted of landscaping in a manner that does not afford a natural protection from the elements, the dune shall be rebuilt and replenished with landscaping to provide the necessary protection and to reestablish the dune ecosystem. Re-establishing of the dune shall be designed to align with the natural dune and contours found to the north and south of the subject property. 
(6)  Fifty percent of all required trees shall consist of native shade tree species. 
(7)  The required shade trees shall be twelve feet in height with six-foot clear trunk at planting and reach 25 feet in height and a 16-foot spread as a minimum. 
(8)  Preservation areas within a site shall be computed as a substitution for landscape areas. 
(9)  Modification of wetlands and buffers along access roads shall be permitted to allow standard driveway access to a main facility and subordinate uses. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-11.V), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85; Ord. No. 4061, § 2, 5-20-15) 
Sec. 31-246. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review shall be required for all permitted uses in the RM-20 high density multifamily dwelling district, except single-family and two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-11.VII), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85) 
Secs. 31-247-31-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - RMH-20 HIGH DENSITY MULTIFAMILY/HOTEL DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-261. - Purpose. 
    The RMH-20 high density multifamily/hotel district is similar to the RM-20 district except that hotels and motels and their customary accessory uses as found to be appropriate may be permitted. The district is basically residential in character and promotes a high quality environment through aesthetically oriented property development standards. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-12.I), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85) 
Sec. 31-262. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the RMH-20 high density multifamily/hotel district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multiple family dwellings. 
(4)  Hotels, motels, apartment hotels. 
(5)  Restaurants and shops accessory to hotels or motels. 
(6)  Private clubs as accessory to the residential uses. 
(7)  Home occupations. 
(8)  Any use commonly accessory to the above uses. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses are permitted by special exception in the RMH-20 high density multifamily/hotel district: 
(1)  Residential planned unit developments (R-PUD). 
(2)  Timesharing. 
(c)  Uses prohibited. No commercial use, building or structure, except that which provides for access to the public beach, shall be permitted east of the 1997 coastal construction setback line. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-12.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85; Ord. No. 2624, § 3, 2-16-94; Ord. No. 4061, § 3, 5-20-15) 
Sec. 31-263. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the RMH-20 high density multifamily/hotel district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size/maximum density: 
a.  Single-family dwelling: 8,000 square feet. 
b.  Multifamily dwelling: maximum permitted density shall be 20 residential dwelling units per acre, including the density bonus referred to in subsection (2) of this section. If the density bonus provision is not applied for, the maximum permitted density shall be 17 units per acre. Base density for hotels and motels shall be 30 units per acre. With the density bonus, the maximum permitted density for hotel/motel shall be 40 units per acre. 
(2)  Bonus density: the bonus density shall be as established in chapter 26, entitled, Minority Employment and Affordable Housing Opportunity Plan. 
(3)  Density transfers: calculation of total site area to derive appropriate density transfer shall be computed as follows: 
a.  Total land area on Singer Island from the westernmost property line, east of the right-of-way of S.R. 703 (A1A) to the 1997 coastal construction setback line as established by the State of Florida shall be computed at 100 percent of the total dry land area between those two points. 
b.  Total land area east of the 1997 coastal construction control line to the mean high water line or the easternmost property line, whichever is less, shall be calculated at 50 percent of the total land area between those two points. 
c.  Total area of wetlands, marshes, lagoons and known mangrove habitat, shall not be computed for density transfer purposes. 
d.  No area of submerged land on Lake Worth shall be computed for density transfer purposes. 
(4)  Maximum building height: 20 stories or 200 feet, excluding mechanical facilities, ornamental towers and antennas, which shall not exceed 20 feet in additional height. Such non-habitable building elements shall be screened and set back from the roof line in such a way as to avoid increasing the building's offsite ground-level shadow. 
(5)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 
1.  Main structures more than two stories in height, 100 feet. 
2.  Main structures two stories or less in height, 50 feet. 
3.  Accessory structures, e.g., parking garages, recreational decks, boiler and generator rooms, etc., 50 feet. This regulation does not apply to ornamental walls and gatehouses, which shall be set back 15 feet from the front property line. 
b.  Side: 
1.  Ten percent of the lot or 20 feet, whichever is greater, shall be maintained for all structures excluding accessory structures two stories or less. 
2.  The accessory structures, e.g., parking garages, recreational decks, boiler and generator rooms, etc., which are two stories or less shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet. 
c.  Rear: 15 percent of the lot, but not to exceed 100 feet. 
d.  Ocean: the 1997 Coastal Construction Control Line. 
e.  High-rise setback: all buildings in excess of two stories shall provide two feet additional setback from each property line (with exception of ocean side setback line) for each additional story of height. 
(6)  Floor area ratio: the ratio of all aggregate residential floor area to site area shall not exceed 1.3:1. 
(7)  Maximum lot coverage: 70 percent of aggregate site area computed in subsection (3) of this section, density transfer, for all structures inclusive of accessory structures, i.e., parking garages, recreational decks, boiler and generator rooms, etc. 
(8)  Maximum north/south width: 110 feet for main structures. For the purposes of this regulation, the accessory structures, e.g., parking garages, etc., two stories or less in height shall not be considered as part of the main building. 
(9)  Minimum recreation facilities and amenities: 
a.  Outdoor: one swimming pool, one tennis court or comparable recreational space and a designated area for sunning, picnics, etc., for residents of project. Additionally, the following amenities are optional: putting green, shuffleboard court, wading pools, observation decks, exercise paths, etc. 
b.  Indoor: one multipurpose room for parties, games and group assembly and an exercise room. Additionally, the following amenities are optional: billiard room, library, sauna, etc. 
c.  Note: a pavilion may be provided, either inside or outside, as a substitute for one of the above minimum requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-12.III), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2214, § 4, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85; Ord. No. 2899, § 2, 6-20-01; Ord. No. 4061, § 3, 5-20-15) 
Sec. 31-264. - Parking. 
(a)  The required off-street parking requirements for an RMH-20 high density multifamily/hotel district should conform to section 31-566 et seq. 
(b)  Seventy-five percent of all required parking shall be placed under a permanent structure in a manner to effectively conceal such parking facility from the public right-of-way by landscaping and other means. 
(c)  Bonuses shall be as established in chapter 26, entitled, Minority Employment and Affordable Housing Opportunity Plan. 
(d)  The maximum height for a parking garage shall be 60 feet. 
(e)  Parking garages shall be concealed from S.R. 703 (A1A) using buffer landscaping and utilizing facade treatments which blend the parking garage structure with the main high-rise structures. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-12.V), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85; Ord. No. 4061, § 3, 5-20-15) 
Sec. 31-265. - Landscaping. 
    In addition to the requirements of section 31-596 et seq., the following landscaping criteria shall be provided: 
(1)  Twenty percent of all gross vehicular use areas shall be landscaped. 
(2)  For every 12 parking spaces, a landscaped island five feet in width shall be provided. 
(3)  Where environmentally sensitive land, wetlands and other conservation or preservation areas abut or are located within the site, at minimum there shall be a ten-foot wide landscape buffer surrounding said areas, planted with ecologically appropriate native vegetation. 
(4)  All property lines shall be provided with a sufficient landscape strip at least five feet in width with one tree for every 50 linear feet. 
(5)  Where the dune has been destroyed or depleted of landscaping in a manner that does not afford a natural protection from the elements, the dune shall be rebuilt and replenished with landscaping to provide the necessary protection and to reestablish the dune ecosystem. Re-establishing of the dune shall be designed to align with the natural dune and contours found to the north and south of the subject property. 
(6)  Fifty percent of all required trees shall consist of native shade tree species. 
(7)  The required shade trees shall be twelve feet in height with a six-foot clear trunk at planting and reach 25 feet in height and a 16-foot spread as a minimum. 
(8)  Preservation areas within a site shall be computed as substitution for landscape areas. 
(9)  Modification of wetlands and buffer area along access road shall be permitted to allow standard driveway access to main facility and subordinate uses. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-12.V), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85; Ord. No. 4061, § 3, 5-20-15) 
Sec. 31-266. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review shall be required for all permitted uses in the RMH-20 high density multifamily/hotel district except single-family and two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-12.VII), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85) 
Secs. 31-267-31-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - OP OFFICE AND PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-281. - Purpose. 
    The OP office and professional district is intended to provide for development of administrative, clerical and professional offices of residential scale and character, to serve nearby residential and commercial areas as well as the city as a whole. These uses are characterized by low volume of direct daily customer contacts. Secondarily, this district accommodates existing medium density residential uses. This district is designed to be a transitional zone and should be used to buffer low density residential uses from more intense land uses. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-13.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-282. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the OP office and professional district: 
(1)  Any residential or commercial buildings and uses existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Professional, business and financial offices, not including sale, display, storage or handling of merchandise on the premises. 
(3)  Office and headquarters of trade, business, labor, political, social, religion, economics, or other similar organization, not including the sale, display, storage or handling of merchandise on the premises. 
(4)  Retail and service facilities within an office building which may include barbershops, beauty shops, newsstands, and retail stores for the sale of books, gifts, flowers, tobacco, drugs and sundries. Such uses shall occupy no more than 25 percent of the floor space of the buildings. 
(5)  Medical or dental clinics offices, including a laboratory. 
(6)  Multiple family dwellings and group homes in accordance with RM-15 district regulations. 
(7)  Temporary uses, if fronting on West Blue Heron Boulevard between Avenue "E" and Avenue "H" West (in accordance with section 31-522(b)). 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses are permitted by special exception in the OP office and professional district: 
(1)  Major manufacturing or corporate headquarters on sites of five acres or more. 
(2)  Churches and their educational buildings. 
(c)  Uses prohibited. The following uses are prohibited in the OP office and professional district: 
(1)  Sale, display, storage or handling of merchandise on the premises, except as permitted above. 
(2)  Trade or vocational schools. 
(3)  Trade or personal service shops, including appliance repair or service, pest control, animal hospital, shoe repair, tailor, dressmaker, milliner, jewelry repair. 
(4)  Mortuaries. 
(5)  Employment agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-13.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2657, § 3, 3-15-95; Ord. No. 2689, § 2, 10-18-95) 
Sec. 31-283. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the OP office and professional district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size: 8,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum property width: 80 feet. 
(3)  Maximum building height: 75 feet, except no building height shall exceed 35 feet within 50 feet of any residential district more restrictive than RM-20. Also, on all lands east of Lake Worth (Singer Island) the maximum building height shall be three stories or 40 feet, whichever is less. 
(4)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 25 feet. 
b.  Side: ten feet. 
c.  Rear: five feet; 15 feet when abutting against residential district. 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage: 
a.  Total ground coverage of all principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed the following: 
Height of 
Building 
(feet) Percent 
Coverage  1-11 50 12-22 45 23-33 40 34-44 35 45-55 30  
b.  At least 20 percent of the plot area shall be used for landscaping. Such space shall be at ground level and maintained in lawns, shrubs and other landscaping. 
(6)  Privacy wall: there shall be a six-foot high finished masonry or concrete wall on the rear and side property lines that are adjacent to residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-13.III), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2478, § 2, 12-6-89) 
Sec. 31-284. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the OP office and professional district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-13.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-285. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the OP office and professional district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-13.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-286. - Nonconforming buildings. 
    Existing buildings not conforming to required setbacks, height limits or ground coverage may be used for offices but may not be enlarged if this increases the intent of the violation. The amount of outdoor living space and landscaping may be reduced below 20 percent if necessary in such cases. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-13.VI), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-287. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review shall be required for new developments and conversions of existing uses. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-13.VII), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-288-31-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - CN NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-301. - Purpose. 
    The CN neighborhood commercial district is intended to provide for development of relatively low intensity retail and/or service oriented convenience stores to serve nearby residential uses. This district is primarily designed to be developed as residential in character and allows multifamily residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-14.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-302. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the CN neighborhood commercial district: 
(1)  Uses permitted in accordance with RM-15 district regulations. 
(2)  Retail uses, including any or several of the following: 
a.  Bakery. 
b.  Bookstore. 
c.  Boutique. 
d.  Dairy products. 
e.  Druggist or pharmacy. 
f.  Florist. 
g.  Gift shop. 
h.  Home accessories, excluding furniture and major appliances. 
i.  Food store or delicatessen. 
j.  Hobby shop. 
k.  Music store. 
l.  Newsstand. 
m.  Pet supply shop. 
n.  Restaurant without drive-through facility or eating establishment without drive-through facility. 
o.  Stationery store. 
p.  Tobacco shop. 
(3)  Service uses, including any or several of the following: 
a.  Barber or beauty shop. 
b.  Coin laundry or dry cleaning substation. 
c.  Locksmith. 
d.  Photographer. 
e.  Shoe repair. 
f.  Travel agency. 
(b)  Uses permitted by special exception. 
(1)  Convenience grocery store without gasoline pumps (no building larger than 3,500 square feet). 
(2)  Churches and their educational buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-14.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2386, § 3, 9-7-88; Ord. No. 2657, § 3, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 31-303. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the CN neighborhood commercial district shall be as follows, provided that residential uses shall be governed by RM-15 regulations: 
(1)  Minimum property size: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum property width: 50 feet. 
(3)  Maximum building height: 35 feet or three stories. 
(4)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 20 feet. 
b.  Side: seven feet. 
c.  Rear: 121/2 feet. 
(5)  Minimum floor area: commercial uses, 800 square feet. 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage: the maximum amount of area which may be covered by all nonresidential uses on the site requiring impervious ground coverage, including but not limited to structure, driveways and off-street parking areas, shall not exceed 80 percent of the total site area. 
(7)  Privacy wall: there shall be a six-foot high finished masonry or concrete wall on the rear and side property lines that are adjacent to residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-14.III), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-304. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the CN neighborhood commercial district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-14.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-305. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the CN neighborhood commercial district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-14.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-306. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Residential uses: see requirements for RM-15. 
(2)  Nonresidential uses: required for all nonresidential uses. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-14.VII), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-307. - Conformance with spirit of this district. 
    Nonresidential uses allowed in the CN neighborhood commercial district will be in close physical proximity to residential uses. It is mandatory that the operation and performance of all uses in the CN neighborhood commercial district shall be subservient to and be compatible with the peace and tranquility of a general residential environment. No operation or activity shall be allowed in any CN neighborhood commercial district which could disturb or annoy the residential inhabitants in the adjacent or nearby residential areas, including, but not limited to any of the following uses or activities, which are absolutely prohibited: 
(1)  Outdoor storage or outdoor display that is visible from off of the premises. 
(2)  Vibration, smoke, dust, fumes or glare to adjacent properties. 
(3)  Operation or business activity at any time between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(4)  Excessive, untimely or unnecessary noise resulting from the activity or operations, including noise caused by service functions, such as deliveries to or from motor vehicles. All such activities shall be scheduled to minimize annoyance to the nearby residential users. 
(Ord. No. 2386, § 4, 9-7-88) 
Secs. 31-308-31-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - CG GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-321. - Purpose. 
    The CG general commercial district is intended to promote uses developed for retail and service needs of the entire community. This district includes uses usually associated with central business areas and shopping facilities which are ordinarily compatible with residential uses and do not involve any heavy machinery which will cause vibrations to the adjoining properties, create or emit noise, dust, odor, or noxious or toxic gas. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-15.I), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2689, § 1, 10-18-95) 
Sec. 31-322. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the CG general commercial district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the CN neighborhood commercial district, except that residential use shall not be permitted. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Personal service establishments, such as barbershops, beauty parlors, medical and dental clinics, restaurants, stores, banks, professional and other offices, funeral homes, parking garages and lots, laundry pickup stations, shoe repair, tailoring, watch and clock repair, and locksmith. 
(4)  Hospitals. 
(5)  Bus passenger terminal. 
(6)  Theaters and motion picture houses, except drive-in theaters. 
(7)  Advertising panels or signs. 
(8)  Private clubs. 
(9)  Coin-operated personal service establishments, conforming to subsection (a)(2) in this section. 
(10)  New car dealerships. 
(11)  Churches and their educational buildings. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses may be permitted by special exception in the CG general commercial district: 
(1)  Hotel/motel, in accordance with RMH-15 regulations. 
(2)  Commercial planned unit development, C-PUD. 
(3)  Inlet harbor center planned unit development, IHC-PUD, only within the boundaries of the inlet harbor center redevelopment agency. 
(4)  Drive-in restaurants. 
(5)  Filling stations. 
(6)  Auto malls. 
(7)  Car washes. 
(8)  Bars, saloons, taverns, cocktail lounges, or nightclubs. 
(9)  Gun shop. 
(10)  Substance abuse clinics. 
(11)  Shopping centers in excess of 20,000 square feet of building area. 
(12)  Adult congregate living facility (ACLF): Temporary conversion from existing hotel/motel structures within the Inlet Harbor Center Overlay zoning district only (see subsection 31-523(e)). 
(c)  Uses prohibited. The following uses are prohibited in the CG general commercial district: 
(1)  Residential uses, except as part of a PUD development. 
(2)  Wholesale, industrial, warehousing and storage uses. 
(3)  Pawn shop. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-15.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2313, § 1, 8-20-86; Ord. No. 2386, § 5, 9-7-88; Ord. No. 2561, § 1, 7-15-92; Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 3-15-95; Ord. No. 2689, § 1, 10-18-95; Ord. No. 2772, § 2, 1-21-98; Ord. No. 2863, § 2, 1-3-01) 
Sec. 31-323. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the CG general commercial district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size: 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum property width: 100 feet. 
(3)  Maximum building height: 
a.  On mainland (west of Lake Worth) not to exceed 65 feet (for bonus on mainland, see chapter 26). 
b.  On Singer Island (east of Lake Worth) not to exceed 40 feet or three stories, whichever is less. There is no bonus applicable to Singer Island to increase these maximum height limits. 
(4)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 20 feet; however, if the lot is on a block where more than 50 percent of the frontage is already developed, this may be reduced to five feet. 
b.  Side: 20 feet when abutting residential district; 15 feet on side street. 
c.  Rear: 20 feet when abutting residential district. 
(5)  Privacy wall: there shall be a six-foot high finished masonry or concrete wall on the rear and side property lines that are adjacent to residential districts. Such wall may be required adjacent to residential uses as determined by planning board and council. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-15.III), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2271, § 1, 4-3-85; Ord. No. 2478, § 3, 12-6-89) 
Sec. 31-324. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the CG general commercial district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. The bonus shall be as established in chapter 26. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-15.IV), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83) 
Sec. 31-325. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the CG general commercial district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-15.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-326. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Residential uses. All existing residential uses which legally existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be allowed to repair, expand or remodel in accordance with RM-15 regulations without the necessity of first obtaining a variance. 
(b)  Lots. If a vacant lot in this district has an area or width or both less than the above minimum and was a lot of record at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article was derived, the lot may be occupied by a commercial structure, provided the minimum yard regulations of the districts are conformed with. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-15.VI, VII), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-327. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review in accordance with section 31-56 et seq. is required for the uses permitted by the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-15.VIII), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-328-31-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - CM MARINE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-341. - Purpose. 
    The CM marine commercial district is intended to promote uses developed for boating activities and services. The district is primarily commercial in character and shall be developed to maintain compatibility with surrounding residential and commercial uses. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-16.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-342. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the CM marine commercial district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the CN district, except residential. 
(2)  Private boating clubs. 
(3)  Retail business or commercial use pertaining to fishing or boating which does not involve manufacturing. 
(4)  Marinas, docks and boat slips for mooring boats used for either pleasure or commercial purposes. 
(5)  Refueling stations for marine use only. 
(6)  Repairing and servicing facilities for marine equipment. 
(7)  Boat storage buildings. 
(8)  Customary accessory uses to all of the above. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses may be permitted by special exception in the CM marine commercial district: 
(1)  Marine ways and lifts for boats over 65 feet in length. 
(2)  Facilities for research and assembly of equipment used in oceanography, marine biology and related fields. 
(3)  Fish houses and fish processing plants with prior approval of the county health department. 
(4)  Commercial planned unit development, C-PUD. 
(5)  Inlet Harbor Center planned unit development, IHC-PUD, only within the Inlet Harbor Center redevelopment agency. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-16.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2313, § 2, 8-20-86) 
Sec. 31-343. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the CM marine commercial district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height: 50 feet. 
(2)  Minimum building setback: 
a.  Front: 20 feet. 
b.  Side: 12 feet; 15 feet on a side street; 20 feet when abutting against a residential district. 
c.  Rear: 20 feet when abutting against a residential district. 
(3)  Privacy wall: there shall be a six-foot high finished masonry wall on the rear and side property lines that are adjacent to residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-16.III), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-344. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the CM marine commercial district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-16.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-345. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the CM marine commercial district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-16.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-346. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review in accordance with section 31-56 et seq. is required for the uses permitted by the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-16.VII), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-347. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - TLI TRANSITIONAL LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-348. - Purpose. 
    The TLI transitional limited industrial district is intended to accommodate low intensity industrial uses that abut residential districts. All uses shall be of non-nuisance type and residential scale having low silhouette. This district is to provide employment near residential areas. The development standards are intended to provide adequate protection to adjacent residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 7, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-349. - Use regulations. 
    The following uses are permitted by special exception in the TLI transitional limited industrial district provided that they are small operations, and the process of manufacturing or materials is such that the amount of dust, odor, gas, smoke or noise resulting therefrom will not be objectionable to adjacent residential properties. To help achieve this standard, no doors or windows shall remain open during the operation of the use except for deliveries, and air conditioning or a similar air handling system is required. No use shall be conducted outside of the building except for plant nursery. 
Auto repairs and auto body shop. 
Boat manufacturing. 
Business offices accessory to primary industrial use. 
Cold storage. 
Confectionery, wholesale. 
Contractors storage. 
Electronic equipment manufacturing. 
Engraving. 
Food processing. 
Furniture manufacturing. 
Laboratories and industrial research. 
Millwork. 
Miniwarehouse for dead storage only. 
Monument works. 
Precision instruments and optics manufacturing. 
Printing and publishing. 
Sign shop. 
Small appliance manufacturing. 
Textile and clothing manufacturing. 
Upholstery shop. 
Warehousing. 
Wholesaling. 
Any use similar to the above uses. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 7, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-350. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards for the TLI transitional limited industrial district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size: 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Maximum building height: 25 feet. 
(3)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 25 feet; 40 feet for properties one acre or more or across the street from a residential district. 
b.  Side: one yard of 15 feet, except 25 feet when adjacent to residential district. 
c.  Rear: 20 feet, except 25 feet if adjacent to a residential district. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage (building): 45 percent. 
(5)  Privacy wall and landscaping: Where abutting the residential areas, there shall be a ten-foot landscaped strip adjacent to the street frontage. There shall be a six-foot-high finished masonry wall adjacent to the rear and side property lines that are adjacent to residential districts. Trees shall be planted every 25 feet on the residential side of the wall. The trees shall be at least ten feet high at planting with a minimum crown spread of six feet. Automatic irrigation shall be provided. The same tree requirements shall also apply to the frontage of any industrial use across the street from a residential district. A four-foot hedge or wall shall screen any parking lot from the public right-of-way. All requirements of section 31-596 et seq. shall also be met. 
(6)  Outdoor storage: No open storage of goods and materials shall exceed six feet in height or occur within the required setbacks or in front of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 7, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-351. - Parking. 
    No trucks shall be parked in front of the building if adjacent to a residential district. Also see section 31-566 et seq. For bonus reductions, see chapter 26. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 7, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-352. - Nonconforming lots. 
    If a vacant lot in the TLI transitional limited industrial district has an area or width, or both, less than the above minimum and was a lot of record at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this division was derived, such lot may be occupied by a commercial structure, provided the minimum yard regulations of the districts are conformed with. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 7, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-353. - Site design standards diagram. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 7, 3-20-91) 
DIVISION 16. - SLIO SPECIAL LIGHT INDUSTRIAL OFFICE DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-354. - Purpose. 
    The SLIO special light industrial office district is intended to achieve a higher standard of appearance where industrial districts front on major "gateway" or entrance arterial streets to the central part of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 1, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-355. - Use regulations. 
    Any use permitted in the IL limited industrial district, except contractors storage yard, lumber yard and auto repair/paint uses are permitted in the SLIO special light industrial office district, provided that the special standards in section 31-356 are met. Office uses do not have to be accessory to industrial uses. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 1, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-356. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards for the SLIO special light industrial office district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size: one acre. 
(2)  Maximum building height: 50 feet for office buildings; 35 feet for industrial buildings. 
(3)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 40 feet. 
b.  Side: 15 feet, unless the side yard abuts a street classified "arterial" in the comprehensive plan, in which case a 40-foot side yard is required. 
c.  Rear: 20 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage (building): 45 percent. 
(5)  Privacy wall: There shall be a six-foot-high finished masonry wall on the rear and side property lines that are adjacent to residential districts. 
(6)  Building design: 
a.  Offices: The office functions of an industrial building shall face the arterial street. 
b.  Overhead doors: No overhead doors or other loading facilities shall face the arterial street. 
c.  Facade architecture: The facade facing the arterial street shall consist of building materials, color and signage that enhance the quality of the gateway or arterial corridor through a high quality of design. Windows and design features are required on the arterial facade in order to avoid a blank wall. Examples of design features include unified use of special eaves, wall and window treatments, substantial variation in facade depths, columns, porticos, cupolas, etc. Use of metal as a predominant building material is prohibited. 
(7)  Arterial street buffer: There shall be a 25-foot landscaped buffer strip along the arterial street. The landscaping shall be of a high quality of design to exceed the requirements of section 31-596 et seq. and may include berming, terraced effects and imaginative use of rocks, water and specimen plants. If a fence is installed, it must be a decorative design acceptable to the city council. Chainlink and barbed wire fences are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 1, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-357. - Parking. 
    The parking requirements for the SLIO special light industrial office district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 1, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-358. - Landscaping. 
    [Except as otherwise required in this division,] the landscaping requirements for the SLIO special light industrial office district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 1, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-359. - Site plan. 
    Site plan review is required in the SLIO special light industrial office district. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 1, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - IL LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-361. - Purpose. 
    The IL limited industrial district is intended to promote developments of low intensity commercial and industrial uses. All uses shall be of nonnuisance type and residential scale having low silhouette. This district is to provide employment near residential areas and the development standards are intended to be compatible with adjacent residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-17.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-362. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the IL limited industrial district: 
(1)  The following light industrial and manufacturing uses where the scale of operations and the process of manufacturing or treatment of materials is such that the amount of dust, odor, gas, smoke or noise resulting therefrom will not be objectionable to surrounding residential properties and where the operations are conducted in one or more buildings: 
Appliance manufacturing. 
Auto paint and body shop. 
Auto repairs and auto body shop. 
Bakeries, wholesale, large scale preparation. 
Boats, manufacturing. 
Business offices accessory to primary industrial use. 
Cold storage. 
Confectionery, wholesale, large scale preparation. 
Contractor's storage yard. 
Cosmetics manufacturing. 
Dairy processing. 
Dry cleaning plant. 
Electronic equipment manufacturing. 
Engraving. 
Food processing. 
Furniture manufacturing. 
Glass manufacturing. 
Laundry plant. 
Leather goods manufacturing. 
Lumber yard. 
Metal fabrication. 
Millwork. 
Monument works. 
Motion picture studio. 
Precision instruments and optics manufacturing. 
Port related ship supply establishments and facilities. 
Printing and publishing. 
Textile and clothing manufacturing. 
Tobacco products manufacturing. 
Upholstery shop. 
Welding shop. 
Wholesaling. 
New vehicle dealerships. 
(2)  CN district uses, nonresidential, which shall be in accordance with chapter 26. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses may be permitted by special exception in the IL limited industrial district: 
(1)  PUD. 
(2)  Used car lots. 
(3)  Beverage manufacturing and bottling works. 
(4)  Laboratory industrial research. 
(5)  Auto services, including transmission and oil change establishments. 
(6)  Truck rental and leasing. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-17.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2386, § 6, 9-7-88; Ord. No. 2963, § 1, 2-18-04) 
Sec. 31-363. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the IL limited industrial district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size: 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Maximum building height: 35 feet; 20 feet for open storage of goods and materials. 
(3)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 25 feet; 40 feet for properties of one acre or more. 
b.  Side: 15 feet; sites one acre or less may be allowed to build to the property line on one side, thereby eliminating the side yard setback on that side, subject to submittal of appropriate access easement for maintenance purposes and approval by the planning and zoning board and city council. For development of sites more than one acre, see chapter 26. 
c.  Rear: 20 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage (building): 45 percent; additional ten percent coverage may be permitted by participating in the minority employment and affordable housing opportunity plan in chapter 26. 
(5)  Privacy wall: there shall be a six-foot high finished masonry wall on the rear and side property lines that are adjacent to residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-17.III), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-3-85; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85) 
Sec. 31-364. - Parking. 
(a)  The parking regulations in the IL limited industrial district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(b)  The bonus reductions for the IL limited industrial district shall be as established in chapter 26. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-17.IV), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83) 
Sec. 31-365. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the IL limited industrial district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-17.V), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-366-31-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 18. - IG GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-381. - Purpose. 
    The IG general industrial district is intended to promote development of industrial and manufacturing uses which would increase the tax base of the city and provide increased employment opportunities for the area residents. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-18.I), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85) 
Sec. 31-382. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the IG general industrial district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the IL districts. 
(2)  Manufacturing, processing and fabrication of any product or commodity except those enumerated hereinafter as prohibited uses or provided as special exceptions. 
(3)  Outdoor drive-in theaters. 
(4)  Public utility structures. 
(5)  Railroad switching and make-up yards. 
(6)  Petroleum storage but not in excess of 50,000 gallons at any one manufacturing or industrial location. 
(7)  Liquid gas storage not in excess of 15,000 gallons at any one manufacturing or industrial location. 
(8)  Any customary accessory use to all above facilities. 
(9)  The following uses shall be permitted east of Broadway (U.S. No. 1) in this district only if directly related to Port of Palm Beach activities and not in conflict with the requirements of this district: 
a.  Piers, docks and wharves. 
b.  Terminals for freight or passengers arriving or departing by ship. 
c.  Railroad lines and sidings for service wharfs and piers, and railroad right-of-way freight, terminals' team-tracks and spur tracks. 
d.  Facilities for maintenance and repair of vessels. 
e.  Ship supply establishments and facilities. 
f.  Wholesale warehouse and retail establishments dealing primarily in bulk materials delivered by ship, and railroad or ship and truck in combination. 
g.  Government and professional. 
h.  Refueling stations for Port of Palm Beach District. 
(10)  CN district uses excluding residential shall be in accordance with chapter 26. 
(11)  Temporary labor employment office. 
(12)  Pawn shop. 
(13)  Recycling center. 
(14)  Recycling facility. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses may be permitted by special exception in the IG general industrial district: 
(1)  PUD. 
(2)  Warehouses and storage uses. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Asphalt and concrete mixing and batching, and product manufacture. 
(5)  Foreign trade zone. 
(6)  Adult entertainment establishments (see Ordinance No. 2648 [ch. 2.5]). 
(c)  Uses prohibited. The following uses shall be prohibited in the IG general industrial district: 
(1)  Residential uses. 
(2)  Acid manufacture. 
(3)  Cement, lime manufacture. 
(4)  Distillation of bones. 
(5)  Manufacture of explosives. 
(6)  Fat, tallow or lard rendering. 
(7)  Garbage, offal, or dead animal reduction. 
(8)  Paper and pulp manufacture. 
(9)  Petroleum refining. 
(10)  Stockyards and slaughter of animals. 
(11)  Soap manufacture. 
(12)  Creosote treatment and manufacture. 
(13)  Tanning, curing of hides or skins. 
(14)  Tar distillation or manufacture. 
(15)  Automobile wrecking or junkyards. 
(16)  Radioactive materials, manufacturing of. 
(17)  Construction demolition debris recycling. 
(18)  Scrap metal processing. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-18.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 7-17-85; Ord. No. 2386, § 7, 9-7-88; Ord. No. 2656, § 1, 8-16-95; Ord. No. 2772, § 3, 1-21-98; Ord. No. 2814, §§ 2, 3, 4-21-99; Ord. No. 2857, 5-17-00; Ord. No. 3072, § 3, 31-382, 10-7-09) 
Sec. 31-383. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the IG general industrial district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size: One acre. 
(2)  Maximum building height: 50 feet. 
(3)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 40 feet. 
b.  Side: 15 feet; for bonus waiver, see chapter 26. 
c.  Rear: 20 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage (building): 45 percent; additional ten percent coverage may be permitted by participating in the minority employment and affordable housing opportunity plan in chapter 26. 
(5)  Privacy wall: there shall be a six-foot high finished masonry wall on the rear and side property lines that are adjacent to residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-18.III), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83) 
Sec. 31-384. - Parking. 
(a)  The parking regulations in the IG general industrial district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(b)  The bonus reductions for the IG general industrial district shall be as established in chapter 26. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-18.IV), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83) 
Sec. 31-385. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the IG general industrial district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-18.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-386. - Nonconformities. 
    The lawful existence of a use, structure or building at the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, although such use, structure or building does not conform to the regulations of this division for permitted uses or property development standards, may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-18.VI), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-387. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review in accordance with section 31-56 et seq. is required for the uses permitted by the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-18.VII), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-388-31-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 19. - RO RECREATION/OPEN SPACE DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-401. - Purpose. 
    The RO recreation/open space district is intended for outdoor recreational activities in which the participants are actively engaged, but which may also provide entertainment for spectators. The activities for which this district is provided are normally and primarily conducted in the open air, while related accessory uses may be in the open air or in a building or structure. The functional characteristics of this district may require its location within, or in close relationship to, residential areas, public recreational areas or scenic areas. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-19.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-402. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the RO recreation/open space district: 
(1)  Archery range. 
(2)  Baseball driving range. 
(3)  Golf course. 
(4)  Golf driving range. 
(5)  Miniature golf course. 
(6)  Shuffleboard court. 
(7)  Swimming pool. 
(8)  Tennis court. 
(9)  Any use of the outdoor recreational type which is found by the city council to be similar in character to, and not more detrimental to surrounding property than a use listed as permissible in this section. 
(10)  Accessory uses. 
(b)  Uses prohibited. The following uses shall be prohibited in the RO district: 
(1)  Any use not specifically approved by the city council. 
(2)  Any industrial or manufacturing use. 
(3)  Drive-in theater, drive-in restaurant or drive-in refreshment stand. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-19.II), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-403. - Property development standards. 
    Because of the nature of uses involved and the variety of arrangement of uses and facilities on the site plan of development, broad development standards cannot be satisfactorily specified. For these reasons, and to assure efficient functioning and effective public service, the uses and site plans for development, improvement and operation are made subject to review and approval in each case by the planning board and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-19.III), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-404. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the RO recreation/open space district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-19.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-405. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the RO recreation/open space district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-19.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-406. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review in accordance with section 31-56 et seq. is required for the uses permitted by the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-19.VI), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-407-31-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 20. - CF COMMUNITY FACILITY DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-421. - Purpose. 
    The CF community facility district is intended to encompass land owned and/or administered by the city or other governmental or public agencies for purposes of providing public service. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-20.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-422. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the CF community facility district: 
(1)  Municipal services and accessory buildings and structures including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Fire stations. 
b.  Police stations. 
c.  Libraries. 
(2)  Municipally owned and operated parks and recreation areas. 
(3)  Educational institutions including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Colleges and universities. 
b.  Schools, public and private. 
c.  Vocational schools and training centers and seminaries. 
(b)  Special exception. The following uses may be permitted in the CF community facility district: 
(1)  The following types of uses and other similar services may be permitted in this district provided if they are operated under the direct control of the municipality: 
a.  Restaurant and other similar food service establishments. 
b.  Lounges may be permitted if in conjunction with a restaurant operation. 
c.  Gift shops. 
d.  Beach apparel. 
e.  Other recreation facilities. 
f.  Sundries and confectionery establishments. 
g.  Publicly owned and operated marinas and dry storage facilities. 
(2)  State/county parks. 
(3)  State/federal buildings and facilities. 
(c)  Uses prohibited. Any use not specifically approved by the city council shall be prohibited in the CF district. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-20.II), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-423. - Property development standards. 
    Because of the nature of uses involved and the variety of arrangement of uses and facilities on the site plan of development, broad development standards cannot be satisfactorily specified. For these reasons, and to assure efficient functioning and effective public service, the uses and site plans for development, improvement and operation are made subject to review and approval in each case by the planning board and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-20.III), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-424. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the CF community facility district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-20.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-425. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the CF community facility district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-20.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-426. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review in accordance with section 31-56 et seq. is required for the uses permitted by the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-20.VI), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-427-31-440. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 21. - U UTILITIES DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-441. - Purpose. 
    The U utilities district is intended to set aside an area restricted to the provision of utilities. This district is provided for large scale utility operations, which would not be compatible with uses in other zoning districts, and restricts from the district nonrelated uses. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-21.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-442. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the U utilities district: 
(1)  Water and wastewater treatment facilities. 
(2)  Electrical power generating plants. 
(3)  Telephone communication facilities. 
(4)  Customary accessory uses to above. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-21.II), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-443. - Property development standards. 
    Because of the nature of uses involved and the variety of arrangement of uses and facilities on the site plan of development, broad development standards cannot be satisfactorily specified. For these reasons, and to assure efficient functioning and effective public service, the uses and site plans for development, improvement and operation are made subject to review and approval in each case. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-21.III), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-444. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the U utilities district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-21.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-445. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the U utilities district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-21.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-446. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review in accordance with section 31-56 et seq. is required for the uses permitted by the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-21.VI), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-447-31-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 22. - MH MOBILE HOME DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-461. - Purpose. 
    The MH mobile home district is intended to provide an alternate housing choice for those who prefer mobile home living as an economic alternative to conventional dwelling units. This district shall be permitted only as a special exception in RM-15 and RM-20 districts. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-22.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-462. - Use regulations. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the MH mobile home district: 
(1)  Mobile home parks for rental or ownership of lots for occupancy by mobile homes as living quarters, wherein the mobile home park is owned and/or operated as a unit. 
(2)  Any customary accessory use for subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  The sale, by its owner or licensed dealer, of used mobile homes on lots presently or previously occupied by the owner of such mobile home. The sale of new mobile homes by a licensed dealer on a sales lot not to exceed five percent of the gross area of the park, for delivery within the park. 
(4)  A centralized storage area designed to serve the residents of the park, which must be fenced and screened from view. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles' parking. 
(6)  Commercial uses, e.g., day care, personal services, food and beverage store, coin-operated laundry, newsstand and pharmacy, etc., shall be permitted subject to the following limitations and requirements: 
a.  Such uses are wholly conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
b.  There are no signs or displays visible from any public street indicating such uses. 
c.  Such uses are conducted for the convenience of occupants of the mobile home park and not normally made available to the other persons. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-22.II), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-463. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the MH mobile home district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum property size: ten acres. 
(2)  Maximum density: ten mobile home units per acre. 
(3)  Minimum lot size: 45 feet in width and 65 feet in depth. 
(4)  Maximum height: 15 feet. 
(5)  Minimum setbacks (lots): 
a.  Front: 15 feet. 
b.  Side: five feet. 
c.  Rear: ten feet. 
(6)  Special requirements: 
a.  Each mobile home lot shall front on a street 50 feet right-of-way with pavement not less than 22 feet in width. 
b.  Each mobile home lot shall be supplied with a parking space and a driveway extending from the right-of-way pavement to the required parking space. 
c.  Structures of a permanent nature added or attached to a mobile home, such as enclosed porches, screened enclosures, storage closets and carports, shall conform to all applicable provisions of the building code. The total combined area of all such additions, except carports, shall not exceed the gross area of the mobile home itself. 
d.  Each lot shall be supplied with water, sewer, electrical and telephone connections, with the service of such utilities to be underground. 
e.  Recreation facilities: all mobile home parks shall provide recreation facilities of not less than six percent of the gross area. Yard space shall not be included in the calculation of this area. Lakes and waterways may be used to satisfy up to one-third of this requirement. At least one land recreation area shall be provided in any park. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-22.III), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-464. - Parking. 
    The parking regulations in the MH mobile home district shall be as stated in section 31-566 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-22.IV), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-465. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the MH mobile home district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-22.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-466. - Nonconformities. 
    Individuals or couples occupying the existing mobile home units on a year-round basis shall be permitted to make their units safe and sanitary by repairing, remodeling or replacement without the necessity of first obtaining a zoning variance. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-22.VI), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-467. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review in accordance with section 31-56 et seq. is required for the uses permitted by the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-22.VII), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-468-31-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 23. - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-481. - Purpose. 
    The planned unit development district is intended to promote unified developments of residential, commercial and industrial projects, utilizing more creative and flexible concepts in site planning than would otherwise be possible through the strict application of property development standards established in corresponding zoning districts. This alternative of permitting planned unit developments as special and particular land uses should introduce a variety of architectural solutions, provide for the preservation of natural features and scenic areas, reduce land consumption by roads, separate vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, originate approaches to a meaningful integration of open space networks and recreation areas within the development, establish neighborhood identity and focus, and ideally increase the desirability and convenience to the occupants of the planned unit development without causing adverse effects on adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23AA-23.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-482. - Classification. 
    The following classes of planned unit development districts are established: 
(1)  R-PUD, residential planned unit development district. 
(2)  R-PUD(1), residential planned unit development district. 
(3)  C-PUD, commercial planned unit development district. 
(4)  I-PUD, industrial planned unit development district. 
(5)  IHC-PUD, Inlet Harbor Center unit development district. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.I), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2313, § 3, 8-20-86; Ord. No. 2529, § 1, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-483. - Minimum site area. 
(a)  The planned unit development district classification shall apply only to a tract of land comprising an area of not less than ten acres or more; however, an area of lesser size may be approved in certain circumstances upon evidence presented to the planning and zoning board and the city council to justify such reduction, that requirements for a PUD district and the benefits to be derived can be done in a lesser area and that permitting such lesser area is in conformity with the comprehensive plan of the city. The R-PUD(1) district shall have 50 acres or more. 
(b)  In the Inlet Harbor Center redevelopment area, IHC-PUDs may be permitted where the area is not less than two acres. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.II.A), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2313, § 4, 8-20-86; Ord. No. 2529, § 2, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-484. - Unified control. 
    All land included for the purpose of development within a planned unit development shall be owned or under the control of the petitioner for such zoning designation, whether that petitioner is an individual, partnership or corporation, or a group of individuals, partnerships or corporations. The petitioner shall present firm evidence of the unified control of the entire area within the proposed planned unit development and shall state agreement that, if he proceeds with the proposed development, he will: 
(1)  Do so in accordance with the final master land use and site plan of the development approved at the time of the granting of the PUD special exception, and such other conditions or modifications as may be attached to the special exception. 
(2)  Provide agreements, covenants, contracts, deed restrictions or sureties acceptable to the city for completion of the undertaking in accordance with the adopted final master land use and site plan as well as for the continuing operation and maintenance of such areas, functions and facilities as are not to be provided, operated or maintained at general public expense. 
(3)  Bind his development successors in title to any commitments made under subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(4)  Secure written consents and agreements from all property owners of record within the planned unit development boundaries who have not joined in the PUD application that there is no objection to including their property in the overall land planning process of the planned unit development. 
(5)  Recording in the public records of the county of a declaration of unity of title. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.II.B), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-485. - Configuration of the site. 
    Any tract of land for which a planned unit development application is made shall contain sufficient width, depth and frontage on a publicly dedicated arterial or major street or appropriate access thereto as shown on the city's thoroughfare plan to adequately accommodate its proposed use and design. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.II.C), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-486. - Conflict with other applicable regulations. 
    Where conflicts exist between these special planned unit development regulations and general zoning, subdivision and other applicable ordinance provisions, the special regulations set out in this division shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.II.D), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-487. - Uses permitted in R-PUD residential planned unit development. 
    The following uses are permitted in the R-PUD residential planned unit development: 
(1)  Any residential structure type and arrangement compatible with the purpose and intent of this special exception. 
(2)  Residential accessory uses. 
(3)  Home occupations. 
(4)  Publicly operated parks and recreation areas or other facility operated by a nonprofit organization. 
(5)  Public and private utility services and accessory buildings and structures, excluding sanitary landfill, incinerator, refuse and trash dumps, for the use of the development. 
(6)  Recreation facilities and clubs. 
(7)  Churches or places of worship and accessory buildings and structures. 
(8)  Day care centers. 
(9)  Nursing and convalescent facilities. 
(10)  Clinics, medical, dental, chiropractic and veterinary, outpatient only. 
(11)  Government services and accessory buildings and structures. 
(12)  Business offices and studios. 
(13)  Professional offices. 
(14)  Financial institutions. 
(15)  Personal services, including but not limited to barber shops, beauty salons and the like. 
(16)  Hotels and motels. 
(17)  Restaurants and lounges. 
(18)  Bakeries, retail; limited preparation of products for on-premises sale. 
(19)  Food and beverage stores. 
(20)  Confectionery, retail; limited preparation of products for on-premises sale. 
(21)  Drycleaning and laundry pickup stations. 
(22)  Self-service laundry and dry cleaning. 
(23)  Newsstands. 
(24)  Automobile service stations; no major repairs. 
(25)  Pharmacy. 
(26)  Hardware, paint and garden supplies. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.III.A.1), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-488. - Uses permitted in C-PUD commercial planned unit development. 
    The following uses are permitted in the C-PUD commercial planned unit development: 
(1)  Any permitted uses in R-PUD residential planned unit development except single-family dwellings and duplexes in accord with R-PUD density. For density bonus, see chapter 26. 
(2)  Any use permitted in CN neighborhood commercial district. 
(3)  Any use permitted in OP office professional district. 
(4)  A C-PUD must be characterized by three or more significant revenue producing uses such as retail, office, residential, institutional, hotel/motel and recreational. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.III.A.2), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83) 
Sec. 31-489. - Uses permitted in I-PUD industrial planned unit development. 
    The following uses are permitted in the I-PUD industrial planned unit development: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the OP office professional district. 
(2)  Any use permitted in the CN neighborhood commercial district (except residential uses). 
(3)  Any use permitted in the IL limited industrial district. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.III.A.3), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-490. - Uses permitted in IHC-PUD Inlet Harbor Center planned unit development. 
    The following uses are permitted in the IHC-PUD Inlet Harbor Center planned unit development: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-PUD residential planned unit development except single-family dwellings and duplexes. 
(2)  Any use permitted in the CG general commercial; the CN neighborhood/commercial and the CM commercial marine district. 
(3)  Any use permitted in the OP office professional district. 
(4)  An IHC-PUD must include three or more significant revenue-producing uses such as retail, office, residential, institutional, hotel/motel and recreational. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.III.A.4), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2313, § 5, 8-20-86) 
Sec. 31-491. - Uses permitted by special exception. 
    The following uses are permitted by special exception in each of the designated classes: 
(1)  Home occupation in R-PUD. 
(2)  Timesharing in R-PUD. 
(3)  Any use permitted by special exception in OP, shall be similarly permitted in C-PUD. 
(4)  Any use permitted by special exception in OP and IL shall be similarly permitted in I-PUD. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.III.B), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-492. - Uses prohibited in the R-PUD residential planned unit development. 
    The following uses are specifically prohibited in the R-PUD residential planned unit development: 
(1)  Any business creating noise, odor or vibrations discernible for a distance of 100 feet from the building in which such disturbance emanates. 
(2)  Business involving manufacturing, processing or prefabrication of products. 
(3)  Hospitals of any kind. 
(4)  Bus terminals, taxi stands or truck terminals. 
(5)  Theaters or motion picture houses. 
(6)  Trailer camps or courts. 
(7)  Advertising panels or signs, except as provided herein. 
(8)  Car lots. 
(9)  Drive-in hamburger or ice cream stands or businesses of a similar nature. 
(10)  Cocktail lounges or bar rooms. 
(11)  Storage warehouses. 
(12)  Contractors' equipment storage or building supplies storage. 
(13)  Mechanical shops and garages. 
(14)  Bottling works. 
(15)  Bakeries, only retail shop bakeries permitted. 
(16)  Printing, book-binding, publishing. 
(17)  Cold storage. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.III.C.1), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-493. - Uses prohibited in the I-PUD industrial planned unit development. 
    Residential uses are specifically prohibited in the I-PUD industrial planned unit development. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.III.C.2), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-494. - Property development standards for the R-PUD residential planned unit development. 
    The property development standards in the R-PUD residential planned unit development are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached. The standards are the same as RS-5 single-family dwelling district in section 31-118. 
(2)  Cluster housing, such as patio homes, townhouses, zero-lot lines, and multifamily structures. The property development standards are: 
a.  Minimum lot size: 
1.  Patio homes (attached, detached or on zero lot line): 2,400 square feet. 
2.  Townhouses: 700 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 
1.  Patio homes (attached, detached or on zero lot line): 25 feet. 
2.  Townhouses: 15 feet. 
c.  Maximum height: 35 feet or three stories. 
d.  Minimum floor areas: 
1. Efficiency ..... 400 square feet 2. One-bedroom ..... 525 square feet 3. Two-bedroom ..... 800 square feet 4. Three-bedroom ..... 1,000 square feet 5. More than three bedrooms ..... 1,000 square feet  
With 100 square feet for each additional bedroom. 
e.  Distance between buildings: 
1.  Five-foot minimum. 
f.  Setbacks: There are no required setbacks or yards except for the following: 
1.  All setbacks shall be approved by the planning board and city council through the site plan review process. 
2.  There shall be a setback or yard of not less than 25 feet in depth abutting all public road rights-of-way within or abutting a planned unit development district. 
3.  There shall be a peripheral setback from boundary lines of the PUD of not less than 25 feet in depth. Except for accessways, no portion of this peripheral setback may be used for parking or other vehicular use area. 
(3)  Each dwelling unit or other permitted use shall have access to a public street, either directly or indirectly via a private approach road, pedestrian way, court or other area dedicated by common easement guaranteeing access. Permitted uses are not necessarily required to front on a dedicated road. The city shall be allowed access on privately owned roadways, easements and common open space to ensure the police and fire protection of the area, to meet emergency needs, to conduct city services, and to generally ensure the health and safety of the residents of the planned unit development. 
(4)  Density: The overall gross residential density in R-PUD shall not exceed 15 dwelling units per acre. The maximum permitted density is 30 units per acre for hotel/motel and/or independent and assisted living units. 
(5)  Groupings: The total length of any townhouse structure shall not exceed 12 units. No more than four consecutive units shall have the same front setbacks or front building line in order to promote unique development design. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.IV.A), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2800, § 2, 1-20-99; Ord. No. 4092, § 2, 1-18-17) 
Sec. 31-495. - Property development standards for the R-PUD(1) residential planned unit developments. 
    Unless otherwise specified in this section, all regulations pertaining to R-PUD and other relevant ordinances shall be applicable to R-PUD(1). In all R-PUD(1) districts the minimum area shall be 50 acres. Where conflicts of land use and/or intensity of use occur at the project's boundary, then an additional perimeter setback of 25 feet shall be required. 
(1)  Single-family detached: 
a.  Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 48 feet. 
c.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
d.  Minimum floor area: 900 square feet. 
e.  Minimum building setbacks: 
Front: 15 feet (for nongarage portion); 20 feet (for front-loaded garage portion); 10 feet (for side-loaded garage portion). 
Side: six feet. 
Rear: 15 feet. 
Side corner: 121/2 feet. 
(2)  Cluster housing (patio and zero lot line only): 
a.  Minimum lot size: 3,500 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
c.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
d.  Minimum floor area: 800 square feet. 
e.  Minimum building setbacks: 
Front: 15 feet (for nongarage portion); 20 feet (for front-loaded garage portion); 10 feet (for side-loaded garage portion when lot width is 48 feet minimum). 
Side (interior and corner lot): ten feet. 
Rear: 15 feet. 
(3)  Townhouses or duplexes: 
a.  Minimum lot size: 
1.  Townhomes: 1,800 square feet. 
2.  Duplexes: 2,400 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 
1.  Townhomes: 24 feet. 
2.  Duplexes: 24 feet. 
c.  Maximum building height: 
1.  Townhomes: 35 feet. 
2.  Duplexes: 35 feet. 
d.  Minimum floor area: 
1.  Townhomes: 800 square feet. 
2.  Duplexes: 800 square feet. 
e.  Minimum building setbacks: 
Front: 
 Townhomes: 15 feet (for nongarage portion); 20 feet (for front-loaded garage portion); 10 feet (for side-loaded garage portion). 
 Duplexes: 15 feet (for nongarage portion); 20 feet (for front-loaded garage portion); 10 feet (for side-loaded garage portion). 
Side: 
 Townhomes: 71/2 feet. 
 Duplexes: 6 feet. 
Rear: 
 Townhomes: 15 feet. 
 Duplexes: 15 feet. 
f.  Length of buildings: 
The total length of each structure shall not exceed six units. 
No more than four consecutive units shall have the same front setbacks or front building line. 
(4)  Multifamily housing: 
a.  Distance from right-of-way and property line: minimum 20 feet plus five feet per story above two stories. 
b.  Distance between buildings (face to face rear): minimum 30 feet plus 15 feet per story above two stories. 
c.  Distance between buildings (side to side): minimum 15 feet plus ten feet per story above two stories. 
d.  Distance between building (corner to corner): minimum five feet per story. 
e.  Height of buildings: maximum 85 feet or seven stories. 
f.  Length of buildings: 
The total length of each structure shall not exceed 200 feet. 
No more than four consecutive units shall have the same front setbacks or front building line. 
(5)  Right-of-way and sidewalks standards: 
a.  Generally, right-of-way standards shall comply with city subdivision street standards; however, private streets may have a minimum width of 24 feet pavement, including curb and gutter, subject to city council approval. Any private utility or other easements shall be separate from the private 24 foot right-of-way. 
b.  Sidewalks shall be provided in a comprehensive system so as to serve all pods of the PUD. It may consist of a main loop with links to the individual pods. The system may be on one side of the streets, and where possible curvilinear and landscaped. 
(6)  Parking standards: 
a.  Common parking areas for recreation and boats: ten percent of total units times 320 square feet. 
b.  Basic parking requirement is two spaces on lot for each dwelling unit, plus 0.25 space per dwelling unit in conveniently located group parking lots. However, the 0.25 space per dwelling unit is not required where group parking is provided, and where three parking spaces are provided on each individual lot. Note: Garage car spaces are counted toward required parking spaces. 
(7)  Landscaping standards: Detailed landscaping plans shall be prepared by a state professional landscape architect, for the major road rights-of-way and recreation areas. Typical plans for each housing type shall be provided as well as grouped parking areas. Xeriscape techniques are encouraged; otherwise, all landscaped areas shall be irrigated. 
(8)  Lighting standards: All utilities shall be underground. Lighting fixtures and poles shall be aesthetically selected so as to add an attractive character to the PUD. Lighting levels may vary to provide lighting interest, recognizing the need for security. Heights of lamp supports can vary commensurate with the lighting purpose. 
(9)  Amenity package component: As a condition of PUD approval, the following minimum package of amenities are required to be provided as an integral component of the PUD. The required amenity types and standards may be modified, and substitutions made depending on the age group profile of the PUD population. 
a.  Small park-tot lot: one park per 125 dwelling units, minimum 0.25 acre. 
b.  PUD park: one park at 0.13 acre per 100 dwelling units, minimum 1.0 acre. 
c.  Swimming pool (number of pools relate to number of dwelling units): 
Minimum pool size: 25 feet by 50 feet/100-150 dwelling units. 
Minimum pool size: 30 feet by 60 feet/150-200 dwelling units. 
Minimum pool size: 40 feet by 75 feet/over 200 dwelling units. 
Pool for 0-100 dwelling units may be required depending on general distribution of required pools as above. 
d.  Tennis courts: one per 300 dwelling units. 
e.  Recreation building: 150 square feet per 100 dwelling units. 
f.  Walkway system: this shall be a comprehensive project-wide system, linking all the elements of the PUD in an attractive and convenient manner. 
(10)  Location of amenities: The required amenities shall be located as geographically convenient as possible and are to be linked by the required walkway system. In the case of the phase pod development, pods may share local recreation and amenity packages, provided that the appropriate amenities will be built and usable concurrent with the completion of the first phase pod in the grouping. 
(11)  Parks equipment: The required parks shall be developed with a variety of facilities, such as children's play areas, picnic areas, tennis courts, fitness trails, volleyball, basketball and handball courts as well as swimming pools and recreation buildings. All parks related to specific pods shall be fully developed either before or when 66 percent of their dwelling units are built, or bond posted to provide the development. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 5, 3-20-91; Ord. No. 2710, § 1, 6-19-96; Ord. No. 2760, § 1, 10-15-97) 
Sec. 31-496. - Property development standards for the commercial (C-PUD) and industrial (I-PUD) PUDs. 
    The property development standards in the C-PUD commercial and I-PUD industrial planned unit development are as follows: 
(1)  Setbacks: There are no required setbacks or yards except for the following: 
a.  All setbacks shall be approved by the planning board and city council through the site plan review process. 
b.  There shall be a setback or yard of not less than five feet in depth abutting all public road rights-of-way within or abutting a planned unit development district. 
c.  In the C-PUD district there shall be a peripheral setback from boundary lines of the PUD of not less than 25 feet in depth. Except for accessways, no portion of this peripheral setback may be used for parking or other vehicular use area. This may be waived if the C-PUD is located within the central business area, as determined by the planning board and council. 
d.  In the I-PUD district there shall be a peripheral setback from boundary lines of the PUD of not less than 50 feet in depth. Except for accessways, no portion of this peripheral setback may be used for parking or other vehicular use area. 
(2)  Height: The maximum height shall be as follows: 
a.  C-PUD maximum height shall be ten stories. 
b.  I-PUD maximum height shall not exceed height of district for which development is to be located. 
c.  For bonus, see chapter 26. 
(3)  Lot coverage: I-PUD: 45 percent. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.IV.B), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2271, § 4, 4-3-85) 
Sec. 31-497. - Property development standards for the Inlet Harbor Center planned unit development (IHC-PUD). 
    The property development standards in the IHC-PUD Inlet Harbor Center planned unit development are as follows: 
(1)  Setbacks: There shall be a setback of not less than 25 feet on the entire perimeter of an IHC-PUD except where retail stores front public or private streets; in such cases, the setback shall be not less than 12.5 feet. Except for accessways, no portion of this peripheral setback may be used for parking or other vehicular use area. 
(2)  Height: maximum height shall not exceed 25 floors nor 300 feet. 
(3)  Lot coverage: 70 percent. 
(4)  Floor area ratio (FAR): the density and intensity of all IHC-PUDs shall be determined by the use of floor area ratio; the maximum FAR for IHC-PUDs is five. Parking structures shall be included in determining this ratio. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.IV.C), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2313, § 6, 8-20-86) 
Sec. 31-498. - Minimum and maximum area limitations. 
(a)  In an R-PUD, the following percentages express the maximum land area that may be devoted to various land uses: 
(1) Residential ..... 65% of gross area (2) Commercial .....  2% of gross area (3) Hospital and convalescent homes .....  1% of gross area  
(b)  All planned unit developments shall contain at least equal to the following minimums: 
(1) Open space ..... 35% of gross area (2) Fire station, schools, daycares, places of worship and other required governmental services (planned unit developments of more than 100 acres) ..... as may be required by the relevant agency and the PUD developer  
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.IV.D, E), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2529, § 3, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-499. - Open space requirements and computations. 
    Planned unit developments shall exhibit and maintain a total open space requirement at least equal to 35 percent of the gross area of the PUD. The following areas qualify wholly or partially as open space: 
(1)  If the major recreation facility is concentrated in a localized section of the PUD with less than 30 percent of the residential dwelling units abutting it, only 50 percent of the area contained in the facility may count toward the open space requirement. 
(2)  If, however, the major recreation facility is dispersed throughout the PUD with between 30 percent and 60 percent of the residential dwelling units abutting it, 75 percent of the area contained therein may count toward the open space requirement. 
(3)  If more than 60 percent of the residential dwelling units abut the major recreation facility, 100 percent of the area contained therein may count toward the open space requirement. 
(4)  Fifty percent of the area contained in manmade water bodies and canals with average water widths less than 60 feet, or 100 percent of the area if the canal or water body has an average water width wider than 60 feet, may count toward the open space requirement. 
(5)  If the water body is natural and the shoreline vegetation will not be disturbed by the development, the total area contained therein may be counted as open space. 
(6)  If natural habitats of unique and significant value are determined to exist, the director of CDEC shall require the area so defined to be left in an undisturbed state and adequately protected or incorporated into the design of the PUD as a passive recreation area with a minimum of improvements permitted. In either case the total area contained therein may be counted as open space. 
(7)  The area contained in a continuous open space pedestrian system, consisting of permanently maintained walks and trails offering intradevelopment communication that is divorced from roads and streets may be counted as open space. 
(8)  The area contained in miniparks which may or may not be a part of the open space system but contain at least one acre and have a minimum dimension of 100 feet, together with but not limited to benches, may be counted as open space. 
(9)  The area occupied by a multiple use recreation building and its attendant outdoor recreation facilities may be counted as open space. 
(10)  Any privately maintained or owned exterior open space adjacent to and for the exclusive use by the residents of the individual dwelling unit, enclosed or partially enclosed by walls, hedges, buildings or structures, including but not limited to balconies, terraces, porches, decks, patios and atriums, may be counted towards the total open space requirement, provided the total area contained therein does not exceed five percent of the gross area of the PUD, nor decrease the amount of ground level open space below that acreage equal to 30 percent of the gross area of the PUD. 
(11)  All pervious land areas between the property or lot lines and the building or buildings thereon shall count as open space, except as herein otherwise provided. 
(12)  The area contained in public and private streets is not considered as open space and receives no credit toward the open space requirement. 
(13)  In all IHC-PUDs the area contained in all decks, plazas, roof gardens, open recreation areas and manmade waterways shall be counted in the computation of open space, regardless of standards set forth in subsections (1) through (11) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.IV.F), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2313, § 6, 8-20-86) 
Sec. 31-500. - Amenity package component. 
    As a condition of PUD approval, the following minimum package of amenities are required to be provided as an integral component of the PUD. The required amenity types and standards may be modified, and substitutions made depending on the age group profile of the PUD population. 
(1)  Small park-tot lot: one park per 125 dwelling units, minimum 0.25 acre. 
(2)  PUD park: one park at 0.13 acre per 100 dwelling units, minimum 1.0 acre. 
(3)  Swimming pool (number of pools relate to number of dwelling units): 
Minimum pool size: 25 feet by 40 feet/100-150 dwelling units. 
Minimum pool size: 30 feet by 60 feet/150-200 dwelling units. 
Pool for 0-100 dwelling units may be required depending on general distribution of required pools as above. 
(4)  Tennis courts: one per 300 dwelling units. 
(5)  Recreation building: 150 square feet per 100 dwelling units. 
(6)  Walkway system: this shall be a comprehensive project-wide system, linking all the elements of the PUD in an attractive and convenient manner. 
(Ord. No. 2529, § 4, 3-20-91) 
Sec. 31-501. - Design criteria. 
    All planned unit developments shall observe and accommodate in the design solution the following objective and requirements: 
(1)  General objectives. 
a.  To provide a suitable environment by utilizing the potential advantages of the site, including suitable placement of the buildings and facilities in relation to the site and surrounding influences. 
b.  To provide adequate open space related to buildings and other land improvements. 
c.  To conveniently locate adequate car storage space within a reasonable distance to the proposed use. 
d.  To preserve those existing trees and other natural features of the site. 
e.  To enhance the appearance of the buildings and grounds with supplemental plantings to screen objectionable features and to control noise from areas or activities beyond the control of the PUD. 
f.  All of the elements of the site plan shall be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size and shape of the tract, the character of adjoining property, and the type and size of the buildings, in order to produce a livable economical land use pattern. 
g.  Arrangements of buildings shall be in favorable relation to the natural topography, existing desirable trees, views within and beyond the site and exposure to the sun and other buildings on the site. 
(2)  Access and circulation. 
a.  Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to encourage smooth traffic flow and minimize hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Merging and turning lanes and traffic medians shall be required where existing or anticipated heavy traffic flows indicate needed controls. Minor streets within the PUD shall not connect with minor streets in adjacent developments in such a way so as to encourage through traffic. In addition, visibility triangles shall be maintained at all intersections. 
b.  Access to the dwellings and circulation between buildings and other important project facilities for vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall be comfortable and convenient for the residents. 
c.  Access and circulation for fire fighting equipment, furniture moving vans, garbage collection, deliveries and other large utility vehicles shall be planned with the appropriate design criteria as determined by the CDEC director. 
d.  Streets shall not occupy more land than is required to provide access as indicated, shall not create unnecessary fragmentation of the development into small blocks, or be so laid out or constructed as to interfere with desirable drainage in or adjacent to the development. 
e.  Where possible, all major streets shown on the master land use and site plan as arterials or collectors shall be controlled access facilities and the only vehicular access thereto shall be by public or private streets. 
f.  Arterial and collector streets, whether public or private, shall connect with similarly classified streets in adjacent developments. If no streets exist, the CDEC director shall determine whether future connections are likely and desirable and shall have the authority to alter the design of the PUD to accommodate his judgment. 
(3)  Garbage and refuse collection. Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash removal when individual collection is not made and indoor storage is not provided. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.V), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-502. - Special requirements. 
(a)  In any planned unit development containing structures on lots permitted by this section, ownership of the common areas which includes open space shall be held by either: 
(1)  The lot owners, in which event each lot owner shall have an undivided interest in the common areas which shall be appurtenant to his lot. The undivided interest in the common area shall not be conveyed separately from the ownership of the lot; 
(2)  A property owner association; 
(3)  A combination of subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section. 
(b)  The developer shall agree to provide agreements, covenants or deed restrictions running with the land. The agreements, covenants or deed restrictions shall provide for the maintenance of the common areas. They shall also provide that the portion of the plat containing open space may not be vacated in whole or in part unless the entire plat is vacated. If any residential unit built under this section is destroyed or removed for any cause, if replaced, such unit shall be replaced with a unit of at least similar size and type, however, not exceeding the dimensions of the previous unit. 
(c)  A townhouse cluster shall be constructed as a whole, and no certificate of occupancy for a townhouse unit shall be issued until completion of that whole. 
(d)  Required for nonresidential uses: 
(1)  Enclosed uses. All uses, except automobile service stations, shall be operated entirely within enclosed buildings (except for PUDs industrial zoning districts). 
(2)  Operating hours. No commercial use within a PUD residential zoning district shall commence business activities, including delivery and stocking operations, prior to 6:00 a.m. nor continue activities later than 11:00 p.m., except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
(3)  Lighting. Artificial lighting used to illuminate the premises and/or advertising copy within a PUD in a residential zoning district shall be directed away from adjacent properties and shall be extinguished no later than 11:00 p.m. of the regular business day. 
(4)  Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of merchandise shall be permitted only when incidental to the commercial or industrial use located on the premises, provided that: 
a.  The storage area shall not be located in any of the required setbacks or yards. 
b.  The stored merchandise shall not protrude above the height of the enclosing walls or buildings, except for PUDs in industrial zoning districts. 
(5)  In commercial zoning districts, ground floor frontage on major thoroughfares shall not be devoted to residential uses. 
(6)  In commercial zoning districts, 15 percent of the gross floor area devoted to residential uses shall be provided as private residential recreation space. This space may be in balconies, rooftops or indoor facilities, etc. 
(7)  Commercial vehicular traffic shall not be permitted to use residential streets for ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.VI), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-503. - Parking and loading. 
(a)  The off-street parking requirements are established in section 31-566 et seq. The bonus provisions are contained in chapter 26. 
(b)  In addition to the parking ratios or standards provided in section 31-566 et seq., the following standard modifications may be allowed for parking in IHC-PUDs. 
(1)  Reduction in parking ratios. Standard parking ratios may be reduced up to 25 percent for developments in IHC-PUDs. 
(2)  Parking space size. The uniform parking space may be reduced to nine feet by 18 feet in the IHC-PUDs. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.VII), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2214, § 3, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2313, § 7, 8-20-86) 
Sec. 31-504. - Landscaping. 
    The landscaping requirements in the PUD planned unit development district shall be as stated in section 31-596 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-23.VIII), 3-17-82) 
Secs. 31-505-31-520. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 24. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4038, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 18, 2013, repealed former Div. 24, §§ 31-521-31-525, in its entirety which pertained to the inlet harbor center overlay zoning district and derived from Ord. No. 2314, § 3, adopted Sept. 3, 1986. 

Secs. 31-521-31-525. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 25. - RH RESORT HOTEL DISTRICT 

Sec. 31-526. - Purpose. 
    This category is resort commercial in character and is intended to promote resort and tourist related activities in a high quality environment through aesthetically oriented property development standards and to ensure compatibility with the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 11-5-03) 
Sec. 31-527. - Definitions. 
    Resort hotel. A facility licensed by the State of Florida offering transient lodging accommodations for the general public for a fee and which may include restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment and recreational facilities. All suites and rooms shall have maid service provided by the establishment; be fully furnished; and be served by a central switchboard telephone system. No permanent residential uses are permitted, all suites and/or rooms must be offered for use as transient lodging accommodations for the general public during each year. 
    Resort hotel suite. An area within a resort hotel licensed as a hotel or motel and/or resort condominium by the State of Florida, which area provides a sleeping accommodation and one kitchen or cooking facility for the use of one or more transient guests registered under one entry with the resort hotel. A resort hotel suite shall consist of a minimum floor area of 450 square feet (exclusive of bathroom, closet and balcony areas), and is permitted a maximum of two bedrooms. A resort hotel suite shall have only one door directly accessible to the common area hallway. 
    Resort hotel room. A room for the use of transient guests registered under one entry with the resort hotel. A resort hotel room shall consist of a minimum floor area of 120 square feet (exclusive of bathroom, closet and balcony areas), and is permitted a maximum of one bedroom. No kitchen or cooking facilities are permitted in a resort hotel room. A Resort Hotel Room shall have only one door directly accessible to the common area hallway. 
    High-rise structure. Any part of a structure three stories in height or more. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 11-5-03; Ord. No. 3003, § 1, 2-1-06) 
Sec. 31-528. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the RH zoning district: 
(1)  Hotels, motels, resort hotels. 
(2)  Restaurants, and shops and meeting facilities accessory to hotels or motels. 
(3)  Multiple family dwellings. 
(4)  Home occupations. 
(5)  Any use commonly accessory to the above uses. 
(b)  Uses prohibited. No building or structure shall be permitted east of the 1997 coastal construction control line, except dune walkovers, ramps or other similar structures whose sole purpose is to provide beach access. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 11-5-03; Ord. No. 4061, § 4, 5-20-15) 
Sec. 31-529. - Property development standards. 
    The property development standards in the resort hotel district are as follows: 
(1)  Density: 
a.  Multifamily dwellings: Base minimum permitted density shall be 17 dwelling units per acre. When the Minority Employment and Affordable Housing Opportunity Plan bonus provision is used, the maximum permitted density shall be 20 residential dwelling units per acre. 
b.  The base density for hotels, motels and resort hotels shall be 30 resort hotel suites per acre, 60 resort hotel rooms per acre. When the Minority Employment and Affordable Housing Opportunity Plan (MEAHOP) bonus provision is used, the maximum permitted density for hotels, motels and resort hotels shall be 40 resort hotel suites per acre, 80 resort hotel rooms per acre. 
(2)  Bonus density: The bonus density shall be as established in the Minority Employment and Affordable Housing Opportunities Plan Chapter of the Land Development Code. 
(3)  Density calculation: 
a.  Density shall be calculated based on 100 percent of the total area of the site. 
b.  No area of submerged land on Lake Worth shall be computed for gross density purposes. 
(4)  Maximum building height: 20 stories or 200 feet, excluding mechanical facilities, ornamental towers and antennas, which shall not exceed twenty feet in additional height. 
(5)  Minimum building setbacks: 
a.  Front: 
1.  All structures three stories or more in height, 100 feet. 
2.  All structures two stories or less in height, 50 feet. 
3.  Ornamental walls and gatehouses, shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the front property line. 
b.  Side: Ten percent of the lot width or 20 feet, whichever is greater, shall be maintained for all structures excluding recreation decks which may be setback 20 feet provided they do not exceed 12 feet in height. 
c.  Ocean: The 1997 Coastal Construction Control Line. 
d.  High-rise setback: All buildings in excess of two stories shall provide two feet additional setback from each property line (with exception of ocean side setback line) for each additional story of height. 
(6)  Maximum impervious coverage: 70 percent of site area as computed in subsection (3)a. of this section, for all structures inclusive of accessory structures, i.e., parking garages, recreational decks, boiler and generator rooms, etc. 
(7)  Maximum north/south building width: 120 feet for high-rise structures. 
(8)  Maximum east/west building width: 200 feet for each high-rise structure. 
(9)  Distance between high-rise structures: 100 feet for high-rise buildings. 
(10)  Minimum recreation facilities and amenities: 
a.  Outdoor: One swimming pool, one regulation tennis court or comparable recreational space and a designated area for sunning, picnics, etc., for occupants of project. 
b.  Indoor: One multipurpose room for parties, games and group assembly and one exercise room. 
(11)  Floor area ratio: The floor area ratio shall not exceed 2.0:1. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 2944, § 1 11-5-03; Ord. No. 4061, § 4, 5-20-15) 
Sec. 31-530. - Parking. 
(a)  The required off-street parking requirements for an RH zoning district should conform to section 31-566 et seq. Resort hotel suites shall provide 1.5 parking spaces per suite and employee parking as applicable. 
(b)  Seventy-five percent of all required parking shall be placed under a permanent structure in a manner to effectively conceal such parking facility from the public right-of-way by landscaping and other means. 
(c)  For bonus, see Minority Employment and Affordable Housing Opportunity Plan regulations chapter. 
(d)  The maximum height for a parking garage shall be 60 feet. 
(e)  Parking garages shall be concealed from S.R. 703 (A1A) using buffer landscaping and utilizing facade treatments which blend the parking garage structure with the main high-rise structures. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 11-5-03; Ord. No. 4061, § 4, 5-20-15) 
Sec. 31-531. - Landscaping. 
    In addition to the requirements of section 31-596 et seq., the following landscaping criteria shall be provided: 
(1)  Twenty percent of all gross vehicular use areas shall be landscaped. 
(2)  All property lines shall be provided with a landscape strip at least ten feet in width with one tree for every 20 linear feet, and shrubbery between each tree and ground cover and sod in remaining areas. 
(3)  Where the dune has been destroyed or depleted of landscaping in a manner that does not afford a natural protection from the elements, the dune shall be rebuilt and replenished with native landscaping vegetation to provide the necessary protection and to reestablish the dune ecosystem. Re-establishing the dune shall be designed to align with the natural dune and contours found to the north and south of the subject property, as established by survey completed by a professional engineer and surveyor. 
(4)  Where environmentally sensitive land, wetlands and other conservation or preservation areas abut or are located within the site, at minimum there shall be a ten-foot wide landscape buffer surrounding said areas planted with ecologically appropriate native vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 11-5-03; Ord. No. 4061, § 4, 5-20-15) 
Sec. 31-532. - Site plan review. 
    A site plan review shall be required for all development within the RH zoning district. Notice of all site plan reviews shall be given to all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property and a notification sign shall be posted on the property at least ten days before said review. 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 11-5-03) 
Sec. 31-533. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4061, § 4, adopted May 20, 2015, repealed former § 31-533 in its entirety which pertained to property within the community redevelopment area and derived from Ord. No. 2922, § 1, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 11-5-03. 
DIVISION 26. - DOWNTOWN ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 31-534. - Downtown districts generally. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the downtown districts is to guide the redevelopment of the Community Redevelopment Area of Riviera Beach and the surrounding properties into a vibrant downtown that: 
(1)  Provides a variety of housing types to accommodate a diverse population; 
(2)  Establishes a "park once" environment by providing a mix of uses within a pedestrian-friendly environment; 
(3)  Maintains and enhances a continuous, inter-connected network of pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly streets that effectively links transit stations, bike paths, sidewalks, buildings, open spaces, and the waterfront; 
(4)  Provides public open space in the form of civic parks, plazas, and greens; 
(5)  Maintains and enhances public access to the waterfront; and 
(6)  Encourages investment by accommodating new development at a range of scales including individual infill buildings and large redevelopment projects. 
(7)  Maintains and improves real and perceived safety as a key component of walkability and sustainability. 
(b)  Downtown districts named. To create the vibrant diverse character envisioned for the downtown area, five downtown zoning districts are hereby created and are being assigned to all land within the boundaries of the Community Redevelopment Area in the Downtown Mixed Use, Working Waterfront, General Industrial, High and Medium Density Multiple Family categories on the Comprehensive Plan's Future Land Use Map to carry out the 2010 Riviera Beach CRA Plan: 
(1)  DC Downtown Core. 
(2)  DG Downtown General. 
(3)  DR Downtown Residential. 
(4)  DI Downtown Industrial. 
(5)  DM Downtown Marine. 
(c)  Regulating plan for downtown districts. The Downtown Riviera Beach Regulating Plan depicts the following information: 
(1)  District boundaries. The locations and boundaries of the downtown zoning districts shall be shown on both a map entitled "City of Riviera Beach Zoning Map" and a map entitled "Downtown Riviera Beach Regulating Plan." The Downtown Riviera Beach Regulating Plan depicts additional information necessary to apply the standards contained in this division and is hereby officially adopted as an integral part of these regulations. 
(2)  Primary and secondary streets. Primary Streets are intended to develop overtime as superior pedestrian environments and, as such, are held to higher standards in the regulations regarding building placement, building frontage, and the location of parking and service uses. Streets not designated as Primary Streets are considered Secondary Streets, which will accommodate service functions and vehicular-oriented development needs including parking, loading, and drive-through facilities. 
(3)  Marina Way. Marina Way is intended to provide both visual and pedestrian connections to Lake Worth and may or may not include vehicular access. Development along Marina Way shall be held to the same standards as development on primary streets and is also subject to the regulations and approval process set forth in the civic building, uses, and open space section (See section 31-538.). 
(4)  Future streets and alleys. Potential future streets and alleys are designated on the regulating plan. Future streets and alleys are desired new vehicular and/or pedestrian connections to, or extensions of, existing streets that will improve the overall transportation network. Future streets are intended to be primary streets; future alleys provide vehicular access to parking and other service functions located behind buildings. Future street and alley designations are not precise alignments or specific locations. The appropriateness of and final street designation, alignment and location of these intended links of the transportation network will be determined during the development review process by the community development director. See section 29-65 for design standards for new streets and alleys. 
(5)  Pre-approved redevelopment design areas. The regulating plan indicates areas where this code provides pre-approved redevelopment options for mobile home/trailer park properties to create mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly environments. See sectgion 31-540. 
(6)  Other zoning districts. For the purpose of informing appropriate transitions of scale and use, lands assigned zoning districts other than the downtown zoning districts are also shown on the regulating plan. 
(d)  General standards for all downtown districts. 
(1)  Specific standards. Specific standards for each downtown zoning district are found in section 31-536. 
(2)  General standards. General standards that apply to more than one downtown zoning district are found in section 31-535 and sections 31-537 through 31-540. 
(3)  Conflicts. Where the requirements of these zoning districts conflict with other portions of this Code, the requirements of these districts shall prevail; however, no development may be approved that conflicts with the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  Planned unit developments. New planned unit developments are not permitted within the CRA. Planned unit developments approved prior to December 18, 2013, shall be governed by their respective planned development approvals. Their boundaries may not be expanded. Any amendments to the planned development approvals must comply with the comprehensive plan and the relevant downtown zoning districts to the extent practicable. 
(e)  Review process for downtown districts. The purpose of site plan review is to ascertain whether a proposed new development follows the pattern of development described in the Community Redevelopment Area (CRA) Plan and conforms to all provisions of the Riviera Beach Comprehensive Plan and this Code. Except for single-family homes on existing lots, all applications for development approval within the CRA that are not otherwise permitted as nonconforming uses or structures shall comply with all requirements of this CODE. 
(1)  Administrative process. In order to facilitate redevelopment in the downtown area, certain applications may be processed administratively. 
a.  Applications for changes in use, renovations to buildings, redevelopment of sites with buildings existing as of the date of the ordinance from from which this division derives, and development in pre-approved redevelopment design areas may be processed administratively. 
b.  The community development director shall review plans, including the exhibits listed in subsection 31-534(e)(2), for completeness and compliance with the provisions of this code, including the regulating plan in subsection 31-534(c). The community development director shall issue a final decision. Denials shall be in writing and shall specifically set forth the grounds for the denial. Any final decision of the director may be appealed to the zoning board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures established in this code for appeals of administrative decisions. 
(2)  Standard review process. 
a.  Applications for new development on vacant or undeveloped sites, development which proposes a reduction from the minimum building frontage requirements, or any application deemed by the community development director to have a significant impact to surrounding properties shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning board, CRA board, and approved by the city council. 
b.  Special exceptions. Requests for special exceptions shall follow the review procedures and standards in sections 31-61 and 31-62 and shall also consider any additional standards defined herein (Division 26). 
c.  Variances. Relief from certain requirements may be permitted pursuant to the process and variance standards in sections 31-39 through 31-41 of this Code. 
(3)  All applications for site plan review shall be accompanied by exhibits prepared by qualified professionals, which shall include the following: 
a.  A survey of existing conditions providing the following information: 
1.  Gross land area (to the nearest 1/100 of an acre). 
2.  Substantial, visual improvements (in addition to buildings) such as signs, parking structures, swimming pools, etc. 
3.  Parking areas and number of parking spaces. 
4.  Indication of access to a public way on land such as curb cuts and driveways, and to and from waters adjoining the surveyed tract, such as boat slips, launches, piers and docks. 
b.  In addition to any other application requirements, drawings of the proposed conditions shall be provided depicting the following: 
1.  Vicinity map showing the property in reference to nearby streets and street intersections. 
2.  Location of the property lines, location of existing and proposed rights-of-way, location and dimension of existing/proposed easements, water courses and other essential features. 
3.  Indication of primary or secondary street designations for all rights-of-way and any future street or alley connections provided. 
4.  Cross section and street design type for new and existing streets and alleys as described in section 29-65. 
5.  Location of vehicular access to site including driveways and curbs cuts. 
6.  The outlines of all existing and proposed buildings showing setbacks, percentage of building frontage, dimensions, and points of pedestrian access. 
7.  Identification and dimensions of frontage types for all primary pedestrian entrances. 
8.  Building elevations and sections, showing overall building height and number of stories. 
9.  Location and dimensions of all proposed signage 
10.  Location and dimensions of all perimeter treatments (sidewalks, pedestrian walkways, street trees, fences, streetwalls, and/or landscaping). 
11.  Location of all off-street parking, loading facilities, and waste collection areas. 
12.  Schematic of drainage system. 
13.  Location, type, and size (in square feet) of civic open spaces. 
14.  Landscaping plans, including specifications of species, of plant material, location, and size. Lighting and landscaping plans shall be coordinated. 
c.  A data table which indicates the following: 
1.  Future land use category and zoning district. 
2.  Total acres of the project. 
3.  Number of dwelling units. 
4.  Square feet of non-residential uses. 
5.  Parking computations as described in section 31-539. 
6.  Floor Area Ratio (FAR). 
7.  Percentage of building frontage required and provided on Primary Streets as described in subsection 31-535(c). 
8.  Public benefit height calculation, if applicable, as described in subsection 31-538(b)(7). 
d.  Such other design data as may be needed to evaluate the project's compliance with the requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13) 
Sec. 31-535. - Building standards for all downtown districts. 
(a)  Building height. Unless otherwise specified herein, the height of buildings shall be measured in and regulated by the number of stories. Increasing the maximum number of stories allowed in a downtown district may not be approved as a variance. Stories are measured from the floor to the bottom of the lowest structural member that supports the story above. See Figure 31-535(2). 
(1)  Stories located below grade are not counted for the purpose of measuring building height. In all districts, if this floor is elevated more than five feet above the adjacent sidewalk, the space below counts as the ground (first) story for the purposes of measuring building height. 
(2)  The ground story of commercial or mixed-use buildings shall be ten feet to 18 feet tall. 
(3)  The ground story of residential buildings shall be from nine feet to 14 feet tall. 
(4)  Each story above the ground story in all buildings must be from eight feet to 12 feet tall; any upper story taller than 12 feet will count as two stories for the purpose of measuring building height. 
(5)  Mezzanines that exceed 15 percent of the floor area are counted as stories for the purpose of measuring height. 
(6)  Each parking garage level exposed to a street or civic open space shall be counted as a story for the purposes of measuring height. Parking levels fully concealed from view by a habitable story and use are not counted as stories for the purpose of measuring height. See Figure 31-535(1). 
Figure 31-535(1) 
Counting Number of Stories 

(7)  Within the downtown core and downtown general districts, residential units must have the floor of the first story elevated at least 18 inches above the adjacent sidewalk. Within the downtown residential district, residential units must have the floor of the first story elevated at least 12 inches above the adjacent sidewalk. Lobbies and common areas in multi-unit buildings may have a zero to six-inch ground floor finish level. 
(8)  Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets no less than 42 inches high, or as required to screen equipment. 
(9)  Mechanical equipment necessary to the operation or maintenance of the building such as, but not limited to, elevator, stair, and mechanical penthouses, cooling towers, vent stacks and antennae shall be enclosed and screened in such a manner that the enclosure is an integral part of the overall building design and provides a balanced and graceful silhouette, and ameliorates the visual impact from adjacent buildings. Minor features not exceeding one foot in height shall be exempted from this regulation. The incorporation of green energy resources, such as photovoltaic cells, is encouraged; however, significant features, such as windmills, require approval by the Community Development Director. 
(10)  Architectural features such as church spires, steeples, belfries, cupolas, or similar, non-habitable structures are not limited by story height. 
Figure 31-535(2) 
Measuring Building Height 

Table 31-535(a) 
Building Height 
A Maximum Number of Stories Varies By District B Ground Floor Finish Level Commercial Uses and Lobbies/Common Areas in multi-unit buildings in all zones 6" max. Residential Units   Downtown Core 18" min.   Downtown General 18" min.   Downtown Residential 12" min. C Ground Story Height Commercial and Mixed-Use Buildings 10' min./18' max. Residential Buildings 9' min./14' max. D Upper Story Height 8' min. / 12' max. E Parapet Height 42" max. F Recess Line Above the 4th Story  
(b)  Building placement. Each district contains dimensional requirements that regulate the disposition of new buildings on lots. 
(1)  Front setbacks shall be measured from the property lines coinciding with public rights-of-way, including streets, paths, and parks, or from a civic open space that meets the requirements in subsection 31-538(b). See Figure 31-535(3). 
(2)  In districts that allow development with no side or rear setback, the following limitations also apply: 
a.  Side and rear setbacks are required only when an abutting property has a building existing as of the effective date of this ordinance [date] with windows facing the adjoining lot line. Then, new development shall set back to provide at least ten feet of separation between the existing and new buildings. 
b.  All light and air shafts, including those necessary per the percentage of openings on building façades, shall be provided within the lot. 
c.  In the DC downtown core district, buildings taller than four stories in height have additional setback requirements for the upper stories, as described in subsection 31-536(a). 
(c)  Building frontage. Building frontage is the percentage of the total width of a lot which is required to be occupied by the primary façade of a building. Each zoning districts provides minimum building frontages. 
(1)  The primary façade shall be parallel to the right-of-way, located in accordance with the minimum and maximum front setback requirements of the zoning district. 
(2)  The location of the primary façade is not changed by architectural elements such as cornices, bay windows, awnings, porches, balconies, stoops, colonnades, arcades or forecourts. 
(3)  The primary façade may adjust around a Civic Open Space that meets the requirements in subsection; 31-538(b) as shown in Figure 31-535(3). 
Figure 31-535(3) 
Building Frontage Requirement 

(d)  Density and floor area ratio. 
(1)  The maximum density of residential units shall be determined as follows: 
a.  For parcels with maximum density, expressed as dwelling units per acre, set forth by the future land use designation in the Riviera Beach Comprehensive Plan, the following calculation, with result rounded to the nearest whole number: 
(Parcel Size in square feet / 43560) X Allowable Density = Maximum number of units 
In mixed use buildings, the maximum number of units is not reduced by floor space dedicated to other uses. 
b.  For parcels with a future land use designation in the Riviera Beach Comprehensive Plan that does not expressly limit density, the maximum number of residential units is limited by the overall floor area ratio allowed in the Riviera Beach Comprehensive plan and the regulations in this CODE that direct building form, story height, and the required number of parking spaces. 
c.  Each dwelling unit must meet the minimum floor area in subsection 31-494(2)(d). 
For downtown zoning districts, the total floor area is the sum of the areas of all floors of a structure, as measured by the exterior faces of the walls, including enclosed porches and the like. Garage space which is located below grade is not included in the computation of total floor area. Additional building square footage gained by using the Public Benefit Height Option in § Section 31-538(a)(7) is not included in the calculation of or limitation of maximum floor area ratio. 
(e)  Frontage standards. The main entrance to every building shall be accessible directly from and face a public right-of-way or civic open space. The manner in which buildings are disposed along the street is a critical component of this CODE and is coordinated with the setback requirements for each district and the CRA Street Design Standards contained in section 29-65. Frontage standards, contained in section 31-537, define architectural and design components for the entrance(s) to buildings and the area between primary façades and property lines. 
(f)  Building façade standards. In all downtown zoning districts, the following façade regulations apply: 
(1)  Building façades facing streets or civic open spaces must have transparent windows covering between 20 percent and 75 percent of the wall area of each story as measured between finished floors. Transparent windows transmit at least 50 percent of visible daylight. 
(2)  Windows and doors shall be vertically proportioned. Horizontal fenestration openings can meet this requirement by using muntins to subdivide glazed areas into vertical or square areas, or by using a series of vertically proportioned windows within the opening. Transom windows may be horizontal, and circular, square, and semi-circular windows may be used as limited accent elements within the facade. 
(3)  All parapets shall have a cornice molding extending a minimum of two inches from the surface plane of the wall. 
(4)  When required by the district, expression lines shall be moldings extending a minimum of two inches from the surface plane of the building wall. Expression lines are intended to be continuous façade elements and may not be covered by awnings or signs. Significant architectural elements such as columns, pilasters, and towers may interrupt expression lines. 
Figure 31-535(4) 
Building Façade Requirements 

(5)  Building facades on primary streets shall be designed to visually screen uses permitted with limitations. Appropriate façade design incorporates the consistent use of materials and construction assemblies, fenestration patterns, architectural articulation, and features such as, but not limited to, the application of architectural screens, louvers, or glass, and the incorporation of vegetated surfaces and planters. Paint, faux treatments, scoring, construction joints, lighting, and material projections less than two inches are permitted, but do not fulfill the façade design requirements. 
Figure 31-535(5) 
Character Examples for Building Façade Screening 
Uses Permitted with Limitations on Primary Streets 
The Clematis Street garage utilizes consistent building materials with fenestration patterns to establish an attractive façade screening the parking levels over the retail space. The Lincoln Theater has the building circulation located along the streets, behind an architectural glass façade, screening the large expanses of blank walls within the movie theater.  
(g)  Paint colors. Paint colors are regulated in the Downtown zoning districts to establish a coordinated color scheme for the downtown, to encourage a range of harmonious color options for visual variety, to encourage light colors for energy savings, and to favor colors appropriate for a tropical environment. These regulations also apply to awning colors. 
(1)  The coloration of all buildings shall be with "earth tone" or pastel colors and shall be harmonious with the adjacent properties. Semi-transparent stains are recommended for application on natural wood. 
(2)  The following specific requirements also apply: 
a.  Landowners may choose up to four colors for a single building (up to two body colors, up to two trim colors, and one accent color; these may be the same or different) and shall use at least two colors (one body color and one trim color). 
b.  Architectural elements on the building facade, such as awnings and canopies, shall be in the same color(s) as the four chosen building colors. 
c.  Body colors are intended for building walls, garden walls, and other primary building elements, and shall be used for no less than 70percent of the painted surface area of the building. If two shades of body color are used on a building, the transition should occur along a horizontal expression line with the lighter hue located above the darker one. Color combinations shall be complimentary to each other. 
d.  Trim colors are intended for door frames, storefront elements, windows and window frames, railing, shutters, ornament, fences, and similar features. Trim colors shall be used for no more than 30 percent of the painted surface area of the building. 
e.  The accent color is used to highlight special features such as doors, shutters, gates, ornament, or storefront elements. The accent color shall be used for no more than 20 percent of the painted surface of the building. 
(3)  New development shall submit colored elevations for review. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13) 
Sec. 31-536. - Regulations for each downtown zoning district. 
(a)  DC downtown core district. The DC downtown core district promotes redevelopment of the commercial center of downtown Riviera Beach. The existing commercial corridor and marina area will become a vibrant, pedestrian-friendly, mixed-use district that accommodates shops, businesses, residences, marine-related, and entertainment uses. 
(1)  Lot size, building placement, size, and height. Table 31-536(a) provides the dimensional requirements regarding lot size and building placement, size, and height for the downtown core district. Figure 31-536(1) illustrates the dimensional requirements from the table. 
Table 31-536(a) 
Downtown Core Dimensional Requirements 
Lot Size Lot Width 20 feet min./No max. Lot Area 2000 square feet min./No max. Lot Coverage 85% max. Building Placement A Front Setback 1 Broadway & Blue Heron Blvd. 12 feet min.; 15 feet max. Primary Streets 10 feet min.; 15 feet max. Secondary Streets 10 feet min. B Side Setback 0 feet 2 C Rear Setback 10 feet min. D Recess Above 4th & 6th Stories 10 feet min. each E Building Frontage 75% min. on Primary Streets Building Size & Height Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 2.0 Minimum Height 2 Stories on Primary Streets Maximum Height 4 Stories Maximum Public Benefit Height 3 8 Stories Maximum Singer Island Height 3 5-8 Stories, with Special exception  
1 Side lot lines facing streets are regulated by front setback requirements. 
2 All light and air shafts shall be provided within the lot See § 31-535(b) 
3 See subsection 31-538(a)(2)c. 
Figure 31-536(1) 
Downtown Core Building Placement and Height 

a.  Building frontage requirement. A minimum of 75 percent of the linear width of the lot along a primary street shall be occupied by the primary façade of a building, located in accordance with the minimum and maximum setbacks in Table 31-536(a). Secondary streets do not have a required minimum building frontage and buildings shall be located in accordance with the minimum setback in Table 31-536(a). 
b.  Modification of building frontage requirement for marine uses. The minimum building frontage requirement on primary streets may be reduced for boat dealerships and mega-yacht facilities subject to these standards: 
1.  Boat dealerships may display boats for sale, arranged in a uniformed and orderly fashion. Service and repair activities must be located within or behind a building or shall be located at least 30 feet from a Primary Street. 
2.  In the absence of a building façade, a fence comprised of metal pickets with masonry piers spaced no less than 25 feet on center shall be installed along both Primary and Secondary Streets. See Figure 31-536(2). The fence shall be three feet to six feet in height, located in line with the front setback and shall have the following design features: 
i.  Fences shall be metal picket with masonry piers. 
ii.  Piers shall be masonry with smooth stucco finish, at least 16 inches wide by 14 inches deep, and may be up to six feet six inches in height. Piers shall have a precast, architectural grade concrete cap, sloped to shed water. 
iii.  Light fixtures shall be installed on the top of the cap or mounted to the side of the piers. Lighting fixtures shall be decorative, scaled proportionally to the pier. 
Figure 31-536(2) 
Fence with Masonry Piers 

3.  Install on-street parking, if applicable. 
(2)  Building height and massing standards. 
a.  On primary streets, the minimum building height is two stories, except for fueling stations, which may be one story in height (see subsection 31-536(a)(3)). 
b.  Maximum building height is four stories. 
c.  Public benefit height option. 
1.  Maximum building height is six stories for projects that opt to provide additional civic open space using the public benefit height option in subsection 31-538(b). 
2.  Maximum building height is increased to eight stories for projects that opt to provide additional civic open space using the public benefit height option in subsection 31-538(b) and are also located in one of the following sites which, due to the prominent setting and/or proximity to large open areas, are appropriate for taller buildings: 
i.  The east side of the intersection of Broadway and 13th Street for the purpose of creating a signature gateway entry to the marina area. 
ii.  On the west side of Avenue C, between 12th Street and 16th Street, overlooking Bicentennial Park. 
(iii)  Overlooking a new, single civic open space of at least 10,000 square feet in size, limited to the project providing the civic open space. 
3.  The use of the public benefit height option on properties on Singer Island requires approval of a special exception. In addition to the standards in §§ 31-61 and 31-62, development shall meet the following standards: 
i.  Ocean Mall is limited to five stories in height; 
ii.  The project shall be designed to allow views to the horizon and provide an attractive skyline; 
iii.  The project shall harmoniously transition in mass and height to adjoining development. 
e.  Buildings over four stories are subject to additional requirements in order to ensure architectural articulation in the overall building massing. 
1.  At the top of the fourth and sixth stories, a recess line of at least ten feet is required along at least 50 percent of building façades facing streets. Buildings built with no side or rear setbacks shall also provide recess lines of ten feet at the top of the fourth and sixth stories along 50 percent of the building elevation facing side or rear lot lines. 
2.  Massing for buildings over four stories in height is regulated using a percentage of the maximum size of the floor footprint of the building per story of height. The 100 percent floor footprint is calculated by multiplying the maximum lot coverage by the overall size of the parcel. Table 31-536(b) depicts the maximum percentage of floorprint allowed per story of height within the DC Downtown Core district: 
Table 31-536(b) 
Percentage of Floor Footprint Allowed per Story 
Story Level 1-4 5-6 7-8 Maximum Floor 
Footprint 100% 65% 35%  
The arrangement of building mass is intentionally flexible to allow free design expression. However, the following massing characteristics must be evident in the building design: 
(i)  The main volume of the building shall be oriented toward Primary Streets, away from side or rear lot lines to reduce impact on adjacent properties. 
(ii)  Tower elements shall be located to appropriately respond to the urban condition of the specific site. Desirable tower locations emphasize street corners, main building entrances, gateways, or the visual axis of another street or civic open space. 
(iii)  Massing articulation shall not wholly occur within the center of the block and must be evident on the street façade(s) using architectural variations such as changes in the number of stories, articulations in the eave or roofline, and/or adjusting the location of the front façade to accommodate a civic open space. 
(3)  Building use. 
a.  Uses permitted on all streets. The following uses are permitted in the DC downtown core district on both primary and secondary streets: 
1.  Multifamily dwelling units. 
2.  Professional office. 
(i)  Drive throughs serving banks shall meet the configuration criteria in subsection 31-536(a)(3)c.4. but are not required to obtain a special exception. 
3.  Retail establishments. 
(i)  Drive throughs serving restaurants require special exception and shall meet the configuration criteria in § 31-536(a)(3)(c)(4). 
4.  Hospitals. 
5.  Marine-related businesses as follows: 
(i)  Retail, office, or commercial uses pertaining to marine industries, which does not involve manufacturing. 
(ii)  Show rooms and office uses for marine sales, repair, or manufacturing. 
6.  Daycare (See section 31-544). 
7.  Hotels/motels. 
8.  Nursing or convalescent homes and adult living facilities (ALF). 
9.  Churches and their educational buildings; Storefront churches. 
10.  Civic open space (See section 31-538). 
11.  Community Gardens. 
b.  Uses Permitted on Secondary Streets and Permitted with Limitations on Primary Streets. 
1.  The following uses are permitted in the DC district on Secondary Streets. On Primary Streets, these uses are also permitted, provided they are separated from the street for at least 20 feet with a use permitted on Primary Streets within the first story of a building up to three stories tall. On Primary Streets, these uses are also permitted provided they are separated from the street for at least 20 feet with a use permitted on Primary Streets within the first two stories of a building four stories tall or taller. Additional Building façade design requirements apply on Primary Streets (see § 31-535(f)): 
i.  Parking garages and lots (whether principle or accessory use). 
ii.  Theaters and motion picture houses. 
iii.  Boat Dealerships. 
iv.  Drive In restaurants. 
v.  Repairing and servicing facilities for marine equipment, boats, or vehicles. 
2.  Temporary surface parking lots in phased development projects, as approved by the community development director. 
3.  Boat dealerships and mega-yacht facilities are permitted on primary streets with reduced building frontage requirements, subject to additional standards. See subsection 31-536(a)(1)b. 
Figure 31-536(3) 
Primary Street Use Limitations 

c.  Special exceptions. The following uses may be permitted by special exception in the DC district: 
1.  Private clubs, bars, saloons, taverns, cocktail lounges, or nightclubs. 
2.  Car washes. 
3.  Fueling stations. Fueling stations require approval of a special exception. In addition to the standards in sections 31-61 and 31-62, development shall meet the following criteria: (i) A ground-story shop must be located along the street, with the gas pumps to the rear of the lot as illustrated in Figure 31-536(4). The shop shall have the primary entrance facing and directly accessible from the street; an additional entrance facing the parking lot is permitted. Fueling Stations may be one story in height. 
Figure 31-536(4) 
Downtown Fueling Station 

4.  Drive throughs. Drive throughs require approval of a Special Exception. In addition to the standards in §§ 31-61 and 31-62, development shall meet the following criteria: 
(i)  The stacking area is accommodated along the side and/or in the rear of the lot. 
(ii)  The drive-through window shall be located either in the rear or to the side of the building, close to the frontage street. Figure 31-536(5) illustrates methods of incorporating drive through uses. 
Figure 31-536(5) 
Drive Through Configuration Options 

(4)  Frontage standards. 
a.  The front setback and side setbacks facing streets shall be hardscaped. The hardscape design shall have the following characteristics: 
1.  Street trees shall be installed as set forth in subsection 31-537(c), consistent with the appropriate street design in section 29-65. 
2.  A pedestrian walkway shall be accommodated as set forth in subsection 31-537(b). 
3.  Any setback area not needed to accommodate a pedestrian walkway may be landscaped using potted plants in removable planters or ground planting that does not obstruct views into storefront windows, and may also be used to accommodate merchandise displays or outdoor dining areas. 
b.  The main entrance(s) to ground story commercial space(s) shall be directly from and face a public right-of-way or civic open space. Doors allowing public access shall occur at intervals no greater than 75 feet. 
c.  Building entrances shall use at least one of the following frontage types detailed in subsection 31-537(a): 
1.  Stoop. 
2.  Forecourt. 
3.  Bracketed balcony. 
4.  Storefront. 
5.  Arcade/colonnade. 
d.  Buildings with more than 250 feet of street frontage shall provide a pedestrian accessway at least ten feet wide connecting the rear parking to the sidewalk area or establishing a cross-block connection. 
(5)  Architectural standards. 
a.  An expression line shall be provided at the top of the first story. 
b.  Buildings taller than four stories shall design and compose building elevations facing side property line(s) as building façades. Prominent side building elevations are most likely to occur on large properties, capable of accommodating taller buildings with structured parking solutions. In order to ensure compatibility with adjacent smaller-scaled structures, the building elevation of the stories of the fifth story and higher shall provide a minimum façade transparency of 15 percent. 
c.  In the absence of a building façade, a streetwall is required along both primary and secondary streets. Streetwalls shall be three feet to three feet six inches in height, located in line with the building façade or the front setback. Streetwalls shall be composed of either an opaque wall using the same material and color as the building or of a continuous, maintained hedge. See subsection 31-536(a)(1)b. for fence standards for marine uses. In addition, one shade tree per 20 lineal feet, uniformly spaced, shall be installed along the length the streetwall. 
d.  An opaque, masonry wall six feet in height shall be built on the property line along all side and rear lot lines that abut single-family houses existing as of December 18, 2013, or lots in a residential zoning district. In addition one tree shall be planted every 20 feet along the wall. 
(6)  Other applicable Standards. See section 31-535 and sections 31-537 through 31-540 for general standards that also apply to the DC district. 
(b)  DG downtown general. The DG downtown general district promotes the redevelopment of the Avenue E corridor and adjacent areas into a mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly environment. Diverse housing options as well as commercial establishments serving the downtown population are permitted of a scale and intensity compatible with the adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
(1)  Lot size, building placement, size, and height. 
a.  Table 31-536(c) provides the dimensional requirements regarding lot size, building placement, size, and height for the DG district. Figure 31-536(6) illustrates the dimensional requirements from the table. 
Table 31-536(c) 
Downtown General Dimensional Requirements 
Lot Size Lot Width 20 feet min./No max. Lot Area 2,000 square feet min./No max. Lot Coverage 80% max. Building Placement A Front Setback 1 Primary Street 10 feet min.; 15 feet max. Secondary Street 10 feet min. B Side Setback 0 feet2 C Rear Setback 10 feet min. D Building Frontage 65% min. on Primary Streets Building Size & Height Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 2.0 Maximum Height 3 Stories  
1 Side lot lines facing streets are regulated by the front setback requirements 
2 All light and air shafts shall be provided within the lot. See § 31-535(b). 
Figure 31-536(6)Downtown General 
Building Placement & Height 

b.  The building types defined in the downtown residential district (DR) (See subsection 31-536(c)) may be used alternatively to regulate lot size, building placement, size, and height for residential development. 
(2)  Use regulations. 
a.  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted by right in the DG district, except that on primary streets, parking (whether principle or accessory use) shall be separated from the street for at least 20 feet: 
1.  Residential 
2.  Professional office, except drive throughs are not permitted. 
3.  Retail establishments, except drive throughs are not permitted. 
4.  Daycare (See section 31-544.). 
5.  Nursing or convalescent homes and adult living facilities (ALF). 
6.  Churches and their educational buildings; storefront churches. 
7.  Civic open spaces (See section 31-538.). 
8.  Community gardens. 
(3)  Frontage standards. 
a.  The front setback and side setbacks facing streets shall be hardscaped. The hardscape design shall have the following characteristics: 
1.  Street trees shall be installed as set forth in subsection 31-537(c), consistent with the appropriate street design in section 29-65. 
2.  A pedestrian walkway shall be accommodated as set forth in subsection 31-537(b). 
3.  Any setback area not used to accommodate a pedestrian walkway, may be landscaped adjacent to the building using potted plants in removable planters or ground planting that does not obstruct views into storefront windows, and may also be used to accommodate merchandise displays or outdoor dining areas. 
b.  The main entrance(s) to ground story commercial space(s) shall be directly from and face a public right-of-way or civic open space. Doors allowing public access shall occur at intervals no greater than 75 feet. 
c.  Building entrances shall use at least one of the following frontage types detailed in subsection 31-537(a): 
1.  Stoop. 
2.  Forecourt. 
3.  Bracketed balcony. 
4.  Storefront. 
5.  Arcade/colonnade. 
d.  Buildings with more than 250 feet of street frontage shall provide a pedestrian accessway at least ten feet wide connecting the rear parking to the sidewalk area or establishing a cross-block connection. 
(4)  Architectural standards. 
a.  An expression line shall be provided at the top of the first story. 
b.  In the absence of a building façade, a streetwall is required along both primary and secondary streets. Streetwalls shall be three feet to three feet six inches in height, located in line with the building façade or the front setback. Streetwalls shall be composed of either an opaque wall using the same material and color as the building or of a continuous, maintained hedge. In addition, one shade tree per 20 lineal feet, uniformly spaced, shall be installed along the length the streetwall. 
c.  An opaque, masonry wall six feet in height shall be built on the property line along all side and rear lot lines that abut single-family houses existing as of the date of this ordinance (date) or lots in residential zoning district. In addition, one shade tree per 20 lineal feet, uniformly spaced, shall be installed along the length the wall. 
(5)  Other applicable Standards. See section 31-535 and sections 31-537 through 31-540 for general standards that also apply to the DG district. 
(c)  DR Downtown residential district. The DR downtown residential district promotes infill and redevelopment of existing downtown residential neighborhoods. New residential uses will enhance and respect the existing neighborhood fabric and accommodate diverse housing options including apartments and townhouses in a manner that is compatible with single-family houses. 
(1)  Building types. This district anticipates a mix of single and multi-family buildings. In order to ensure compatibility, new development shall be in form of one of the following building types: 
a.  House. A single-family detached building with front, side and rear yards. 
b.  Townhouse. A single-family attached building, attached on at least one side with a private rear yard. 
c.  Apartment house. A detached building resembling a large house, but containing multiple dwellings above and/or beside each other. 
d.  Courtyard building. A building designed to accommodate multiple dwellings above and beside each other, arranged around a central garden or patio that is partially or wholly open to the street. 
(2)  Lot size, building placement and height. 
a.  Table 31-536(d) provides the dimensional requirements for lot size, building placement, frontage, and height for each of the allowable building types in the DR district. 
Table 31-536(d) 
Downtown Residential District 
Dimensional Requirements for Lot Size & Building Placement 
Building 
Type Lot Size Building Placement (feet) Building Height in Stories (min/max) Lot Width 1 
(min/max 
in feet) Lot Area 1 (min/max 
in sf.) Lot Coverage (max) A B C D Front 
Setback 2 
(min/max) Side Setback (min) Rear 
Setback 
(min) Building Frontage Percentage (min/max) House 40/70 4,000/8,400 60% 12/25 5 20 40%-70% 1/3 Townhouse 20/36 1800/4000 70% 12/25 0 1,3 20 80%-100% 2/3 Apartment House 50/120 4,800/15,000 70% 12/25 5 20 70%-80% 2/3 Courtyard Building 4 120/320 12,500/No max. 70% 12/25 5 20 50%-90% 1/3  
1 These sizes reflect a fee-simple arrangement. In a condominium development, the lot sizes should be illustrated on the site plan, though not necessarily platted. 
2 Corner lots must meet front setbacks on both streets. Front setbacks on infill lots shall either match the front setback of one of the adjacent buildings or shall be located between the setbacks. 
3 See subsection 31-535(b). 
4 See subsection 31-536(c)(2)c. for dimensional criteria for the courtyard 
Figure 31-536(7) 
Figure 31-536(8) 

Figure 31-536(9) 
Figure 31-536(10) 

b.  Where the property to be developed abuts an existing building or buildings, the proposed building shall be located to match or provide a transition to the adjacent front setback. The community development director will administratively determine the appropriate front setback. 
c.  Courtyard buildings have the following additional criteria: 
1.  A courtyard, open to the sky, of at least 12 percent of the lot area shall be provided. 
2.  The longer dimension of the courtyard shall be at least 30 feet if oriented east-west and at least 40 feet if oriented north-south. 
3.  The main entrance to ground story dwellings shall be directly from the street or the common courtyard. 
4.  In courtyards at least 35 feet wide, open-air porches, stoops, and balconies may encroach from two sides. In courtyards less than 35 feet wide, encroachment is permitted from one side. 
5.  An open-air covered pedestrian passageway, at least ten feet wide, may connect the courtyard, through the building to the street. The passageway may be gated. 
d.  Townhouses have the following additional criteria: 
1.  Townhouses must have or install a rear alley to accommodate vehicular access and parking. 
2.  Townhouses shall occur in an array of at least three, side by side. 
3.  No more than eight contiguous townhouses shall occur without a pedestrian accessway of at least ten feet. 
(3)  Use regulations. 
a.  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the DR district: 
1.  Single-family dwellings. 
2.  Multiple family dwellings, provided the dwelling is provided in the form of a townhouse, apartment house, or courtyard building, as described in subsection 34-536(c)(1). 
3.  Home occupations. 
4.  Community gardens. 
5.  Civic open spaces (See section 31-538.). 
b.  Special exception. The following uses may be permitted by special exception in the DR downtown residential district: 
1.  Churches and their educational buildings. 
2.  Daycare (See section 31-544.). 
3.  Nursing or convalescent homes and adult living facilities (ALF), or group home. 
(4)  Frontage standards. 
a.  The front setback and side setbacks facing streets shall be landscaped and shall have the following characteristics: 
1.  Street trees shall be installed as set forth in subsection 31-537(c), consistent with the appropriate street design in section 29-65. 
2.  A pedestrian walkway shall be accommodated as set forth in subsection 31-537(b). 
3.  Any remaining setback area not used to accommodate a pedestrian walkway, shall be landscaped. 
b.  Building entrances shall use at least one of the following frontage types detailed in subsection 31-537(a): 
1.  Porch. 
2.  Stoop. 
3.  Bracketed balcony. 
(5)  Parking for residential building types. 
a.  House type. Parking shall be located to the side or rear of the house. Attached garages shall be recessed at least ten feet from the front façade of the house. 
b.  Townhouse type. 
1.  Townhouses must have or install a rear alley to accommodate vehicular access, garage access, and parking. 
2.  Garage doors shall not face the street. 
3.  Parking is not permitted in front setbacks or side setbacks facing streets. 
c.  See section 31-539 for additional parking standards. 
(6)  Other applicable standards. See section 31-535 and sections 31-537 through 31-540 for general standards that also apply to the DR district. 
(d)  DI downtown industrial district. The downtown industrial district is intended to accommodate industrial uses, while achieving a high standard of appearance along streets in the downtown. 
(1)  Lot size, building placement and height. Table 31-536(e) provides the dimensional requirements regarding lot size, building placement, frontage and height for the downtown industrial district. Figure 31-536(11) illustrates the dimensional requirements from the table. A liner building is required on primary streets to shield industrial uses from the street. 
Table 31-536(e) 
Downtown Industrial Dimensional Requirements 
Minimum Lot Width 200 feet Minimum Lot Size 35,000 square feet Maximum Lot Coverage 85% Liner Building Placement A Front Setback 1 10 feet min./15 feet max. B Side Setback 0 feet 2 C Rear Setback 20 feet min. D Building Frontage 65% min. on Primary Streets E Building Depth 30 feet min. Industrial Placement F Front Setback 20 feet min. G Side Setback 6 feet min. Abutting Residential 20 feet min. H Rear Setback 20 feet min. Building Size & Height Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 1.15 Liner Building 3 Stories max. Industrial 35 feet max.  
1 On Liner Buildings, side lot lines facing streets are regulated by the front setback requirements 
2 See subsection 31-535(b). 
Figure 31-536(11) 
Downtown Industrial 
Building Placement & Height 

(2)  Use regulations. 
a.  Uses permitted by right on primary streets. The following uses are permitted by right on primary streets in the DI district: 
1.  Retail establishments. 
2.  Professional office. 
3.  Residential uses are permitted only in the upper stories of liner buildings. 
4.  Retail, show rooms, and office functions of industrial and manufacturing uses. The industrial/ manufacturing aspect of the use shall be located in accordance with subsection 31-536(d)(2)b. 
5.  Adult training centers. 
6.  Civic open space (See section 31-538.) 
7.  Community gardens. 
b.  Uses permitted on secondary streets and permitted with limitations on primary streets. The following uses are permitted in the DI district on secondary streets. On primary streets, these uses are also permitted provided they are separated from the street for at least 20 feet with a use permitted on primary streets on the first story. 
1.  The uses permitted by right in the IL limited industrial district. 
2.  Auto services, including transmission and oil change establishments. 
3.  Beverage manufacturing and bottling works. 
4.  Laboratory industrial research. 
5.  Truck rental and leasing. 
6.  Warehouses and storage uses. 
(3)  Frontage standards. 
a.  The front setback and side setbacks facing streets shall be hardscaped. The hardscape design shall have the following characteristics: 
1.  Street trees shall be installed as set forth in subsection 31-537(c), consistent with the appropriate street design in section 29-65. 
2.  A pedestrian walkway shall be accommodated as set forth in subsection 31-537(b). 
3.  Any setback area not used for the pedestrian walkway may be landscaped adjacent to the building using potted plants in removable planters or ground planting that does not obstruct views into or out of front windows. 
b.  The main entrance(s) to ground story liner buildings shall be directly from and face a public right-of-way or civic open space. Doors allowing public access shall occur at intervals no greater than every 75 feet. 
c.  Building entrances shall use at least one of the following frontage types detailed in subsection 31-537(a): 
1.  Forecourt. 
2.  Bracketed balcony. 
3.  Storefront. 
4.  Arcade/colonnade. 
(4)  Architectural standards. 
a.  An expression line shall be provided at the top of the first story. 
b.  Overhead doors or other loading facilities shall not face primary streets and may not be counted toward fulfilling the minimum façade transparency requirements. 
c.  In the absence of a building façade, a streetwall or fence is required along both primary and secondary streets. Streetwalls and fences shall be no higher than six feet and shall be located in line with the building façade or the front setback. Streetwalls shall be composed of an opaque wall using the same material and color as the building. Fences shall have a continuous, maintained hedge installed on the street side. In addition, one shade tree per 20 lineal feet, uniformly spaced, shall be installed along the length of the streetwall or fence on the street side. 
d.  An opaque, masonry wall six feet in height shall be built on the property line along all side and rear lot lines that abut single-family houses existing as of December 18, 2013 or lots in residential zoning district. In addition, one tree shall be planted every 20 feet along the wall. 
(5)  Other applicable Standards. See section 31-535 andsections 31-537 through 31-540 for general standards that also apply to the DI district. 
(e)  DM downtown marine district. The DM downtown marine district promotes the use of marine industry, marine-related businesses and services, and boating activities within the downtown area, while recognizing the waterfront area is comprised of and surrounded by a diverse mix of uses. In order to ensure appropriate transitions between marine industry and other uses, including existing single-family houses, this district controls building form and the location of certain uses to establish a successful, vibrant downtown area, and to enhance access to the waterfront area. 
(1)  Lot size, building placement and height. 
a.  Table 31-536(f) provides the dimensional requirements regarding lot size, building placement, frontage, and height for the downtown marine district. Figure 31-536(12) illustrates the dimensional requirements from the table. A liner building is required on Primary Streets to shield certain marine uses from the street. 
Table 31-536(f) 
Downtown Marine Dimensional Requirements 
Maximum Lot Coverage 85% Liner Building Placement A Front Setback 1 Primary Street 10 feet min.; 15 feet max. B Side Setback 0 feet 2 C Rear Setback 20 feet min. D Building Frontage 65% min. on Primary Streets E Building Depth 30 feet min. Marine Industry Placement G Front Setback 20 feet min. H Side Setback 
Side Setback Abutting Residential 6 feet min. 
20 feet min. I Rear Setback 20 feet min. Building Size & Height Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 1.15 Liner Building Maximum Height Facing a Residential District 3 Stories max. Not facing a Residential District 5 Stories max. Marine Industry Maximum Height 50 feet max.  
1 On liner buildings, side lot lines facing streets are regulated by the front setback requirements 
2 See subsection 31-535(b). 
Figure 31-536(12) 
Downtown Marine 
Building Placement & Height 

b.  Appropriate transitions between existing residential uses and marine industry. 
1.  Along primary streets, parking and marine industry uses such as, but not limited to, refueling stations, boat storage buildings, exterior boat storage, and repairing, manufacturing, or servicing facilities shall be shielded from view of the street by a liner building. A liner building is allowed, but not required on secondary streets. 
2.  For parcels in the DM district facing the fronts of existing single-family houses or lots located within a residential zoning district, one or more of the following options shall be used to provide an appropriate transition: 
i.  In lieu of a liner building, one or more of the building types permitted in the DR downtown residential district, separated from the marine industry uses by a rear alley, shall line the street; 
ii.  A liner building in accordance with regulations in Table 31-536(f) shall be installed; however, the front setback shall match or provide a transition to the front setback of the surrounding houses. The community development director will administratively determine the appropriate front setback. 
iii.  In combination with either i. or ii. above, up to 60 percent of the property line facing a street may be a civic open space. 
Figure 31-536(13) 
Downtown Marine Residential Transitions 

(2)  Use regulations. 
a.  Uses permitted by right on primary streets. The following uses are permitted by right on primary streets in the DM district: 
1.  Retail establishments. 
2.  Residential and extended stay lodging uses are permitted only in the upper stories of liner buildings. 
3.  Professional office. 
4.  Retail, office, or commercial uses pertaining to marine industries, which do not involve manufacturing. 
5.  The show rooms and office uses for marine industries that involve manufacturing. The manufacturing aspect of the industry shall be located in accordance with subsection 31-536(e)(2)b. 
6.  Marinas. 
7.  Marine-related adult training centers. 
8.  Civic open space (See subsection 31-538(b)). 
9.  Community gardens. 
b.  Uses permitted on secondary streets and permitted with limitations on primary streets. The following uses are permitted in the DM district on secondary streets. On primary streets, these uses are also permitted provided they are separated from the street for at least 20 feet with a use permitted on primary streets on the first story. 
1.  Parking garages and lots (whether principle or accessory use); 
2.  Refueling stations for marine use only; 
3.  Repairing, manufacturing, and servicing facilities for marine equipment; 
4.  Boat storage buildings and exterior boat storage; 
5.  Marine ways and lifts; 
7.  Facilities for research, manufacturing, and assembly of equipment used in oceanography, marine biology, and related fields; 
8.  Customary accessory uses to all of the above. 
c.  Additional Uses permitted by right near the Port of Palm Beach. Storage and manufacturing of construction materials and related equipment, which rely upon marine transport as a component of the operations, are added to the permitted uses under §31-536(e)(2)(b) above, for properties located in the following area: 
1.  East of Broadway; and 
2.  Directly adjacent to the Port of Palm Beach or on the north side of 11th Street, across from the Port of Palm Beach. Lots with frontage on 12th Street are not eligible for the additional uses. 
(3)  Frontage standards. 
a.  The front setback and side setbacks facing streets shall be hardscaped. The hardscape design shall have the following characteristics: 
1.  Street trees shall be installed as set forth in subsection 31-537(c), consistent with the appropriate street design in section 29-65. 
2.  A pedestrian walkway shall be accommodated as set forth in subsection 31-537(b). 
3.  Any remaining setback area not used for the pedestrian walkway, may be landscaped adjacent to the building using potted plants in removable planters or ground planting that does not obstruct views into or out of front windows. 
b.  The main entrance(s) to ground story Liner Buildings shall be directly from and face a public right-of-way or civic open space. Doors allowing public access shall occur at intervals no greater than every 75 feet. 
c.  Building entrances shall use at least one of the following frontage types detailed in subsection 31-537(a): 
1.  Forecourt. 
2.  Bracketed balcony. 
3.  Storefront. 
4.  Arcade/colonnade. 
(4)  Architectural standards. 
a.  Overhead doors or other loading facilities shall not face primary streets and may not be counted toward fulfilling the minimum façade transparency requirements. 
b.  In the absence of a building façade, a streetwall or fence is required along both primary and secondary streets. Streetwalls and fences shall be no higher than six feet and shall be located in line with the building façade or the front setback. Streetwalls shall be composed of an opaque wall using the same material and color as the building. Fences shall have a continuous, maintained hedge installed on the street side. In addition, one shade tree per 20 lineal feet, uniformly spaced, shall be installed along the length of the streetwall or fence on the street side. 
c.  An opaque, masonry wall six feet in height shall be built on the property line along all side and rear lot lines that abut single-family houses existing as of December 18, 2013 or lots in residential zoning district. In addition, one tree shall be planted every 20 feet along the wall. 
(5)  Other applicable standards. See section 31-535 and sections 31-537 through 31-540 for general standards that also apply to the DM district. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13) 
Sec. 31-537. - Frontage standards. 
    The downtown zoning districts establish a predictable spatial framework to create a pedestrian-friendly environment supportive of infill redevelopment and multi-modal transportation options. Frontage standards ensure a superior pedestrian environment develops overtime that improves the overall visual appearance and use of downtown streets. These standards define architecture and design components for the entrance(s) to buildings and the area between building facades and streets. 
(a)  Frontage types. The entrance(s) of every building shall be directly accessible from and face a public right-of-way or civic open space. Frontage Types define architectural characteristics for the detailing of these building entrances. Six distinct frontage types have been identified, which are appropriate for different types of buildings and uses. Table 31-537(a) identifies the frontage types appropriate for each zoning district by an "X" . Using one or more of frontage types identified is required. 
Table 31-537(a) 
Frontage Types per Zoning District 
Zoning District Frontage Types Porch Stoop Bracketed 
Balcony Forecourt Storefront Arcade/ 
Colonnade Downtown Core X X X X X Downtown General X X X X X Downtown Residential  House X X  Apartment House X X  Courtyard Building X X X  Townhouse X X Downtown Industrial X X X X Downtown Marine X X X X  
  
(1)  Porch. A porch is an open-air structure attached to a building forming a covered entrance large enough for comfortable use as an outdoor room. Porches are generally appropriate for single-family attached or detached houses. The main building façade is typically setback from the property line, creating a private front yard. Table 31-537(b) provides the dimensional requirements and the maximum allowable encroachment permitted by the zoning district. Figure 31-537(1) illustrates the dimensional requirements from Table 31-537(b). 
Table 31-537(b) 
Dimensional Requirements for Porches 
>Minimum Maximum A Building Setback varies by zoning district B Depth 8 feet 12 feet >C Width 40% Facade 100% Facade D Floor Elevation 1.5 feet 3 feet Maximum Allowable Encroachment per District Downtown Residential 50% of Setback  
Figure 31-537(1) 
Figure 31-537(2) 
Porch Frontage Type 
Porch Character Example 

(2)  Stoop. A stoop is a small staircase leading to the entrance of a building that may be covered. The elevation of the stoop is necessary to ensure privacy for residential uses in the ground story of buildings. Stoops should provide sufficient space for a person to comfortably pause before entering or after exiting the building. Stoops are frontage types typically associated with townhouses and other residential building types. Table 31-537(c) provides the dimensional requirements and the maximum allowable encroachment permitted by the zoning district. Figure 31-537(3) illustrates the dimensional requirements from Table 31-537(c). 
Table 31-537(c) 
Dimensional Requirements for Stoops 
Minimum Maximum A Building Setback varies by zoning district B Depth 5 feet 8 feet C Width 4 feet No Max. D Floor Elevation 1.5 feet 4 feet Maximum Allowable Encroachment per District Downtown Residential 5 feet Downtown General 5 feet Downtown Core 5 feet  
  
Figure 31-537(3) 
Figure 31-537(4) 
Stoop Frontage Type 
Stoop Character Example 

(3)  Bracketed balcony. A bracketed balcony is second-story platform projecting from the building wall, enclosed by a railing or balustrade, supported by brackets. The bracketed balcony is located over the main building entry, which provides cover for a person entering or exiting the building, emphasizes the entryway, and creates a semi-public space overlooking the street. Bracketed balconies are typically associated with buildings with commercial uses in the ground story; however, bracketed balconies can be used on residential building types when combined with a stoop. 
a.  Table 31-537(d) provides the dimensional requirements and the maximum allowable encroachment permitted by the zoning district. Figure 31-537(5) illustrates the dimensional requirements from Table 31-537(d). 
Table 31-537(d) 
Dimensional Requirements for Bracketed Balcony 
Minimum Maximum A Building Setback varies by zoning district B Depth - 5 feet C Width 4 feet No Max. D Floor Elevation 0 - Maximum Allowable Encroachment per District Downtown General 3 feet Downtown Core 3 feet Downtown Industrial 3 feet Downtown Marine 3 feet  
  
Figure 31-537(5) 
Figure 31-537(6) 
Bracketed Balcony Frontage Type 
Bracketed Balcony Character Example 

b.  Bracketed balcony elements. 
1.  Brackets shall be made of wood, pre-cast concrete or steel. 
2.  Brackets shall be designed to reflect their intended structural role and to define the entryway. 
(4)  Forecourt. A forecourt is an open area in front of the main building entrance(s) designed as a small garden or hardscaped plaza. The forecourt may afford access to one or more first floor units and may incorporate storefronts for retail uses. The forecourt is suitable for outdoor seating for residents or restaurants. Forecourts are typically associated with multifamily, mixed-use, and commercial building types. 
a.  Table 31-537(e) provides the dimensional requirements and the maximum allowable encroachment permitted by the zoning district. Figure 31-537(7) illustrates the dimensional requirements from Table 31-537(e). 
Table 31-537(e) 
Dimensional Requirements for Forecourt 
Minimum Maximum A Building Setback varies by zoning district B Depth 10 feet 20 feet C Width 20 feet 50% of facade D Floor Elevation 0 3 feet Maximum Allowable Encroachment per District Not Applicable  
  
Figure 31-537(7) 
Figure 31-537(8) 
Forecourt Frontage Type 
Forecourt Character Example 

b.  Forecourt Elements 
1.  Low walls or balustrades may extend into the front setback and shall be at least two feet six inches tall and shall not exceed three feet six inches in height. 
2.  Low walls shall be constructed of similar material as the principal building, or be composed of a continuous, maintained hedge. 
3.  Forecourts may be combined with the storefront frontage type. 
4.  Awnings, if proposed, shall project at least four feet and no more than two feet from the edge of curb. 
5.  Awnings shall be consistent with the architecture of the building. Internally illuminated or vinyl awnings are prohibited. 
(5)  Storefront. The storefront is a frontage type placed along the property line, and is typically associated with retail and mixed-use buildings. The storefront must be designed in a way that promotes an attractive, convenient shopping experience. Storefronts are typically at sidewalk grade and are usually shaded by awnings or arcades. 
a.  Storefront Dimensions. Table 31-537(f) provides the dimensional requirements and the maximum allowable encroachment permitted by the zoning district. Figure 31-537(9) illustrates the dimensional requirements from Table 31-537(f). 
1.  Storefronts shall extend across at least 70% of the commercial/retail space. 
2.  Storefronts shall be directly accessible from sidewalks; storefront doors may be recessed up to 10 feet. 
Table 31-537(f) 
Dimensional Requirements for Storefronts 
Minimum Maximum A Building Setback varies by zoning district B Storefront Width 70% 100% C Storefront Base 1.5 feet 3 feet D Glazing Height 8 feet No Max. E Glazing Area 70% 100% Maximum Allowable Encroachment of Elements in All Districts F Awning Projection 4 feet 2 feet from curb G Pedestrian Blade Sign Projection N/A 4 feet  
  
Figure 31-537(9) 
Figure 31-537(10) 
Storefront Frontage Type 
Storefront Character Example 

3.  Storefronts shall have transparent glazing of at least 70% of the facade area, comprised of storefront windows and doors. Storefront windows shall have a base one foot six inches to three feet high with transparent glazed areas extending from the base to at least eight feet in height as measured from sidewalk grade. Transparent glazing transmits at least 50% of visible daylight. 
b.  Storefront elements. 
1.  Awnings shall project a minimum of four feet from the building facade and no more than to within two feet from the face of curb. 
2.  Awnings shall be sympathetic to the buildings' architecture and designed as an integral component of the overall signage package. All awnings shall be sloped 30 degrees from the horizontal plane and have both ends open. All awnings on street level shall have an eight inch vertical valance with concealed weight to prevent excessive movement in high winds. Internally illuminated or vinyl awnings are prohibited. 
3.  Each ground story business may have one wall sign per street front. The wall sign shall be no greater than three feet in height by 60 percent of the width of the tenant space along the street front. The wall sign shall be located over the first story, below the second story. A name or logo printed on the awnings shall be considered as square footage against the overall dimensions of the sign band. 
4.  Each ground story business may have one pedestrian blade sign per street front. Pedestrian blade signs may extend up to four feet from the building façade and shall not exceed three feet in vertical dimension, including all mounting brackets and hardware. Pedestrian Blade Signs shall be set back at least two feet from the end of the building or storefront. Pedestrian blade signs may not be internally illuminated. 
5.  Window signs advertising special sales, events or services, store hours, and store name may be affixed to the inside of a window provided that their total area does not exceed 20 percent of the window area. 
6.  Storefronts may be combined with forecourts or arcade/colonnades. 
Figure 31-537(11) 
Storefront Composition and Signage Examples 

(6)  Arcade/colonnade. An arcade/colonnade is a covered, unglazed, linear hallway attached to the front of a building, supported by columns or pillars. The arcade/colonnade extends into the public right-of-way, over the sidewalk, creating a shaded environment ideal for pedestrians and conducive to retail. In arcades, upper stories of the building extend over the passageway. This frontage type is typically associated with retail and mixed-use buildings. 
a.  Arcade/colonnade dimensions. Table 31-537(g) provides the dimensional requirements and the maximum allowable encroachment permitted by the zoning district. Figure 31-537(12) illustrates the dimensional requirements from Table 31-537(g). 
1.  Arcades/ colonnades shall extend over the sidewalk. A sidewalk should not run parallel to an arcade or colonnade, which allows pedestrians to bypass retail or commercial windows. Use of the arcade/colonnade requires entering into a right-of-way agreement between the property owner and the City. This agreement shall establish liability and insurance responsibilities in a form acceptable to the City attorney. 
Table 31-537(g) 
Dimensional Requirements for Arcade/Colonnades 
Minimum Maximum A Building Setback varies by zoning district B Arcade/Colonnade Depth 10 feet 20 feet C Arcade/Colonnade Height 12 feet N/A D Column/Pillar to Face of Curb 2 feet 4 feet Maximum Allowable Encroachment of Elements in All Districts E Arcade/Colonnade varies by street F Pedestrian Blade Sign Projection N/A 4 feet  
  
Figure 31-537(12) 
Figure 31-537(13) 
Arcade/Colonnade 
Arcade/Colonnade Character Example 

2.  Arcades/colonnades shall have a clear depth between the interior face of the columns and the building facade of at least ten feet and no more than 20 feet. If the distance between the property line and the face of curb is not sufficient to accommodate the minimum depth required for an arcade/colonnade, the building shall set back accordingly. If the distance between the property line and the face of curb is wide enough that using the minimum building setback results in an arcade with a clear depth greater than 12 feet, the minimum front setback may be administratively reduced by the community development director, taking into consideration the ultimate location of the face of curb based on the street design standards for the community redevelopment area set forth in section 29-65. 
3.  Arcades/ colonnades shall have a clear height above the sidewalk of at least 12 feet. 
4.  Support columns or pillars shall be placed no farther apart than they are tall, and shall be placed two to four feet from the face of the curb. 
5.  Open-air terraces and habitable stories may extend over the arcade, up to the fourth story. 
6.  Arcade/ colonnade ceilings shall be designed with coffers or exposed beams extruding at least six inches, aligned with columns or pillars. 
b.  Arcade/Colonnade Elements. 
1.  Arcade/colonnades shall be combined with storefronts. 
2.  The height and proportions of the arcade/ colonnade shall be consistent with the style and proportions of the building to which it is attached. 
3.  Each ground story business may have one wall sign not exceeding three feet in height by 60 percent of the storefront width on the first story facade of the arcade/colonnade. 
4.  Each ground story business may have one wall sign under the covered area, not exceeding two feet in height by 60 percent of the storefront width. 
5.  Each ground story business may have one pedestrian blade sign under the covered area. Pedestrian blade signs may extend up to four feet from the building façade and shall not exceed three feet in vertical dimension, including all mounting brackets and hardware. Pedestrian Blade Signs shall be set back at least two feet from the end of the building or storefront. Pedestrian blade signs may not be internally illuminated. 
6.  Potted landscaping or ground planting shall be provided between the face of the columns or pillars and the face of curb. 
Figure 31-537(14) 
Example of Arcade/Colonnade Signage Examples 

(b)  Pedestrian walkway. In order to ensure a superior pedestrian realm develops overtime, a pedestrian walkway may be required on-site to augment public sidewalk widths, especially along narrow rights-of-way. A pedestrian walkway is an area that forms a continuous route for pedestrians, which is unobstructed by trees, landscaping, street lights or utility poles. Pedestrian walkways may be composed of public sidewalks, hardscape on private property, or a combination of the two. 
Figure 31-537(15) 
Clear Width of Pedestrian Walkway 

Table 31-537(g) 
Dimensional Requirements for Pedestrian Walkways per Zoning District 
Downtown Core 10 feet Downtown General 8 feet Downtown Residential 5 feet Downtown Marine 6 feet Downtown Industrial 6 feet  
(1)  Width of pedestrian walkway. The minimum width of pedestrian walkways shall be provided as depicted in Table 31-537(g). The proposed pedestrian walkway shall be demonstrated on site plans. In order to accommodate the required width of the pedestrian walkway, increasing the front setback beyond the minimum amount allowed by the zoning district may be necessary and buildings shall set back further than the maximum allowed per zoning district, if necessary. In the event the maximum front setback does not provide adequate space, the pedestrian walkway may be accommodated within the arcade/colonnade frontage type to meet the intent of the code. 
(2)  Where an existing public sidewalk adjoins the property line, the paved area of the public sidewalk and the pedestrian walkway shall connect, thereby expanding the perceived width of the public sidewalk. An existing, adjoining public sidewalk may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum clear width of a pedestrian walkway. 
(3)  All paving materials for the pedestrian walkway shall be compliant with ADA accessibility standards, and shall be constructed of concrete consistent with the adjacent sidewalk and acceptable to the Community Development and Engineering Departments. 
(4)  Where a sidewalk or a pedestrian walkway crosses vehicular ingress/egress points, the pedestrian crossing shall be paved with material consistent with the paving material of the sidewalk or walkway, and shall be different from the vehicular surface. 
(c)  Street trees. Street trees are intended to provide a shaded environment for the pedestrian, provide a physical separation between pedestrians and vehicles, and improve the overall visual appearance of the street. 
(1)  All new construction, relocation of a building, or addition equal to or greater than 20 percent of the gross floor area of an existing building shall install street trees at the time of development. Street trees shall be a canopy species, planted in the public right-of-way directly in front of the property line(s), uniformly spaced no greater than 25 feet on center. Spacing of trees may only exceed 25 feet in order to accommodate curb cuts, fire hydrants, utilities, existing trees, and other infrastructure elements. Palm varieties may be used at corners, crosswalks, or to accent building entrances and may be permitted in lieu of shade trees when physical conditions may prevent the proper growth of shade trees, as determined by the community development director. Consistency in street tree species shall be established on both sides of the street along a block face. The first to develop shall establish the species. 
(2)  Street trees shall be planted in planting strips, landscaped planters or tree grates consistent with the street design standards contained in section 29-65. Street trees shall be located along the curb side, in order to separate pedestrians from vehicular lanes. 
(3)  All trees shall satisfy the following standards at the time of planting: 
(i)  Canopy species: Minimum 14 feet in height with a clear trunk space of six feet and a spread of no less than eight feet. 
(ii)  Palm trees: Minimum 18 feet in height, with a clear trunk space of eight feet. 
(4)  In the event that site constraints such as utility easements prevent the installation of required street trees, removable planters of small palms and small shrubs, vines or seasonal flowers shall be installed. In addition, the building shall provide devices such as awnings or roof overhangs to establish a shaded pedestrian environment. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13) 
_____
Sec. 31-538. - Civic open spaces. 
(a)  Civic open spaces. Civic open spaces are maintained outdoor spaces which are accessible by the general public, improve the pedestrian environment, are aesthetically pleasing, and serve as an amenity for the city as a whole as well as for occupants of the building which the open space serves. Civic open spaces are generally constructed by landowners when they build on adjoining property. 
(1)  Amount. On sites one acre or more in size, new buildings or additions of gross floor area equal to 20 percent or more to existing buildings, shall provide at least five percent of the size of the site as a civic open space. Dedicated rights-of-way and building setbacks may not count toward fulfilling the required amount. 
(2)  Location. Civic open space may be provided either on site or off site, provided the civic open space is located within 660 feet of the building site, within the same zoning district, and within the CRA boundary. 
(3)  Types of civic open spaces. Civic open space shall be designed as one of the following types: 
a.  Green. A green is at least 2,000 square feet in size and adjoins streets on at least two sides. Greens are designed primarily for passive uses, consisting primarily of lawn with either formally or informally arranged landscaping. 
b.  Plaza. A plaza is at least 2,000 square feet in size and adjoins a street on at least two sides. Plazas are mostly hardscaped with formal landscaping and a water feature. 
c.  Playground. A playground shall be at least 2,500 square feet in size. Playgrounds shall provide children's play equipment and shaded seating. Playgrounds adjoin a street on at least one side and the proposed configuration should ensure easy surveillance of the area from the adjacent buildings and streets 
d.  Square. A square is at least 10,000 square feet and adjoins streets on at least three sides. Squares may be up to 50 percent hardscaped, with formal landscaping. Squares accommodate both passive uses and community gatherings. 
e.  Attached Green. The attached green is generally 3,000 to 6,000 square feet and spans the entire length of a block. Attached greens shall be at least 30 feet wide and are appropriate on the short end of a block. Attached greens are formally landscaped, with trees arranged in an allee or staggered allee configuration. 
Figure 31-538(1) 
Civic Open Spaces 

(4)  Configuration. Civic open spaces shall be configured as follows: 
a.  The civic open space shall adjoin a street front property line for no less than 30 linear feet. 
b.  Except for attached greens, civic spaces shall have a proportion so that the depth is no more than 2.5 times the frontage width, and the width is no more than five times the depth; 
c.  Civic open spaces shall be lined by building facades or streets on all sides. In order to provide oversight of the space, buildings facing civic open spaces shall contain habitable uses; parking lots, parking garages, and storage areas are not considered habitable uses. 
(5)  Additional standards. Civic open spaces shall meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  Civic open spaces must be accessible to the public during all daylight hours; 
b.  Civic open spaces must be situated to allow easy ingress and egress by pedestrians. Except for playgrounds, which may be fenced, no streetwalls, gates, fences or other impediments to pedestrian accessibility shall be permitted along the frontage line; 
c.  Civic open spaces must be located at the sidewalk level; 
d.  Civic open spaces must be open to the sky; however, open-air garden structures such as gazebos or band shells are permitted within civic open spaces; 
e.  Landscaping shall be arranged in a manner reflective of description of the type of civic open space. One shade tree per 20 feet of perimeter of the space is required. Trees may be arranged in regular spacing or in informal clusters, depending on the type of open space. Trees shall be installed to provide shade along walkways and for benches. Substituting shade trees for multiple palm species is not permitted; however, adding palms to the landscape design is permitted. 
f.  Each civic open space shall provide the following street furniture elements, specifications subject to approval by the City of Riviera Beach: 
1.  One bench per 350 square feet of area; 
2.  One drinking fountain; 
3.  One bicycle rack with no less than four spaces; 
4.  One trash receptacle; 
5.  One pet clean up station. 
g.  Fences are permitted only to enclose playgrounds. Fences may be composed of wood or metal pickets and shall not exceed four feet in height. 
h.  Vehicular traffic shall not be permitted within a civic open space. 
i.  Civic open spaces shall be designed to enhance user safety and security using Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CEPTED) principles by 
1.  Being well lighted; 
2.  Having one or more focal points within the open space visible from all perimeter streets; 
3.  Having a clear landscape zone between three feet and eight feet in height providing sightlines unobstructed by berms or bushes. 
(6)  Availability. Civic open space shall be developed and open for use prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building(s) for which the open space is required. 
(7)  Public benefit height option. In order to encourage projects to provide civic open space in the downtown, increased building height is offered in the downtown core district. 
a.  Civic spaces provided in order to receive the public benefit height option shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  Comply with subsections 31-538(b)(2) through (6). 
2.  In order to use the public benefit height option, civic open spaces must be at least 2,000 square feet in size. Dedicated rights-of-way, minimum building setbacks, and civic open space provided to meet the requirement in subsection 31-538(b)(1) may not count toward fulfilling this amount. 
b.  The quantity of the additional building square footage permitted within the extra stories of height is directly related to the size, location, and accessibility by the general public of the proposed civic open space. Waterfront locations are considered the most desirable sites and therefore receive the highest factor. 
Table Figure 31-538(a) 
Public Benefit Factor 
Civic Open Space Configuration Public Benefit Factor Adjoining one public right-of-way Not permitted Adjoining two or more public rights-of-way 2.0 Waterfront location* 3.0 * Waterfront locations shall have at least one side adjoining the Intercoastal waterway and at least three sides bounded by public rights-of-way, one of which shall be along the water's edge.  
c.  Computing the benefit. The following formula computes the amount of building square footage allowed above the fourth story: 
1.  Multiply the square footage of the proposed civic open space by the maximum number of stories allowed in the district without using the public benefit height. 
2.  Multiply the result by the public benefit factor from Table Figure 31-538(a) that best describes the configuration of the proposed civic open space. 
3.  The result is the total additional building square footage that can be placed within in the extra stories allowed by the district as the maximum Public Benefit Height (subject to floorplate limitations in the massing regulations). 
For example, within the downtown core district, a project that proposes a civic open space of 2,000 square feet in size adjoining two streets and not located on the waterfront would compute the benefit as follows: 
(2000 sf. × 4 stories × 2) = 16,000 square feet. 
Therefore, 16,000 square feet could be arranged within the fifth through eighth stories (subject to floorplate limitations). 
4.  The additional building square footage garnered by using the Public benefit height option is not included in the calculation of or limitation of maximum floor area ratio. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13) 
Sec. 31-539. - Downtown parking and access. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. This subsection provides modified parking regulations for off-street parking within the downtown zoning districts. These regulations recognize that the downtown is a compact, interconnected area with multimodal transportation options, and that improper placement of parking and mandatory duplication of the downtown parking supply on each building site separates the various land uses from each other. This separation reduces the viability of the mixed-use districts and harms the walkability of the streets in the downtown area. These regulations reflect the needs of the urban, mixed use downtown. 
(b)  Minimum number of off-street parking spaces. The minimum number of parking spaces required in section 31-577, Off-street parking ratios, are modified by this section for use in the downtown zoning districts; the following regulations shall apply to determine the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required: 
Table 31-539(a) 
Downtown Zoning District Parking Ratios 
Land Use Number of Spaces Single Family House 
Single Family Townhouse 2 spaces/unit 
2 spaces/unit Residential Multi Family 2 spaces/unit Hotels, Motels 1 space/first 40 guest rooms 
1 additional space/every 2 guest rooms or suites, thereafter Hospitals 1/300 sf Medical and Dental Clinics 1/300 sf Places of Assembly 1/300 sf Auditoriums, Stadiums, Arenas, Recreational Facilities, etc. For stadiums, arenas, auditoriums etc: 
1 space/ 7 bleacher seats, when provided, or 20 spaces/athletic field, whichever is greater. For outdoor attractions and other recreation areas: 1 space/300 sf of total floor area of covered space plus 3 spaces for each acre of outdoor attraction area. For motorcycles: 14 spaces/acre. Restaurants 1/300 sf Retail Establishments 1/300 sf Office Buildings 1/300 sf Wholesale/warehousing 1 space/1,000 sf or 1 space/2 separate mini-warehousing units Industrial uses 1 space/500 sf Marina facilities Wet slips: 1 space/2 wet slips for private vessels 
Dry storage: 1 space/4 dry storage spaces 
Sight seeing; charter; commercial: 
a) 3 spaces/ passenger-carrying vessel carrying up to six passengers for hire; 
b) 1 space/ two passenger-carrying vessels carrying more than six passengers for hire, as ascertained by U.S. Coast Guard Certificate of Inspection. Daycare 1/employee (min. 3) plus adequate provision for drop-off children  
(1)  Within the downtown core and downtown general districts, lots 100 feet in width or less are not required to provide off-street parking. 
(2)  On-street parking located directly in front of the property line(s) may be counted toward fulfilling the total parking requirement in all downtown zoning districts. 
(3)  Director of community development may administratively waive the minimum number of parking spaces if criteria such as market demand, parking availability, or unique circumstances of the project within the area justify a reduction. 
(c)  Location and access. Parking and service areas shall be accessed and located at the rear or side of the building(s). 
(1)  Parking is not permitted in front setbacks or in side setbacks facing streets, parks or civic open spaces. Parking lots may be located on the side of buildings provided the minimum building frontage requirement by the zoning district is met and the parking lots are screened from view of the street by a streetwall (See subsection 31-539(e).). 
(2)  On primary streets, parking garages shall be lined by a use permitted by right for primary streets by the zoning district for at least 20 feet of depth on all stories. On secondary streets, parking garages not lined by such a use shall be screened by a façade design consistent with the main building design and/or shall employ landscaping planters with irrigation as an integral part of the façade design. 
(3)  Alleys, when present, shall be the primary source of vehicular access to off-street parking. Alleys shall be a minimum width of 20 feet, and may be incorporated into parking lots and garages as standard drive aisles. Access to all properties adjacent to the alley shall be maintained. 
(4)  When alleys are not present, primary vehicular access to off-street parking shall be from secondary streets. Access drives shall not exceed 24 feet in width. 
(5)  When neither alleys nor secondary streets are present, primary vehicular access may be from a primary street. Access drives from primary streets shall not exceed 24 feet in width. In the instance that site constraints necessitate access from a primary street, and the provision of an access drive precludes meeting the minimum building frontage percentage required by the zoning district, the community development director may administratively allow a reduction from the minimum building frontage in order to allow vehicular access to the site. 
Figure 31-539(1) 
Vehicular Access 

(6)  Within the downtown core and downtown general districts, when an alley is not present, vehicular access between adjacent parcels across property lines is required, and shall be accommodated within the site layout. The first property owner to develop shall be required to make an irrevocable offer of cross-access to the adjacent parcels prior to issuance of a development order. When adjacent property develops, a reciprocal cross-access agreement is required, and the physical connection shall be completed. 
(7)  Parking lots and structures shall provide pedestrian access directly from a street. In addition, pedestrian access may also be provided directly from a building. 
(8)  Buildings with more than 250 feet of street frontage on a block face shall provide a pedestrian accessway at least ten feet wide connecting the rear parking to the sidewalk area. 
(9)  Public sidewalks may not be interrupted or deviated to accommodate drop-off or valet parking. 
(10)  Within the CRA, offsite parking arrangements may be provided in lieu of on-site parking, as long as sufficient documentation of the location and the number of spaces is provided to the review authority. 
(d)  Parking dimensions. The following minimum dimensions for parking bays and access aisle widths apply in lieu of the specific requirements in the design standards in section 31-576: 
Table 31-539(b) 
Downtown Zoning District Parking Dimensions 
Angle of Parking (degrees) Aisle Width 
(feet) Parking Bay 
(feet) Two Way One Way Width Length  90° 24 22 9 18  75° 22 18 9 18  60° 20 16 9 18  45° 20 14 9 18  30° 20 14 9 18  0° (parallel) 18 14 9 20  
(e)  Parking lot landscaping requirements. 
(1)  Streetwalls are required on both primary and secondary streets. Streetwalls shall be located in line with the building façade or in accordance with the front setback requirements. Streetwalls shall be three feet to three feet six inches in height, composed of either an opaque wall of the same material and color as the building or of a continuous, maintained hedge. One shade tree per 20 lineal feet, uniformly spaced, shall be installed along the length the streetwall within a planting area at least five feet wide. Streetwalls may have openings to accommodate automobile and pedestrian access. 
(2)  Along side and rear lot lines, a landscape strip five feet in width shall be installed with trees planted at least 50 feet on center. When an alley is not present, openings shall be made to accommodate current or future vehicular connections between adjacent properties. Lots which interconnect their parking to adjacent lots may be administratively relieved of side/rear landscape strips in order to maximize the parking supply between the properties. 
(3)  Parking lots shall provide either landscape islands or landscape trips as set forth below: 
a.  One landscape island at least six feet in width, extending the entire depth of the parking bay and containing at least one shade tree shall be provided for every ten parking stalls; or 
b.  A landscape strip at least six feet in width containing at least one shade tree for every 50 linear feet shall be provided between parking rows. 
Figure 31-539(2) 
Parking Lot Landscaping 

(f)  Bicycle parking requirements. 
(1)  The minimum number of bicycle parking spaces required is set forth in Table 31-539(b). 
Table 31-539(b) 
Downtown Zoning District Bicycle Parking Ratios 
Land Use Number of Spaces Residential Multi Family 1 space/3 units Office 1 space/ 7,500 sf., and 
1 visitor space/ every 20,000 sf Retail For the first 50,000 sf: 
1 employee space/ 7,500 sf 
1 visitor spaces/ 10,000 sf 
  
Thereafter: 
1 additional employee space/25,000 sf 
1 additional visitor space/12,500 sf  
(2)  Employee and resident bicycle parking facilities shall be highly visible to the intended users and protected from rain within a structure shown on the site plan. The facilities shall not encroach on any area in the public right-of-way intended for use by pedestrians. The facilities for employee, resident, and visitor bicycle parking must be highly visible from a building entrance, a full-time parking attendant, a full-time security guard or a visitor/customer entrance to ensure good natural surveillance. The Planning Director shall review the location, design, and details of the bicycle spaces as part of the site plan review. Residential condominium covenants shall not prohibit the storage of bicycles inside individual condominium units. 
(3)  Offices greater than 50,000 square feet shall provide one shower per gender, up to a maximum of three showers per gender. Also, a minimum of one clothes storage locker per gender shall be installed for every required employee bicycle parking space. The lockers shall be installed adjacent to showers in a safe and secured area. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13) 
Sec. 31-540. - Redevelopment design areas. 
    Conceptual redevelopment plans have been designed for certain areas which are likely to redevelop due to ownership consolidation, parcel size, or use. The boundary of each area with a redevelopment design is indicated on the regulating plan as "Pre-Approved Redevelopment Design Area." The purpose of redevelopment design areas is to guide the transformation of these parcels into a traditional neighborhood pattern, consistent with the conceptual plans contained in the Comprehensive Plan and with the vision of the Community Redevelopment Area Plan. 
(a)  General concepts. 
(1)  Zoning districts. The regulating plan designates appropriate downtown zoning districts within each redevelopment design area (RDA). In order to properly transition between scale and uses, more than one zoning district may be applied within a RDA. In this event, the site plan shall be consistent with the requirements of the designated district in that area of the parcel. 
(2)  Future streets and alleys. The regulating plan designates the location of future streets and alleys within each RDA. 
a.  Within a RDA, the locations of future streets and alleys reflect a site specific solution and provide the framework to establish a site plan with the following characteristics: 
1.  Consistent with the scale and uses permitted by the zoning district; 
2.  Responds to the geometry of the specific parcels within the RDA; 
3.  Establishes important links to expand the existing street network; 
4.  Ensures parking is located in the rear of buildings. 
b.  Minor adjustments in the alignment and location of future streets and alleys may be administratively approved. Major changes such as eliminating a street or alley, or shifting a street so that connections to existing streets are not completed require City Commission approval. 
c.  The site plan design shall utilize one or more of the street and alley cross-sections in the street design standards for the community redevelopment area contained in section 29-65. 
(3)  Implementation. Redevelopment plans may be wholly or partially implemented. Individual properties can proceed with site plan review and development without the participation of other parcels and owners within the RDA. If the adjacent parcel has an approved site plan, the applicant shall complete links to any street or alley connections identified in the approved plan, and shall ensure buildings are compatibly oriented. 
(b)  Specific redevelopment design areas. The City of Riviera Bach Beach Comprehensive Plan contains conceptual redevelopment plans for two areas designated on the regulating plan: 
(1)  Western RDA. The city's preferred redevelopment plan for the RDA located on the west side of Broadway, north of Chateau Circle, has the following characteristics: 
a.  Avenue E is reconnected through the properties; 
b.  A system of new streets, alleys, and pedestrian paths connect the adjacent parcels to each other and to Broadway Avenue; 
c.  Mixed-use buildings are located along Broadway Avenue; 
d.  Townhouses and low-rise multi-family buildings provide a transition between the single-family houses located to the west and the mixed-use buildings facing Broadway Avenue; 
e.  The fronts of buildings face the fronts of buildings, the backs of buildings face the backs of buildings; 
f.  Civic open spaces are provided in the form of public parks, plazas, or greens, lined by streets and the fronts of buildings; and 
g.  Off-street parking is accommodated in the rear of buildings. 
(2)  Eastern RDA. The city's preferred redevelopment plan for the the RDA located on the east side of Broadway, north of 30th Street has the following characteristics: 
a.  A system of new streets and alleys connect the parcels to each other, and between Broadway Avenue and Avenue A; 
b.  Mixed-use buildings are located along Broadway Avenue; 
c.  Multi-family buildings such as low-rise apartments and townhouses provide a transition between residential uses along Avenue A and the more intense uses along Broadway Avenue. 
d.  The fronts of buildings face the fronts of buildings, the backs of buildings face the backs of buildings; and 
e.  Off-street parking is accommodated in the rear of buildings. 
(3)  Approval process. 
a.  Follow the process in subsection 31-534(e). 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13) 
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 31-541. - General application. 
    The requirements or regulations in this article qualify or supplement as the case may be the district regulations or requirements appearing elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-24), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-542. - Accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Those uses which because of their nature do not warrant a separate zoning district, and buildings or structures customarily incidental or subordinate to the main use or building and located on the same lot, are permitted uses. 
(b)  Property development standards. 
(1)  Location. All accessory uses, buildings and structures shall be located on the same lot as the principal or main use and not within any required yard setbacks, except as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Height. No accessory use, building or structure shall exceed the height permitted in the district in which the principal use is located. 
(3)  Use. Such accessory building shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate unit. 
(4)  Other. An accessory building may occupy not more than 30 percent of a required rear yard. 
(5)  No accessory building shall be erected closer than five feet to the line of the abutting lot to the rear. 
(6)  All accessory structures must maintain a minimum distance of two feet from established easement lines. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-24.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-543. - Churches. 
    A church building is defined as an enclosed structure for public or semipublic religious worship and, when permitted, must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The minimum size plot of land shall be not less than 20,000 square feet in area and 100 feet in width. 
(2)  Side yards shall be not less than 20 feet in residential districts and front and rear yards shall be not less than specified for the zoning district. No parking areas or driveways shall be permitted within five feet of a property line abutting residential zoned property. 
(3)  Accessory buildings and uses may include offices of the church, church school or kindergarten, library, meeting rooms, residential structures for resident employees of the church, and others which are incidental to the operation of the church. Accessory buildings and uses shall be located on the same plot of land consisting of parcels contiguous to or across an alley, unless otherwise permitted in the zoning district. 
(4)  Parking lots to serve the church may be permitted on noncontiguous plots of land located within 400 feet of the church plot. 
(5)  a.  There shall be a minimum of 500 feet between a proposed church and existing churches. 
b.  There shall be a minimum of 500 feet between a proposed church and existing bars or package stores. 
These distances shall be measured along the route of ordinary pedestrian travel from the main front entrance of the proposed church to the main front entrance of an existing church, bar or package store. 
(6)  Each application for a new church shall include written justification of the need for the proposed church at the requested location. This justification shall include at least the following information: 
a.  The number of members in the church. 
b.  A geographic breakdown of the church membership by zip code. 
c.  The types of services to be offered by the church. 
d.  Any other reasonable requirements made by the planning and zoning board or city council. 
(7)  A proposed church that abuts residentially-zoned property shall construct a six-foot-high, finished masonry wall along the property line that abuts the residential property. This wall shall not be required in front-yard setback areas. 
(8)  The city council reserves the right to limit the hours of operation for any new church that is located in a residential zoning district. 
(9)  Storefront churches as defined in section 31-1 are not required to comply with the regulations in subsections 31-543(1) or (2). Church offices and meeting rooms are permitted in storefront churches, but the other accessory uses listed in § 31-543(3) are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-24.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2657, § 4, 3-15-95; Ord. No. 4038, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-13) 
Sec. 31-544. - Child care, daycare and other preschool facilities. 
[(a)]  Family day care home: 
(1)  A family day care home is a permitted use in the following zoning districts: 
- RS-5 Single-Family Dwelling District; 
- RS-6 Single-Family Dwelling District; 
- RS-8 Single-Family Dwelling District; 
- RML-12 Low Density Multifamily Dwelling District; 
- RD-15 Two-Family Dwelling District; 
- RM-15 Multiple Family Dwelling District; 
- RMH-15 Multifamily/Hotel District. 
(2)  Shall only be an accessory use in a private residence and may function either for or not-for-profit. 
(3)  Is limited to no more than six children at any one time. 
(4)  The person furnishing such service shall have a current, valid permit from Palm Beach County Health Department for operation of a family day care home, as required by Article II of Chapter 39, Palm Beach County Code; and a City of Riviera Beach Certificate of Use and Business Tax Receipt categorizing the use as a "family day care home." A valid permit from the Palm Beach County Health Department or a letter of approval must be submitted when applying for a certificate of use and business tax receipt for the city. 
(5)  A family day care home registered with the State Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services (HRS) is specifically exempt from having to obtain any special exemption or use permit or pay any special fee in excess of $50.00 to operate within the city (F.S. § 166.0445). 
(6)  Baby-sitting services provided by an individual at the home of the parents or legal guardians of the child(ren) are deemed to be exempt from these provisions. 
(7)  All family day care homes shall comply with state, county and city codes and regulations. 
[(b)]  Large family child care home: 
(1)  A large family child care home requires city council approval via the special exception process and can only operate in the following zoning districts: 
- RS-6 Single-Family Dwelling District; 
- RS-8 Single-Family Dwelling District; 
- RML-12 Low Density Multifamily Dwelling District; 
- RD-15 Two-Family Dwelling District; 
- RMH-15 Multifamily Dwelling District. 
(2)  Requirements: 
a.  Two full-time child care personnel must be on the premises during the hours of operation. One of the full-time child care personnel must be the owner or occupant of the residence. 
b.  Such use must first have operated as a licensed family day care home for two years, with an operator who has had a child development associate credential or its equivalent for one year. The person furnishing such service shall update their current permit from Palm Beach County Health Department for operation of a large family child care home, and a City of Riviera Beach Certificate of Use and Business Tax Receipt categorizing the use as a "large family child care home." The updated permit from the Palm Beach County Health Department or a letter of approval must be submitted when applying for a certificate of use and business tax receipt for the city. 
c.  A large family child care home shall be allowed to provide care for one of the following groups of children which shall include those children under 13 years of age who are related to the caregiver: 
1.  A maximum of eight children from birth to 24 months of age; or 
2.  A maximum of 12 children with no more than four children under 24 months of age. 
d.  Floor area: Facilities shall contain a minimum floor area of 35 square feet per child, exclusive of space devoted to bathrooms, halls, kitchen, offices, and storage. 
e.  Outdoor area: There shall be a minimum area of 75 square feet of outdoor play area per child. The play area shall be located on the same lot as the principal use and shall not be located in the front yard setback or adjacent to any outdoor storage area. The play area shall be surrounded by a four to six-foot high opaque fence or wall. If the fence or wall is not entirely opaque, landscaping shall be installed, four to six feet in height at planting, to create an immediate minimum screening effect of 75 percent of the fenced or walled area. The lot shall be landscaped to code while considering visibility corridors for safety and prohibiting poisonous plant species. 
f.  Parking and loading area: Parking shall be in accordance with section 31-577(14) of the city's Code of Ordinances. Additionally, a pick-up and drop-off area for children shall be provided in a suitable area adjacent to the building and shall provide clear ingress and egress to the building as determined by the city engineer, police chief, and fire chief (or designees for the aforementioned). 
g.  Separation requirement: Measured from parcel to parcel, there shall be a minimum of 250 feet between large family child care homes. No large family child care home shall be permitted within 250 feet of any package store, bar, nightclub, or adult entertainment establishment. 
h.  Other regulations: All large family child care homes shall comply with state, county and city codes and regulations. 
[(c)]  Child care facility: 
(1)  A child care facility requires city council approval via the special exception process and can only operate in the following zoning districts: 
- RML-12 Low Density Multifamily Dwelling District; 
- RM-15 Multifamily Dwelling District; 
- CN Neighborhood Commercial; 
- CG General Commercial. 
(2)  Separation requirement: Measured from parcel to parcel, there shall be a minimum of 500 feet between child care facilities. No child care facility shall be permitted within 500 feet of any package store, bar, nightclub, or adult entertainment establishment. 
(3)  Minimum floor area: There shall exist a minimum usable floor area, exclusive of any space devoted to the kitchen, halls, office, storage and bathroom facilities, of not less than 1,000 square feet is required. Facilities with capacities exceeding 25 children shall provide 35 square feet of additional floor area per child. 
(4)  Property development regulations: The building height, setbacks, parking and total floor area shall be governed by the applicable zoning district and/or site plan review. 
(5)  Parking and loading area: Parking shall be in accordance with section 31-577(14) of the city's Code of Ordinances. Additionally, a pick-up and drop-off area for children shall be provided in a suitable area adjacent to the building and shall provide clear ingress and egress to the building as determined by the city engineer, police chief, and fire chief (or designees for the aforementioned). 
(6)  Outdoor play area: 
a.  There shall be provided a minimum of 1,500 square feet of outdoor play area or 100 square feet of outdoor play area per child, whichever produces the larger area. The play area shall be located on the same lot as the principal use and shall not be located in the front yard setback or adjacent to any outdoor storage area. The play area shall be surrounded by a four to six-foot high opaque fence or wall. If the fence or wall is not entirely opaque, landscaping shall be installed, four to six feet in height at planting, to create an immediate minimum screening effect of 75 percent of the fenced or walled area. The lot shall be landscaped to code, while considering visibility corridors for safety and prohibiting poisonous plant species. 
b.  For child care facilities with enrollments of 30 or more, the outside play area may be utilized on a split shift basis, provided that a written statement and schedule of play periods, with age groups, are submitted for prior approval by the community development director, and provided that minimum outdoor play area shall not be less than that required for one-third of the total enrollment. 
(7)  Other: All child care facilities shall comply with state, county and city codes and regulations. A certificate of use and business tax receipt must be obtained from the city prior to operation. Submittal of an active permit from Palm Beach County Health Department or a letter of approval from the Palm Beach County Health Department must be submitted in order to apply for city licensing. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-24.III), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 3092, § 2, 5-18-11) 
Sec. 31-545. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Purpose. The supplemental zoning regulations in this section are intended to allow the use of a residential dwelling unit for a secondary or small-scale occupation, such that the dwelling unit is not changed nor the residential character of the neighborhood adversely impacted. 
(b)  Where permitted. Home occupations, as regulated by this Code, are permitted uses in all of the city's residential zoning districts. However, a home occupation shall not be in conflict with a restrictive covenant of a homeowner association or property owner association. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited as home occupations: 
(1)  Retail or wholesale sales on the premises, including food sales. 
(2)  Personal services, such as barber or beauty shops. 
(3)  Nursing home. 
(4)  Vehicle or boat repair. 
(d)  Standards for approval. In accordance with the purpose of this section, a home occupation: 
(1)  Shall not necessitate any physical changes to a dwelling unit, such as separate doorways or extra parking spaces; 
(2)  Shall not generate vehicular or pedestrian traffic which adversely impacts the residential character of the neighborhood; or 
(3)  Shall not create any other adverse impacts on adjacent neighbors or the neighborhood. 
(e)  Operation requirements. 
(1)  Location. A home occupation must be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit or garage, but not in an open porch or carport. This restriction shall not prohibit off-premises sales or services involved in a home occupation. 
(2)  Incidental nature. The area devoted to a home occupation shall not be the dominant use of a dwelling, and shall not exceed ten percent of the total square footage of living area or 200 square feet, whichever is least. 
(3)  No change to character of dwelling. There shall be no external evidence, sign, noise or odor indicating that a dwelling is being used for a home occupation. 
(4)  Employee restrictions. A home occupation must be conducted only by family members or other persons residing on the premises. 
(5)  Occupational license. A city occupational license is required for any home occupation. 
(6)  Number. Only one home occupation shall be permitted at a dwelling unit. 
(7)  Advertising. No external evidence or sign shall advertise, display or otherwise indicate the presence of a home occupation, nor shall the street address of the home occupation be advertised through signs, television, radio or newspapers. 
(8)  On-premises sales. A home occupation shall not involve the sale of any stock in trade, supplies, products or services on the premises, if such activity creates adverse traffic impacts on the area. Only occasional outside visitation shall be allowed. Occasional visitation is considered to be no more than two separate visits per day. 
(9)  Outside storage. No equipment or materials involved in a home occupation shall be stored or displayed outside of the dwelling unit, including driveways. 
(10)  Nuisances. A home occupation shall not involve the use of any mechanical, electrical or other equipment, materials or items which produce noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare, smoke, dust, odor or other nuisance outside the dwelling unit. There shall be no storage of hazardous or noxious materials at the site of the home occupation. 
(f)  Violations. The department of community development and environmental control may issue a citation for a violation of the regulations in this section. The city's code enforcement board shall make a determination regarding the citation and shall take appropriate action. This action may include the revocation of the occupational license for the home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-24.IV), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2624, § 4, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 31-546. - Swimming pools. 
    This section applies to swimming pools in all districts, except where otherwise specified. Swimming pools, accessory to a primary site use, may be open, enclosed, or covered by a screen enclosure, and shall only occupy a required rear or side yard, providing that the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  Rear yard setback. A minimum seven foot setback from the rear property line to swimming pool deck or platform, the exterior face of an infinity edge pool catch basin, or a screen enclosure associated with a swimming pool shall be provided, however, swimming pool decks may extend to the property line and be connected to a permitted dock and its related decking when abutting a body of water. There shall be a minimum seven-foot setback from the rear property line to the water's edge of a swimming pool or to the waterline of the catch basin of an infinity edge pool. For oceanfront properties located east of North Ocean Drive, this setback shall be measured from the 1997 Coastal Construction Control Line. 
(2)  Side yard setback. A minimum seven foot setback from the side property line to a swimming pool deck or platform, the exterior face of an infinity edge pool catch basin, or a screen enclosure associated with a swimming pool shall be provided. There shall be a seven-foot minimum setback from side property line to the water's edge of a swimming pool or to the waterline of the catch basin of an infinity edge pool. 
(3)  Corner properties within residential districts. For corner lots a twelve and one- half foot setback from the front property line and from the side lot line facing the street to the swimming pool, deck, platform or screen enclosure shall be provided. For corner lots with radial corners, the front setback and the side setback facing the street shall be taken from the midpoint of the curve of the corner of the property. 
(4)  Residential locations with two fronts, or through lots. Lots with two fronts shall be permitted to place a pool and pool deck, with a minimum ten foot setback from the property line, at the functional rear of the house. 
(5)  Walk space. A walk space at least 20 inches wide shall be provided between walls, fences or screen enclosures and the water's edge of a swimming pool. 
(6)  Safety barrier. Every swimming pool shall be protected by a safety barrier, as required by the Florida Building Code, as amended from time to time. 
(7)  Visual barrier. Swimming pools, when visible from any public street or alley, shall be screened from public view by an opaque landscape hedge, wall or fence, not less than five feet in height. A hedge shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous dense row of greenery, with plants spaced not less than 24 inches on center, in three gallon containers or larger when planted. 
(8)  Drainage. If a patio or paved area is provided adjacent to or surrounding a pool, it shall be designed to drain away from the pool, but shall not drain onto adjacent properties. An exception to this rule may apply to perimeter flow pools. 
(9)  Pool equipment. Pool equipment shall not be permitted within a required setback. 
(10)  Commercial swimming pools. The minimum size of all commercial swimming pools shall be 450 square feet with a minimum width of 15 feet. A walkway, no less than four feet in width, is required around the swimming pool, exclusive of coping. Commercial swimming pools shall satisfy all applicable Florida Building Code requirements, as amended from time to time, and also any applicable requirements provided by a governmental agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-24.V), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 4083, § 2, 8-3-16) 
Sec. 31-547. - Walls and fences. 
(a)  Property zoned for residential use, walls and fences shall be erected or maintained in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Along or adjacent to lot lines in the required rear or side yard, maximum height shall be six feet. 
(2)  In the required front yard, the maximum height shall be four feet. 
(3)  On a corner lot, no fences or walls shall be erected or maintained to a height exceeding three feet above the crown of the roadway within 25 feet of the intersection of two streets. 
(b)  On all property zoned for commercial use, maximum height shall be six feet. 
(c)  On all property zoned for industrial use, maximum height shall be eight feet. 
(d)  A waiver from the height provisions in the subsections above may be granted by the director of community development for nonelectric walls and fences used for athletic fields or recreational purposes. 
(e)  On all commercial or industrial property development adjoining residential districts, a six-foot solid masonry wall shall be constructed prior to final certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion. 
(f)  All easements shall be free and clear of walls and fences. An exemption may be granted only when the property owner has first agreed, in writing, to remove such obstruction upon the request of the city council and at the property owner's expense. This documentation shall be submitted, reviewed and approved by the city prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(g)  No barbed wire shall be permitted as fencing within the corporate limits of the city, except that it may be permitted on the top of a fence six feet high or higher in industrial districts, not to exceed eight feet in total height. 
(h)  Electric fences shall be permitted only in the general industrial (IG) zoning district, not to exceed eight feet in total height. 
(i)  Electric fences shall be permitted only for use within outdoor storage areas in the general industrial (IG) zoning district, provided that the electric fence is installed and operated in the following manner: 
(1)  Electric fencing shall be constructed or installed in conformance with the specifications set forth in International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Standard 60335-2-76. 
a.  The energizer for an electric security fence must be driven by a commercial storage battery not to exceed 12 volts DC. 
b.  The electric charge produced by the fence upon contact shall not exceed energizer characteristics set forth in paragraph 22.108 of the IEC and depicted in Figure 102 of IEC Standard No. 60335-2-76. 
(2)  Fifty percent or more of the energy needed to electrify the fencing must be generated on site with the use of solar panels or an alternate zero emission power source. 
(3)  No electric fence shall be installed unless its exterior is completely surrounded by an additional non-electric fence or wall, a minimum of six feet in height. If an electric fence is installed adjacent to a residentially zoned parcel, its exterior must be completely surrounded by an additional solid masonry wall, a minimum of six feet in height, in addition to landscape buffer requirements. 
a.  There must be a clearance of four to 12 inches between the electric fence and the additional wall or fence, for the entire length of the electric fence. 
b.  The exterior of this additional wall or fence must be landscaped according to article VIII. Landscape Regulations, of the City of Riviera Beach Code of Ordinances. An application for an electric fence shall be treated as a renovation development for which the city issues a building permit, as described in subsection 31-597(b). 
(4)  The following required signage must be maintained and visible at all times denoting the electric fence. Signs that read: "Warning Electric Fence" at intervals of not less than 20 feet must be installed, maintained, and remain visible at all times. In no instance may there be less than one sign visible on each side of the fence. Signs can be a minimum of four inches by eight inches but must not exceed 12 inches by 18 inches. Additional signage may be required if determined necessary by the chief of police or the director of community development. Sign details must be submitted during the permitting process. 
(5)  Electric fences shall be governed by burglar alarm fees and regulations. 
(6)  Electric fences may be operational only after business hours. The fence must remain off during business hours. 
(7)  One year after the issuance of an electric fence permit and yearly thereafter, the electric fence's owner must submit a maintenance report to the building official, police chief and fire chief, affirming concurrency with the aforementioned guidelines and regulations. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any persons to install, maintain or operate an electric fence in violation of this section. The chief of police shall immediately abate, through the code enforcement process, any electric fence that is not properly maintained or does not meet any standard set forth in this section. The city may also avail itself of injunctive relief should the electric fence fail to be operated in accordance with this section. 
(k)  Businesses that choose to own, operate and maintain an electrified fence, barbed wire, are solely responsible for any liability or damage caused by or stemming from the ownership or operation of these materials. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-24.VI), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 3071, § 3, 10-7-09) 
Sec. 31-548. - Miscellaneous yard, height and use regulations. 
(a)  Every part of a required yard shall be open from its lowest point to the sky, unobstructed, except for the ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features and eaves. 
(b)  In computing the depth of a rear yard, for any building where the yard opens onto an alley, one-half of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the rear yard, unless otherwise prohibited. 
(c)  The side yard requirements for a dwelling shall be waived where dwellings are permitted to be erected above stores or shops. 
(d)  On double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
(e)  Public or semipublic buildings, hospitals, schools and churches, where permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, when the front, rear and side yards are increased an additional foot for each foot such buildings exceed the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the buildings are built. 
(f)  Chimneys, water tanks or towers, elevator bulkheads, stacks, spires, broadcasting towers, false mansards, parapet walls, similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a height in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the city. 
(g)  Unless otherwise specified, all permitted uses which can be transferred from one district to another shall abide by the regulations of the district in which the use is to be located. 
(h)  If a vacant lot in a district has an area or width, or both, less than the required minimum and was a lot of record at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, such lot may be occupied by a permitted structure, provided the minimum yard regulations of the districts are complied with. 
(i)  Each single-family residence, duplex, triplex or fourplex constructed after December 6, 1989, shall have the ground floor, parking and landscaping on solid land. All such structures and accessory uses, if any, shall be built on a foundation firmly attached to the ground by concrete pour or stem walls, etc. No conventional structure shall be built on stilts or any other elevation device that leaves space between the ground level surface and the base of the structure, except where elevations of a few feet are required by law for manufactured homes, mobile homes or floodplains. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-24.VII), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2478, § 4, 12-6-89) 
Sec. 31-549. - Temporary labor employment office. 
    Temporary labor employment offices, where permitted, must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  No outside waiting or loitering shall be permitted on the site of the day labor employment office. 
(2)  No license for a temporary labor employment office shall be issued where the location of such proposed service is within 1,000 feet of another tem 
porary labor employment office. The method of measurement shall be made or taken from the main front entrance of the existing temporary labor employment office to the main entrance of the applicant's place of business along the route of ordinary pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2772, § 4, 1-21-98) 
Sec. 31-550. - Pawn shop. 
    A pawn shop, where, permitted, must meet the following requirement: 
(1)  No license for a pawn shop issued where the location of such proposed business is within 1,000 feet of another pawn shop. The method of measurement shall be made or taken from the main front entrance of the existing pawn shop to the main entrance of the applicant's place of business along the route of ordinary pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2772, § 5, 1-21-98) 
Sec. 31-551 - Principal arterial design standards overlay. 
(a)  Objectives of this section. 
(1)  The following standards are established for development along principal arterial roadways, excluding all areas having a downtown zoning district designation, to ensure that such uses are compatible with other uses permitted in the same district and to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(2)  The purpose of these standards is to promote designs that are architecturally compatible with the surrounding area and the design goals of the city. 
(3)  These standards are designed to promote development and redevelopment where the physical, visual and spatial characteristics are established and reinforced through the consistent use of compatible architectural elements. Such elements shall relate the design characteristics of an individual building or project to the other existing and planned structures in a harmonious manner, resulting in a coherent overall development and redevelopment pattern and streetscape. 
(4)  The standards used in this section are intended to discourage development types that bear little relation to the planned redevelopment pattern of the city. 
(b)  Delineation of the overlay district . The Riviera Beach Principal Arterial Overlay District shall be superimposed on all properties fronting on any of the following roads in the city: 
(1)  Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard. 
(2)  President Barack Obama Highway. 
(3)  Blue Heron Boulevard. 
(4)  Broadway (U.S. Highway No. 1). 
(5)  13th Street. 
(6)  Military Trail. 
(7)  Congress Avenue. 
(8)  Australian Avenue. 
(c)  Applicability . This section shall apply to all new developments, and to additions or renovations valued in excess of 50 percent of improvement value within any 24-month period, and for signs or signage changes in excess of $500.00, as determined by the city's director of development services. 
(d)  Variances . The development special magistrate may grant variances to these provisions according to the city's established variance process, as provided in Code section 31-42, as amended from time to time. 
(e)  Appearance . 
(1)  All structures on the same parcel of land or in the same development shall have a unified architectural theme. Color building elevations identifying said architectural theme shall be required to be submitted to the City for all applicable new developments, renovations, or additions. 
(2)  Building walls exposed to public view shall be designed through the use of a coherent and clear architectural design consistent with the character of the building. Building designs should incorporate architectural details and natural lighting. 
(3)  Buildings facing a public street or interior courtyard space shall be architecturally emphasized through entrance treatments and building details. Buildings with more than one facade facing a public street shall provide architectural treatment on each such facade. 
(4)  Roofing shall be incombustible material such as shingles, clay or cement tiles, or metal. 
(5)  Roof and exterior wall surfaces, with the exception of glass, shall be nonreflective. Reflective or mirrored glazing at ground level, visible from the sidewalk, is prohibited. 
(6)  The rear and side of buildings shall be finished with material that in texture and color resembles the front of the building. 
(7)  Glass windows and doors must make-up a minimum of twenty percent of the primary elevation and a minimum of ten percent of the secondary elevation. The primary elevation is defined as facing the abutting arterial road. The secondary elevation is defined as facing a perpendicular side road. Faux windows do not count towards the above mentioned required percentages. 
(8)  The coloration of all building walls shall be with a maximum of three colors, exclusive of the roof color. The primary use of "earth tone" and neutral color palettes shall be required. Semi-transparent stains are recommended for application on natural wood. 
(9)  Canopies over vehicular use areas shall have a maximum clearance of up to 14 feet above grade and shall be consistent with the main building design. The canopy columns shall be architecturally finished to match the building. 
(10)  Work area or storage doors and open bays shall not open toward or otherwise be visible from any of the designated principal roads. 
(11)  Heating, ventilation, air conditioning equipment, duct work, air compressors, other fixed operating machinery shall be either screened from public view or located so that such items are not visible from a designated arterial, adjacent residential properties or intersecting street. 
(12)  No temporary structures shall be permitted, except those used in conjunction with and during construction. Office-type mobile units when used as temporary facilities shall be screened from view from a designated arterial and equipped with rigid skirting on all sides. Any towing gear shall be removed, and if not removable, shall be screened from a designated arterial. 
(f)  Landscaping, walls and fencing . Development must comply with the landscaping requirements in article VIII of chapter 31 in the Riviera Beach Land Development Code as well as the items specified below: 
(1)  Landscaped areas shall be surrounded with a six-inch raised curb. 
(2)  Perimeter buffer landscape requirements. Landscape buffers shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the following standards. 
a.  Right-of-Way (R-O-W) Buffer. R-O-W buffers shall be provided along all street R-O-W. 
1.  Width: The total width of the buffer along streets, thoroughfares, or other means of vehicular access shall depend on the width of the street, as indicated in table 31-551(f)(2)a Width of R-O-W Buffer. 
Table 31-551(f)(2)a - Width of R-O-W Buffer (Feet) 
Width of R-O-W (Feet) Minimum Width of Buffer (Feet) Greater than 75 feet 15 feet 0 feet to 75 feet 10 feet  
2.  Shrub hierarchy . R-O-W buffers shall include each of the shrub types listed in table 31-551(f)(2)b Shrub Planting Requirements. 
Table 31-551(f)(2)b - Shrub Planting Requirements 
Shrub type Minimum Height at Installation (Size) Minimum Number of Shrubs Per Linear Foot of Buffer Length Maximum Spacing at Installation Maximum Maintained Height Ground cover 6 inches 2 per 1 linear foot 6 inches N/A Small shrubs 18 inches 1 per 2 linear feet 24 inches 36 inches Medium shrubs 24 inches 1 per 4 linear feet 48 inches 48 inches Large shrubs 36 inches 1 per 4 linear feet 48 inches N/A Notes 
 1.  Maximum maintained height is established to maintain the hierarchical visual effect for perimeter R-O-W buffer.  
3.  Planting pattern for a perimeter R-O-W buffer . One hundred percent of the buffer length shall be composed of a continuous opaque vertical landscape screen at least two feet in height, and composed of the shrub types listed in table 31-551(f)(2)b, Shrub Planting Requirements. The area of the buffer not planted with trees and shrubs shall be landscaped with ground treatment according to Florida friendly landscape provisions. 
4.  Minimum tree quantities. R-O-W buffers shall contain one shade tree per 20 linear feet. 
5.  Area measurement . The width of access ways and drive aisles that traverse required perimeter landscape buffers shall be included in the calculation of linear dimension and count towards required plant quantities. 
6.  Buffer width reduction. The required buffer width may be reduced due to site constraints as determined by the development services director. The required quantity of shrubs may be reduced in proportion to the reduction in the buffer width, a maximum of 50 percent, to ensure the viability of the material. The required number of canopy trees or palms shall not be reduced, however, they may be rearranged to ensure proper growing area. 
7.  Encroachment. No easement encroachment greater than five feet shall be permitted in required perimeter buffers, except for bisecting utility easements and required safe sight distance easements not to exceed a maximum of 50 percent of the required buffer width. 
8.  Exemptions. R-O-W buffers are not required for individual single-family residential, townhouse lots, or the side of lot that abuts the Intracostal Waterway, private street rights-of-way internal to a PUD, and alleys. 
(3)  Chain-link or similar fencing adjacent to a designated arterial roadway is prohibited. Where such fencing can be viewed from a designated arterial, landscaping or berms shall be provided to minimize visibility from the designated arterial. 
(4)  Perimeter walls shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building. 
(g)  Signage and lighting . 
(1)  Monument signs compatible with the architectural design of the development are the only permitted freestanding sign. Only one such sign is permitted per roadway frontage and it can measure no more than seven feet high and six feet in width. If a property roadway frontage exceeds 400 feet, a second monument sign may be permitted on that frontage, so long as the two signs are separated by 100 feet or more. 
(2)  Canopies shall not contain any signage, striping or other graphics. 
(3)  Window signage, whether permanent or temporary, shall be permitted up to twenty percent coverage of a window. 
(4)  Lighting fixtures shall be baffled and arranged so that illumination is deflected away from adjacent properties and roads. 
(5)  All signage must comply with these regulations within five years of adoption of this section. 
(6)  Fuel price digital signs shall be permitted as a monument sign feature subject to meeting the digital fuel price sign requirements of section 28-125. 
(h)  Location criteria for developments with drive-up facilities . 
(1)  No drive-up facilities may be located within 500 feet of an existing facility located on the same side of a designated arterial. Such distance shall be measured from the point of ingress or egress of an existing site to the point of ingress or egress of the proposed site. 
(2)  Existing drive-up facilities located closer than 500 feet may be improved or upgraded provided that are able to meet the other requirements of this section. 
(i)  Pedestrian connectivity . 
(1)  Developments must consider and promote pedestrian connectivity within and around the site, including access to sidewalks and separation from roadways and drive aisles by utilizing landscaping, planters, bollards, and similar. 
(2)  Developments adjacent to designated bus stops shall identify and fulfill requirements to implement a bus shelter or bus bench, which may require dedication of easement and maintenance accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2833, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 4073, § 4, 12-16-15; Ord. No. 4110, § 2, 5-2-18) 
Sec. 31-552. - Bars, saloons, taverns, cocktail lounges, or nightclubs. 
    In reviewing an application for these uses, the following requirements must be met: 
(1)  Minimum required lot area shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  The proposed site shall be at least 500 feet from the property line of the nearest place of worship, school or child care center. 
(3)  The proposed site shall be at least 500 feet from any other similar use. 
(4)  The proposed site shall be at least 500 feet from a residential district. 
(5)  Measurement shall be by a straight line from nearest property line to property line. 
(6)  Buffering shall be provided in accordance with the City of Riviera Beach Landscaping Code. Additional site design standards may be required by the city council to protect neighboring residential districts or uses from negative impact. 
(7)  Minimum distance and lot size requirements are exempted for properties located within the Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA). 
(Ord. No. 2863, § 3, 1-3-01) 
Sec. 31-553. - Fireworks and sparklers. 
(a)  Definitions: 
    Building means a permanent structure containing no fewer than four outer walls and a roof enclosing said walls, constructed in accordance with the local building code and a duly issued building permit, and for which occupancy is authorized by a duly issued certificate of occupancy. For purposes of this section, the term building shall also include a part of the structure, such as a unit or space within a shopping center. 
    Commercial structure or building means a building constructed and used for the purpose of producing income. For purposes of this section, the term commercial building shall not include a building designed, constructed and used in accordance with the laws for residential occupancy. 
    Distributor means any person engaged in the business of selling fireworks or sparklers to a wholesaler. 
    Fireworks means and includes any combustible or explosive composition or substance or combination of substances or, except as hereinafter provided, any article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation. The term includes, but is not limited to blank cartridges and toy cannons in which explosives are used, the type of ballons which require fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, dago bombs, and any fireworks containing any explosives or flammable compound or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance. 
    Fireworks does not include sparklers approved by the Division of the State Fire Marshal of the Department of Insurance; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper caps containing twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper caps which contain less than twenty hundredths grains of explosive mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
    Fireworks also does not include the following novelties and trick noisemakers, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times: 
(1)  A snake or glow worm, which is a pressed pellet of not more than 10 grams of pyrotechnic composition that produces a large, snakelike ash which expands in length as the pellet burns and that does not contain mercuric thiocyanate. 
(2)  A smoke device, which is a tube or sphere containing not more than 10 grams of pyrotechnic composition that, upon burning, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect. 
(3)  A trick noisemaker, which is a device that produces a small report intended to surprise the user and which includes: 
a.  A party popper, which is a small plastic or paper device containing not more than 16 milligrams of explosive composition that is friction sensitive, which is ignited by pulling a string protruding from the device, and which expels a paper streamer and produces a small report. 
b.  A booby trap, which is a small tube with a string protruding from both ends containing not more than 16 milligrams of explosive compound, which is ignited by pulling the ends of the string, and which produces a small report. 
c.  A snapper, which is a small, paper-wrapped device containing not more than four milligrams of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand, and which, when dropped, explodes, producing a small report. A snapper may not contain more than 250 milligrams of total sand and explosive composition. 
d.  A trick match, which is a kitchen or book match which is coated with not more than 16 milligrams of explosive or pyrotechnic composition and which, upon ignition, produces a small report or shower of sparks. 
e.  A cigarette load, which is a small wooden peg that has been coated with not more than 16 milligrams of explosive composition and which produces, upon ignition of a cigarette containing one of the pegs, a small report. 
f.  An auto burglar alarm, which is a tube which contains not more than ten grams of pyrotechnic composition that produces a loud whistle or smoke when ignited and which is ignited by use of a squib. A small quantity of explosive, not exceeding 50 milligrams, may also be used to produce a small report. 
    Manufacturer means any person engaged in the manufacture or construction of fireworks or sparklers. 
    NFPA means National Fire Protection Association. 
    Occupancy means the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is used or intended to be used. 
    Retailer means any person who, at a fixed place of business, is engaged in selling fireworks or sparklers to consumers at retail. 
    Seasonal retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling fireworks or sparklers at retail in this state from June 20 through July 5 and from December 10 through January 2 of each year. 
    Seller means any person, corporation, firm, or co-partnership engaged in the business of selling fireworks, including "manufacturer," "retailer," "seasonal retailer," "wholesaler," and "distributor." 
    Sparkler means a device which emits showers of sparks upon burning, does not contain any explosive compounds, does not detonate or explode, is hand held or ground based, cannot propel itself through the air, and contains not more than 100 grams of the chemical compound which produces sparks upon burning. Any sparkler that is not approved by the Division of the State Fire Marshal of the Department of Insurance is classified as fireworks. 
    Wholesaler means any person engaged in the business of selling fireworks or sparklers to a retailer. 
(b)  The sale of fireworks shall only be permitted pursuant to an exception or exemption set forth in F.S. §§ 791.02, 791.04 or 791.07 and any such sale shall only be located in an IL or IG zoning district. The sale of fireworks shall only be permitted in a permanent commercial structure or building and any such sale will be prohibited in any temporary structure including but not limited to, a tent, canopy, trailer, open air stand, vehicle or any other structure not permanently located on the property at which the sale of fireworks is to take place. The sale and storage of fireworks shall be protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system that complies with minimum Extra Hazard Group-2 design criteria, in accordance with NFPA standards for such occupancy hazard. Additionally, pursuant to Palm Beach County Code 31-9.3, said structure shall be of non-combustible construction and shall be free standing with a minimum of ten feet from any contiguous building line. 
(c)  When selling fireworks pursuant to an exception or exemption set forth in F.S. §§ 791.02, 791.04, or 791.07, the seller of fireworks shall require the purchaser to produce a photo identification or other such documents as are needed to establish the identity of the purchaser. Additionally, the seller shall document and retain for each sale: 
(1)  The name, telephone number and home address of the purchaser; 
(2)  A detailed description of the documents reviewed to establish the identification of the purchaser; 
(3)  The date of the purchase or sale; 
(4)  The name, telephone number and home address of the salesperson making the sale; 
(5)  The specific nature of the use which qualified for the exception or exemption relied upon (i.e. "a sale at wholesale," "a sale to be shipped directly out-of-state," etc.); 
(6)  The manufacturer's label name and the quantity for each firework sold; and 
(7)  The proof reviewed by the seller to establish the exception or exemption applied to that sale, which shall at a minimum contain the following information: 
a.  If the sale is at wholesale between manufacturers, distributors, and wholesalers who have registered with the Division of State Fire Marshal of the Department of Insurance, the seller shall record the registration number of the purchaser; 
b.  If the sale is for fireworks that are to be shipped directly out-of-state, the seller shall record the name, address, and telephone number of the common carrier who will make the delivery and the date said fireworks were delivered to that common carrier; 
c.  If the sale of fireworks is to a person holding a permit from any board of county commissioners or the governing body of a municipality, the seller shall review the permit and record the date, permit number, expiration date, and identity of the governing body issuing the permit; 
d.  If the sale is for the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination, or for use in quarrying or blasting or other industrial use, the seller shall record the name, address and telephone number of the railroad, transportation agency, or other entity which will use the fireworks; 
e.  If the sale is for blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, the seller shall record the name, address, and telephone number of the organization sponsoring or producing the event or show; 
f.  If the sale is for use by military organizations or organizations comprised of the armed forces of the United States, the seller shall record the name, address, and telephone number of the organization which will use the fireworks; 
g.  If the sale is for the use solely and exclusively in frightening birds from agricultural works or fish hatcheries, the seller shall retain a copy of the statement that has been filed with the sheriff's office pursuant to the rules prescribed by the State of Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services which must be provided by the purchaser prior to the sale of the fireworks. 
(d)  If a purchaser claims to be exempt from registration requirements pursuant to an exemption set forth in F.S. § 791.04, in addition to the information required to be recorded in subsection c. above, the purchaser must provide a written notarized statement setting forth the basis of the exemption and the purpose for which the fireworks are being purchased. 
(e)  The information required to be recorded shall be available for review, inspection and/or copying by the city or its agents at the location where the fireworks are being sold during the period that fireworks are being sold. Additionally, said information shall be retained by the seller for a period of 12 months from the date of sale, and if requested by the city or its agents, shall be produced for review at city hall during normal business hours. The request by the city or its agents shall be in writing and served upon the seller by certified mail, return receipt requested or by hand delivery to the seller at the last known address of such seller. The seller shall produce the requested information to the city or its agent within five business days after receipt of the written request. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any seller, as defined herein, to sell fireworks without first obtaining, documenting and recording the information required to be recorded in subsection c. above. 
(g)  It is unlawful for any seller of fireworks to fail to retain the information or records required to be recorded under this section for a period of 12 months from the date of sale or fail to make said information or records available for review, inspection and copying at the site of the sale. 
(h)  It is unlawful for any seller of fireworks to fail to produce the information required to be recorded, copied and/or retained under subsection c. above within the time limits proscribed herein after the written request of the city or its agents. 
(i)  It is unlawful for any person, corporation, firm, or co-partnership to misrepresent, misstate, or falsify a statutory exemption under Chapter 791, Florida Statutes for the purpose of inducing a sale of fireworks. 
(j)  It is unlawful for any person, corporation, firm or co-partnership to manufacture fireworks or sparklers within the city. 
(k)  The retail sale of sparklers, as defined by F.S. §§ 791.01(8) and 791.013, shall be limited to sale in CG and IL zoning districts. The sale of sparklers shall only be permitted in a permanent commercial structure or building and any such sale will be prohibited in any temporary structure including but not limited to, a tent, canopy, trailer, open air stand, vehicle or any other structure not permanently located on the property at which the sale of sparklers is to take place. The sale and storage of sparklers shall be protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system that complies with minimum Extra Hazard Group-2 design criteria, in accordance with NFPA standards for such occupancy hazard. Additionally, said structure shall be of non-combustible construction and shall be free standing with a minimum of ten feet from any contiguous building line and subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  A hold harmless affidavit which holds the city harmless for any liability connected with the operation shall be provided to the city 15 days prior to the authorized sale of sparklers. 
(2)  A certification of registration from the state fire marshal authorizing the sale of sparklers shall be provided to the city 15 days prior to the authorized sale of sparklers. 
(3)  A signed and notarized affidavit of compliance with the state approved list of sparklers shall be signed under oath affirming that only products on the State Fire Marshal's Approved List of Sparklers and Novelty Items will be sold and that the seller understands that a violation of the affidavit may result in an injunction against the sale of sparklers shall be provided to the city 15 days prior to the authorized sale of sparklers. 
(4)  A plan approved by the city fire department and the department of community development delineating storage, parking, sales area and signage shall be provided to the city 15 days prior to the authorized sale of sparklers. 
(l)  Any violation of this section shall subject an offender to arrest pursuant to F.S. § 901.15, and prosecution pursuant to F.S. § 125.69. 
(m)  Any violation of this section shall also subject an offender to seizure of the unlawful goods such that the police department of Riviera Beach and its officers shall, at the expense of the owner, seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed all stocks of fireworks or sparklers offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 2, 6-5-02) 
Sec. 31-554. - Advertising within the City of Riviera Beach. 
(a)  Purpose of article. The purpose of this section is to establish advertising regulations for businesses within the City of Riviera Beach, resulting in greater recognition of the city. The city's intent is to prevent the misleading and/or incorrect use of the names of municipalities in advertisements. Incorrect, misleading or false advertising of a municipality or region is subject to fees and penalties as outlined in this section. 
(b)  Advertisements. All businesses that are located within the city limits of Riviera Beach are required to correctly advertise their location, regardless of the method used. If a business located within the city limits of Riviera Beach, chooses to advertise the name of the municipality or specific location in which it is situated, the following applies: 
(1)  Listing a municipality incorrectly, or in a misleading manner in an advertisement is prohibited and will be subject to fees and penalties. 
(2)  Advertising only a specific location within the city limits of Riviera Beach without listing the City of Riviera Beach is prohibited and will be subject to fees and penalties. 
a.  "Riviera Beach" must appear in a similar style of text and a font size equal to or greater than the specific location that is also listed in the advertisement. 
b.  Regardless of text style or font size selected, the size of lettering used to display "Riviera Beach," measured by height and width per letter, must be equal to or greater than the text used for any specific location listed in the advertisement. 
c.  The color of text selected for displaying "Riviera Beach" must be as visible and as legible as the text displaying the specific location. Background colors or graphics that mask or conceal the text "Riviera Beach" are prohibited. 
(c)  Annexed parcels. Businesses annexed into the city limits of Riviera Beach have a one-year grace period following their annexation to update their advertisements to conform to this Code. After the one-year grace period has ended, the business will be subject to fees and penalties as stated in this section. 
(d)  Fees and penalties. Any business existing when this section was enacted has one year to comply with the provisions of this section, then shall be subject to the following fees and penalties. New businesses must immediately adhere to this Code in its entirety; any advertisements failing to adhere to this section shall be subject to the following fees and penalties. 
(1)  Upon first violation, a notice of guidance will be sent and a penalty of $500.00 will be assessed. The cited business will have one month from the date the notice was received, to come into compliance with this Code. 
a.  This $500.00 fee may be waived if the business comes into compliance within this one-month period or if the business demonstrates exigent circumstances to the satisfaction of the city manager. 
b.  If the business in violation does not come into compliance after 30 days, a running fine of $500.00 per day will be assessed until compliance is achieved. If a separate timeline is agreed upon by the business entity and the city manager, these fees may be waived by the city manager if compliance to this Code is achieved in the agreed amount of time. 
1.  The department of community development may choose not to renew a business's tax receipt until all violations are addressed and all fines are paid. If fines are not paid, the City of Riviera Beach has the right to place a lien on the property for the amount due. 
2.  The department of community development may also choose to deny the issuance of permits pertaining to a party in noncompliance of this Code. 
(e)  Enforcement of fees and penalties. The department of community development and the code enforcement division will be responsible for enforcement of these provisions. 
(f)  Future resolutions. The following phrase will be added to all future site plan approval and business approval resolutions; "All future advertising must state that the development is located in the City of Riviera Beach. Fees and penalties in accordance with the Advertising Ordinance will be levied against the property owner and/or business for violation of this condition." 
(Ord. No. 3070, § 2, 10-7-09) 
Sec. 31-555. - Recycling center. 
(a)  All materials must be stored indoors, other than receptacles/bins screened from the view of public rights-of-way used solely for the collection of recyclable materials from the general public on a concrete surface engineered to specific load. This includes the storage of materials waiting to be separated and separated materials waiting to be shipped. 
(b)  Only sorting and separating of materials is allowed at recycling centers. 
(c)  Landscape buffers must include a combination of walls, fences, gates, berms, trees, shrubbery, and sod and shall be located around the perimeter of the site and shall be at least 75 percent opaque. 
(1)  Buffers for abutting properties shall be a minimum of five feet for industrial properties, ten-foot minimum for commercial properties, and 20-foot minimum for residential properties. 
(d)  The city council reserves the right to limit the hours of operation for any new recycling center. 
(e)  Internet protocol (IP) based surveillance cameras must be installed and monitoring access given to the police department. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 4, 10-7-09) 
Sec. 31-556. - Recycling facility. 
(a)  (1)  [ Generally. ] All separating, crushing, compacting, processing and equipment must be indoors. 
a.  The facility must include a roof and be entirely enclosed other than large roller/bay doors and windows. 
All materials must be stored indoors on a concrete surface engineered to specific load with an oil and water separation pit to accommodate liquid collection and containment to ensure no contamination of ground water or soil. This includes the storage of materials waiting to be processed and processed materials waiting to be shipped. There shall be a minimum of 500 feet between proposed recycling facilities and residential properties. 
b.  These distances shall be measured along a straight line of travel from the location of proposed facilities property line to the nearest residential property line. 
(2)  Landscape buffers must include a combination of walls, fences, gates, berms, trees, shrubbery, and sod and shall be located around the perimeter of the site and shall be at least 75 percent opaque. 
a.  Buffers for abutting properties shall be a minimum of five feet for industrial properties and ten-foot minimum for commercial properties. 
(3)  Shredding, smelting, melting or changing the chemical content of material is prohibited. 
(4)  Standard hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. of the same day. The city council reserves the right to limit the hours of operation for any new recycling facility. 
(5)  Internet protocol (IP) based surveillance cameras must be installed and monitoring access given to the police department. 
(b)  Building construction requirements. All office and administrative buildings constructed and/or renovated in conjunction with the operation of a scrap metal processing or recycling facility must at a minimum meet the United States Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Silver Certification prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Existing and nonconforming uses. Existing scrap metal or recycling facilities existing prior to the adoption of this Code are exempt from these regulations unless and until one of the following occurs. If any of the conditions listed in this section occurs, every future use of such premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Code within one year. Nothing in this Code restricts existing facilities from adding or purchasing new processing equipment, however a building permit is required to add any fixed structure. Nothing herein shall be construed as allowing or permitting the addition of land to the nonconforming use. 
(1)  Modification, repair, upgrades, additions, renovations, voluntary or caused by acts of nature, greater than 100 percent of the appraised value of the structure. 
(2)  If such nonconforming use of such structure is discontinued for a continuous period of 180 days. 
(d)  Parking requirements. Parking shall be calculated using a combination of warehouse and office parking ratios added together for the total amount of spaces required. The warehouse ratio shall be calculated by the total square footage of storage area on the entire site at one space per 1,000 square feet up to 30 parking spaces with a letter or statement declaring the total number of employees that will be working at any given time. The office parking ratio shall be calculated by the total square footage of office space on the entire site at one space per 300 square feet. 
(e)  Site assessment. Prior to operation of any facilities an American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Phase 1 Environmental Site Assessment on the proposed site must be completed and submitted to the city for approval, said approval to occur within 30 days of submission of the site plan application. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 4, 10-7-09) 
Sec. 31-557. - Residential docks. 
(a)  Residential docks and related marine facilities and vessels. 
    Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boat lift means any device fixed to the ground, a seawall, post, piling or a dock, designed to lift watercraft clear of the water. 
    Canal means a stream or river or an artificial waterway with a width of less than 500 feet, which is not surrounded by land on all sides. 
    Canal dead end means the terminus or closed end section of a canal. 
    Dock means a floating, cantilevered, or pile supported structure, with a horizontal top surface, designed and used primarily for the securing of watercraft in the water, fishing, swimming or other water-related activity. The term dock shall include piers. 
    Dolphin means a single pile or cluster of closely driven piles used as a fender for a dock or as a mooring or guide for watercraft, but not used as a channel marker or as a dock piling. 
    Finger dock means a section of dock which extends roughly perpendicular to a shore-normal dock, but which is not a marginal dock. The term finger dock shall include "T" and "L" heads. 
    Marginal dock means a dock with the long axis is parallel to the shoreline, and which abuts the shoreline along its length. 
    Shore-normal dock means a dock with the long axis roughly perpendicular to the shoreline. 
    Mooring means any appliance used to secure a vessel other than to a dock or seawall. 
    Moored means attached to a dock or mooring facility. 
    Piling means the vertical support member of a dock, or a vertical member of relatively symmetrical cross-section, installed into the substrate and extending above the water to provide lateral support for a vessel. 
    Residential docks and related marine facilities means any structures and appurtenances thereto extending into or above any body of water from a residential zoning district, designed and used primarily for the securing of watercraft in the water, fishing, swimming or other water-related activity. It shall include docks, piers, terminal platforms, marginal docks, finger docks, boat lifts, wave attenuators, pilings, and dolphins. 
    Seawall means a vertical or near vertical wall between the water and the land, designed to hold back the soil, and prevent erosion of the soil. 
    Shoreline In canals, the shoreline is the platted property line of the subject property which is closest to and generally parallel to the canal. In all other waterbodies, the shoreline is the mean or ordinary high water line. 
    Side lines means the "projection" of the upland side property lines into the waterbody for purposes of side setbacks for residential docks and related marine structures and vessels in this chapter, as defined below: 
(1)  On sovereignty submerged lands, side lines are the "riparian lines." 
(2)  On privately owned submerged lands owned by the individual upland lot owner, the side lines are the side property lines. 
(3)  On all submerged lands not included in a. or b. above, side lines shall be constructed as follows: 
The landward end of the side line shall in every case be the intersection of the upland side property line with the shoreline. The side line projects waterward in a straight line from this point, over an infinite length. The side line projects waterward at an angle perpendicular to the shoreline (see Figure 1 below), with the following exceptions: 
Where the shoreline reaches an inflection point at its intersection with the side property line (see Figure 2 below), or within ten feet of its intersection with the side property line on one side of the side property line only (see Figure 3 below), the side line shall extend waterward at an angle which bisects the angles of the shoreline on either side of the inflection point. Where the shoreline reaches inflection points at or within ten feet of its intersection with the side property line on both sides of the side property line (see Figure 4 below), the side line shall extend waterward at an angle which bisects the angles of the shorelines beyond the inflection points. 
For curved shorelines, the angle of the shoreline for purposes of this section is the angle of the tangent to the curve, whether it be at its intersection with the side property line, or at an inflection point (see Figures 5 and 6 below). 

    Vessel means a watercraft as defined in the definitions contained in F.S. Ch. 327. 
    Waterbody width means the distance from the shoreline of the subject property to the shoreline of the property across the waterbody, measured perpendicular to the shoreline of the subject property. 
(b)  Docks and related marine facilities permitted as accessory use. 
(1)  Accessory use. Residential docks and related marine facilities, including but not limited to docks, piers, boat lifts, dolphins, pilings, and moorings are permitted as an accessory use to the principal residential structure in all residential zoning districts, subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Regulations governing construction in canals. 
(1)  The following regulations apply in canals within the city, reference the canals and waterbody map: 
Residential docks and related marine facilities shall be setback from the side lines by five feet. 
Except in the shore drive/palm drive canal, residential docks and related marine facilities shall not extend more than 25 percent of the waterbody width from the shoreline of the parcel to which the structure is accessory, or the following distance, whichever is less: 
In the Lake Park Marina Canal, 21 feet. 
In the Wilma Circle Canal, 30 feet, subject to any agreement with the submerged land property owner, Inlet Marina of Palm Beach, Ltd. 
In the Gulfstream Way/Bimini Lane Canal, 30 feet. 
In the Grand Bahama Lane Canal, 30 feet. 
In the Morse Boulevard/Powell Drive Canal, 40 feet. 
In the Sugar Sands Canal, 30 feet for properties fronting on Singer Drive, 40 feet for all other properties. The three longer, shore-normal existing docks on the south side are hereby specifically allowed to be maintained or rebuilt to the existing shore-normal and shore-parallel dimensions. 
In the Yacht Harbor Canal (the finger extending east of the main harbor), 75 feet on the north and south sides, and 35 feet on the east side. 
In the Shore Drive/Palm Drive canal, residential docks and related marine facilities shall not extend more than 33 percent of the waterbody width from the shoreline of the parcel to which the structure is accessory, or 25 feet, whichever is less. 
On the north side of the Sugar Sands Canal, no vessel shall be moored in such a manner as to project more than 30 feet from the north side seawall. 
Except in the Shore Drive/Palm Drive canal, no vessel shall be moored in such a manner as to obstruct more than 30 percent of the width of the waterbody in which the boat or other watercraft is moored. 
In the Shore Drive/Palm Drive canal, no vessel shall be moored in such a manner as to obstruct more than 33 percent of the width of the canal. 
Vessels shall be moored such that no part of a vessel, including anchors or lines, shall extend beyond the side lines. 
Residential docks and related marine facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements and regulations: 
a.  Marginal docks shall extend a maximum of eight feet out from the face of the bulkhead wall. 
b.  Shore-normal docks shall not exceed a width of eight feet. 
c.  Finger docks shall not exceed a width of eight feet. 
d.  No dock shall be located closer to the side property line extended than half of its extension waterside. 
e.  Shore-normal docks and finger docks shall be for vessel mooring only, and shall be spaced accordingly. 
f.  Wave attenuators shall not be permitted, except at the mouth of a canal. 
g.  Mooring buoys and anchors shall not be installed unless they are part of at least a two-point system which will secure the vessel within the limits specified in this chapter. 
(d)  Regulations governing construction in waterbodies other than canals. 
(1)  The following regulations apply in waterbodies other than canals, within the city: 
Residential docks and related marine facilities shall be setback from the side lines by five feet. 
Residential docks and related marine facilities shall not be located more than 25 percent of the waterbody width, or 200 feet, whichever is less, from the shoreline of the parcel to which the structure is accessory. 
No vessel shall be moored in such a manner as to obstruct more than 25 percent of the width of the waterbody in which the boat or other watercraft is moored, or to unreasonably infringe on navigation. No part of a boat shall be moored so as to extend beyond the side lines. 
Residential docks and related marine facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements and regulations: 
Marginal docks or piers shall extend a maximum of 12 feet out from the face of the bulkhead wall. 
Shore-normal docks shall not exceed a width of ten feet for a single-family dock, and twelve feet for a multi-family dock. 
Finger docks shall not exceed a width of ten feet for a single-family dock, and twelve feet for a multi-family dock. 
Any dock or overwater decking other than a marginal dock, and/or a single shore-normal dock and finger dock shall be for vessel mooring only and shall be spaced accordingly. 
(e)  Regulations governing construction in all waterbodies. 
    The following regulations apply in all waterbodies within the city: 
Each dock shall be provided with at least one ladder extending from the dock surface to one foot below mean low water. 
Enclosures prohibited. Residential docks and related marine facilities shall not contain walls, roofs, coverings, or enclosures, other than dock boxes, covered or uncovered fish cleaning tables, utility pedestals, and trash receptacles. 
Canal dead end or inside corner. In regard to construction waterside of any platted lot at the dead end of a canal or on the inside corner of a waterbody, a dock or a pier may be placed zero feet from the side line when all of the following requirements are complied with: 
The lots abutting the side line shall be in a RS-5 Single Family Dwelling District. 
At least one of the lots abutting the side line shall have less than 75 feet frontage on the water. 
A dock or pier shall be constructed at the same time, by each of the abutting owners, with both owners' consent, on both sides of the side line in question. 
The dock or pier on a lot shall be structurally independent of the dock or pier on the adjacent lot. 
Commercial use prohibited. Use of residential docks and related marine facilities for commercial purposes is prohibited. However, the following shall not be construed to be "for commercial purposes": rental of a private residence with a dock or pier; construction by a developer of a dock or pier; or the sole act of mooring a commercial vessel at the vessel owner's private residential dock (this shall not be construed to allow commercial loading or unloading operations, or embarking or disembarking of paid personnel or passengers for hire). No dock shall contain an advertising sign. 
Use of residential docks. Residential docks shall be used only by residents or their guests, and shall not be used by or rented or leased to nonresidents other than owners of the principal dwelling or dwellings. For the purpose of this section, the term guest shall mean a person or persons visiting the resident. In any case, a guest vessel may not be moored at the dock more than 60 nights within one calendar year. 
Lighting. Artificial lighting may be installed on a dock for security or safety. Applicant must provide documentation that lighting will not adversely affect surrounding properties. Blinking or intermittent lights are prohibited. 
Floating docks. Floating docks are permitted, subject to conformance with all requirements of this section and all applicable building codes. 
(f)  Permits required. 
(1)  Building permit required: 
a.  A building permit is required for construction or expansion of all residential docks and related marine facilities, and for installation of lighting or other electrical facilities on such structures. The building permit shall be obtained prior to initiation of the construction or expansion. 
b.  A building permit is not required for nonstructural repairs or maintenance, or for replacement of deck boards or something similar. 
(2)  Additional application requirements. 
a.  Proof that the applicant is the owner of the upland residential property adjacent to the waterbody. 
b.  Two sets of construction plans prepared by and under the seal of a Florida Licensed Professional Engineer. Plans shall include a site plan drawn to scale sufficient to represent all elements of the proposed facilities, the shoreline/seawall of the upland property from which the dock will project, top of seawall elevation, the docks and related marine facilities of the adjacent properties, and the docks and related marine facilities across the waterbody from the proposed facilities, if within 100 feet of the proposed facilities. Adjacent and nearby facilities owned by others may be scaled from an aerial photograph, if indicated as such on the site plan, and if field verified by observation concurrent with preparation of the site plan. 
c.  Written authorization for the proposed dock from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD), and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps), is required. A printout from the DEP's self-certification website shall be sufficient to meet this requirement, if it provides the applicable authorization. Such written approval shall not be expired. 
(3)  Supporting documentation. 
a.  In addition to the specific limits provided in this section, the proposed residential docks and related marine facilities and vessel mooring shall not preclude abutting or adjacent property owners from constructing residential docks or related marine facilities in accordance with this section. 
b.  In addition to the specific limits provided in this section, the proposed residential docks and related marine facilities and vessel mooring shall not preclude abutting or adjacent property owners from mooring, maneuvering, or usage associated with their residential docks or related marine facilities legally existing or constructed in accordance with this section. 
(g)  Maintenance. Residential docks and related marine facilities shall be maintained by the property owner in a safe, properly maintained condition as determined by the city code administrator. A licensed contractor or the property owner by way of owner builder building permit shall perform all work on residential docks and related marine facilities. A residential dock or related marine facility which is determined by the building official to be in an unsafe condition is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(h)  Nonconforming structures. Unless otherwise provided for, any existing residential dock or related marine facility that does not meet the requirements of this chapter shall not be added to or altered in any manner so as to increase the extent to which the structure is in violation of applicable requirements. Any existing residential dock or related marine facility legally constructed prior to this section may be repaired or replaced, except that if the residential dock or related marine facility has failed or been destroyed, it must be repaired or replaced within two years of its failure or destruction, or meet the other provisions of this section. Such docks shall be subject to all provisions of this Code relating to unsafe structures. 
(i)  Measurement of docks and marine facilities. Unless otherwise provided herein, any required measurement associated with a dock or related marine facility shall be made from the property line of the property to which the dock or facility is accessory. 
(Ord. No. 3076, § 1, 4-7-10) 
Sec. 31-558. - Portable storage containers. 
(a)  Portable storage containers. Portable storage container and/or any temporary storage unit, means any portable, weather-resistant receptacle designed and used for the temporary storage or shipment of household goods. 
(b)  Portable storage containers are allowed in residential zoning districts. 
(c)  A permit must be obtained from the city building division. The permit is valid for 30 days from the date of delivery of container. The following must be submitted with the permit application for the portable storage container. 
(1)  Two copies of a drawing or plan showing the location of the portable storage container to scale on the property. 
(2)  If applicable a copy of an approval letter from the property's Home Owners Association or Property Owners Association is required. 
(d)  If a storage container is to be located on the property more than 30 days, an extension to the permit must be approved by the building official and a fee must be paid for the permit extension. This process must be followed for each subsequent permit extension. Additional fees will be required for each 30 days extension at increasing intervals to a maximum of three months. After which time if the portable storage container is not removed a citation from code enforcement will be issued for the maximum civil penalty of up to $500.00 per day. 
(e)  No storage container shall be located closer than five feet from a property line unless approved by the community development director. 
(f)  No storage container shall obstruct traffic vision or be located within a visibility triangle which is the triangular area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two or more public rights-of-way. Two sides being 25 feet in length along the abutting public right-of-way lines and pavement edges, measured from their point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two other sides. 
(g)  No portable storage container shall have dimensions greater than 20 feet in length and eight feet in width and height. Storage capacity shall be no greater than 1,280 cubic feet. 
(h)  Not more than two portable storage containers smaller than 20 feet by eight feet and totaling 1,280 cubic feet shall be located on a property at any given time. Each separate portable storage container must be permitted and appropriate fees paid. 
(i)  All portable storage containers in use on a lot shall be in a condition free from rust, peeling paint and other visible forms of deterioration. 
(j)  In cases of emergency caused by natural disasters, floods, and fires a portable storage container may be acquired and a permit obtained after the fact within one week of the portable storage containers delivery. All other rules of portable storage container code must be followed and proof of the emergency will be required. 
(k)  No portable storage container is to be located in the street or any part of the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 3097, § 1, 7-6-11) 
Sec. 31-559. - Medical marijuana. 
    Medical marijuana treatment centers and/or medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities are strictly and specifically prohibited within all city zoning districts and within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4109, § 3, 5-2-18) 
Secs. 31-560-31-565. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 19; stopping, standing and parking, § 19-56 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, ch. 29. 

Sec. 31-566. - General requirement; definition. 
(a)  Every building, structure or use instituted or erected after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived shall be provided with off-street parking and loading facilities for the use of occupants, employees, visitors, patrons and service vehicles in accordance with the following schedule. The off-street parking and loading facilities shall be maintained and continued as an accessory use as long as the main use is continued. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the term "off-street parking space" shall consist of a minimum area for the parking of any automobile, exclusive of access drives or aisles thereto. Off-street parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley. No parking shall be allowed in lanes which must be used for emergency access. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-567. - Driveways. 
    Driveways on the off-street parking lot shall be considered as constituting off-street parking spaces for single-family and two-family duplex dwellings in residential districts, provided that sufficient spaces are available on such driveways to meet the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.I.A), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-568. - Location of off-street parking spaces. 
    Except as otherwise prohibited in this chapter, all parking spaces shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the building or use served, or, with the exception of the requirements in section 31-580, off-site valet parking spaces may be provided, or, subject to site plan review, within 300 feet from the building or use served, measured along lines of the shortest pedestrian route, provided the zoning classification of the parking lot land allows the use (as a permitted use or by special exception) to be served by the parking lot. No off-site parking shall be allowed if the pedestrian route must cross any federal or state highway. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.I.B), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2405, § 1, 1-4-89; Ord. No. 2890, § 1, 1-3-01) 
Sec. 31-569. - Landscaping. 
    All off-street parking areas for all uses except single-family and duplex parking areas shall be landscaped as outlined in the landscape section. The city will determine from the site plans submitted whether the requirements for landscaping have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.I.C), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-570. - Construction. 
    All parking areas, including those for single-family dwellings and duplexes, shall be surfaced with a smooth nondusting surface in compliance with the standards prescribed in this Code. Shell rock parking lots only will not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.I.D), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-571. - Maintenance. 
    All parking surfaces shall be maintained free of all weeds, grass, dust and accumulated trash and in a manner as to not create a hazard or nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.I.E), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-572. - Drainage. 
    The proposed grading and drainage for all off-street parking facilities shall be approved by the city in accordance with the city's pertinent codes. Drainage on an on-site lawn or catchbasin tied directly to the city storm sewer system shall be provided. When storm sewers are not accessible, other types of drainage must be approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.I.F), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-573. - Plan approval. 
    All plans for parking lots shall be approved and final inspection done by the engineering department and must comply with all the regulations in this article in addition to regulations for sidewalks, concrete driveways, approaches and traffic view. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.I.G), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-574. - Nuisance prevention. 
    When necessary, as determined by the city engineer, walls, swales and/or planting areas shall be installed to protect adjoining properties and their occupants from flooding, glaring lights and noise. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.I.H), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-575. - Mixed uses in one building. 
    Where a building is used for more than one use or for different uses, and where the floor area used for each use for which loading space is required is below the minimum for required loading spaces but the aggregate total floor area used is greater than such minimum, then off-street loading space shall be provided as if the entire building were used for that use in the building for which the least spaces are required. In such cases, the city may make reasonable requirements for the location of the required loading space. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.I.I), 3-17-82) 
Sec. 31-576. - Design standards. 
(a)  Parking lots. The regulations governing parking lots shall be as follows: 
(1)  Parking bays. 
a.  Minimum dimensions are ten feet by 20 feet, except for parallel parking which shall have a minimum bay of ten feet by 24 feet and single- and double-car garages which shall have a minimum bay of nine feet by 19 feet. 
b.  Handicapped spaces shall be 12 feet by 20 feet. 
c.  All stalls shall have a wheel stop placed 21/2 feet from the edge of the stall. This 21/2-foot strip may be used for additional landscaping and drainage for the parking lot, so long as it does not interfere with the overhangs of the parked auto. 
d.  The minimum parking bay dimensions may be reduced, as indicated below, if a minimum of 30 square feet of landscaped area is added for each parking space with these reduced dimensions. The developer must also demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department director or designee that the maximum floor area of new development is based on paragraph "a" above. 
Standard parking spaces - nine feet by 19 feet. 
Handicap parking spaces - 12 feet by 19 feet. 
Parallel parking spaces - nine feet by 24 feet. 
Existing parking spaces may be restriped to these reduced dimensions if the overall parking area is not increased in size. 
(2)  Minimum aisle widths/backup. 
a.  Ninety-degree parking: 24 feet. 
b.  Sixty-degree parking: 
1.  One-way traffic: 18 feet. 
2.  Two-way traffic: 24 feet. 
c.  Forty-five-degree parking: 
1.  One-way traffic: 15 feet. 
2.  Two-way traffic: 24 feet. 
d.  Thirty-degree parking: 
1.  One-way traffic: 13 feet. 
2.  Two-way traffic: 24 feet. 
(b)  Access. All access driveways shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Access location. 
a.  Corner lots: point of access shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from intersecting right-of-way lines on streets. 
b.  Interior lots: access for interior lots shall not be closer than ten feet apart. 
(2)  Access to parking lots. 
a.  One-way access: ten feet. 
b.  Two-way access: 20 feet. 
c.  Access drives shall not be closer than five feet from the property line. 
(c)  Minimum size and dimensions of loading space. For the purposes of these regulations, a loading space is a space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, having minimum dimensions of loading bays as follows: 
Vehicle Width Length Maneuvering Apron Single units 12 feet 30 feet 30 feet  
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.II), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2728, § 1, 1-15-97) 
Sec. 31-577. - Off-street parking ratios. 
    The minimum off-street parking requirements for the uses indicated are as follows. Floor area and floor space in all instances not otherwise designated shall mean gross floor area. 
(1)  Residential uses. For all residential uses: 
a.  Residential units shall have at least two parking spaces per unit, including PUD residential developments. 
b.  Parking for units for the elderly shall provide at least 0.8 parking spaces per unit. Units for the elderly shall include independent living units and assisted living units. 
c.  Affordable housing units shall provide at least one parking space per unit. A parking analysis and management plan shall be provided in order to ensure that transportation and off-street parking needs will be met. 
1.  The parking analysis and management plan shall include but is not limited to the following items: 
i.  Parking inventory and needs assessment; including current and proposed parking ratios, number of parking spaces utilized and required, including guest parking spaces, and number of vehicles owned by residents. 
ii.  A narrative demonstrating how property management will accommodate anticipated parking needs and enforce parking provisions. 
iii.  Identification of mass transit access; bus stops and routes, shelters, benches and other infrastructure. 
iv.  Identification of pedestrian connectivity within the neighborhood and adjacent area, including bicycle paths and racks. 
(2)  Hotels, motels and lodging houses or boardinghouses. There shall be provided a minimum of one parking space for each guest room, plus one additional space for each five guest rooms up to a maximum of 20 additional spaces. 
(3)  Hospitals. For hospitals, including sanitariums, orphanages, convalescent homes and homes for the aged, there shall be at least one off-street parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
(4)  Medical and dental clinics. For medical and dental clinics, there shall be at least one parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
(5)  Places of assembly. For places of assembly, including theaters, clubs, churches, schools, mortuaries and other similar places, there shall be at least one off-street parking space for every 200 square feet of floor area. 
(6)  Auditoriums, stadiums, arenas, recreation facilities, amusements and attractions, exhibits, etc. For stadiums, arenas, auditoriums, etc., there shall be one parking space for every four bleacher seats whenever bleacher seats are provided, or 30 parking spaces per athletic field, whichever is greater. For outdoor attractions and other recreation areas there shall be one parking space for each 70 square feet of total floor area of covered space, plus five spaces for each acre of outdoor attraction area. For motorcycles there shall be 20 parking spaces per acre. 
(7)  Restaurants. Restaurants, including nightclubs, diners, lunch counters, drive-ins and all other similar dining establishments shall have at least one off-street parking space for every 150 square feet of floor area. 
(8)  Retail establishments. For retail establishments there shall be at least one off-street parking space for every 200 square feet of floor area. 
(9)  Office buildings. For office buildings, including governmental and professional buildings, there shall be at least one off-street parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
(10)  Wholesale/warehousing establishments. For wholesale/warehousing establishments there shall be at least one off-street parking space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, or one parking space for every two separate miniwarehousing units, whichever is the greater. 
(11)  Industrial plants. For those manufacturing uses which have more than 50 percent gross area devoted to storage or which demonstrate a low employee to gross square footage ratio to the satisfaction of the CDEC director, there shall be at least one off-street parking space for every 500 square feet of floor area. 
(12)  Marina facilities. Parking spaces shall be provided on abutting dock properties as follows: 
a.  Wet slips. One parking space for every two wet slips for private vessels not carrying passengers for hire. 
b.  Dry storage. One parking space for every four dry storage spaces. 
c.  Sight-seeing; charter; commercial. 
1.  Minimum three parking spaces for each passenger-carrying vessel carrying six or less passengers for hire. 
2.  Minimum one parking space for every two passenger-carrying vessels carrying more than six passengers for hire, as ascertained by a U.S. Coast Guard Certificate of Inspection. 
(13)  Other uses. For uses not indicated, parking shall be as required by the closest similar use above, as interpreted by the planning director. 
(14)  Daycare. One space per employee (minimum three spaces) plus adequate provision for drop-off of children. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.III), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2179, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2271, § 5, 4-3-85; Ord. No. 2800, § 1, 1-20-99; Ord. No. 3021, § 4, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 4114, § 3, 9-5-18) 
_____
Sec. 31-578. - Table depicting off-street loading ratios. 
    The loading space requirements shall be as per the following table: 
Use or Use Category Floor Area 
(in Square Feet)  Loading Spaces 
  Required Retail stores (including department stores, restaurants, consumer service), wholesale and employment establishments  3,000-10,000 One berth 10,000-20,000 Two berths Each additional 20,000 or major fraction thereof One additional berth Automotive (including any new and used vehicle sales), recreation facilities, amusements and attractions  2,000-15,000 One berth 15,000-40,000 Two berths Each additional 10,000 or major fraction thereof One additional berth Office building, apartment building over five floors, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing or convalescent facility  5,000-20,000 One berth 20,000-100,000 Two berths More than 100,000 Three berths Arenas, auditoriums, stadiums, trade expositions 20,000-50,000 Two berths Over 50,000 Four berths Any manufacturing and processing use, research and development Up to 15,000 One berth 15,000-40,000 Two berths 40,000-65,000 Three berths Each additional 80,000 One additional berth  
Loading demand statement. For commercial or industrial establishments with a total of 65,000 square feet or more of total floor area devoted to such uses, a statement outlining the projected normal demands for loading and unloading for the use, and a plan showing the location on the lot of the space to be provided, shall be supplied by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.IV), 3-17-82) 
_____
Sec. 31-579. - Supplemental regulations. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. 
(1)  This subsection shall regulate the parking of all vehicles and equipment in order to maintain the quality and viability of the city, particularly residential areas, by minimizing the impact of parking of vehicles other than the family vehicle. 
(2)  This subsection shall not limit any deed restrictions, condominium regulations, or similar private limitations on land use imposing more stringent requirements or limitations than are provided herein nor create an obligation for the city to enforce private limitations on land use imposing more stringent requirements or limitations than are provided herein. 
(b)  All zoning districts: general provisions. 
(1)  All vehicles which can be viewed from an abutting property or a public right-of-way shall be maintained in an operable condition, unless temporarily parked or stored at a licensed vehicle repair facility or specifically allowed in an industrial zoning district. 
(2)  A vehicle or boat shall not park closer than three feet from any lot line. This restriction shall not apply to: 
a.  Vehicles parked in driveways constructed in accordance with a valid building permit before the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived; or 
b.  Boats parked or stored next to a seawall. 
(3)  A vehicle or boat shall not be used for habitation while parked or stored on a public right-of-way, canal or any property in a residential or nonresidential zoning district, unless specifically zoned or licensed for such purpose. 
(4)  A vehicle or boat shall not be parked or stored on a vacant unimproved lot, except as allowed by this paragraph. In single-family residential areas, a vehicle or boat may be parked on a vacant unimproved lot next to a single-family residence if the lot is owned by the owner of the abutting single-family residence. Access to the vacant lot shall be restricted to the same driveway used for the abutting single-family residence. 
(5)  A camper or recreational vehicle may be parked in an licensed mobile home park, recreation vehicle park or designated parking area for recreational vehicles. 
(c)  Residential zoning districts: parking and storage. 
(1)  Permitted parking. A vehicle, boat or trailer may be parked or stored in a front, side or rear yard, as specified in the applicable zoning district regulations, in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Any family vehicle, panel or pickup truck, van, jeep or similar type truck, not exceeding a carrying capacity of one ton, shall be parked only in a garage, on a paved driveway, or on a legal driveway that is unpaved. 
b.  A boat, trailer or recreational vehicle shall only be parked in a garage or in a rear or side yard if screened from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. 
c.  Major vehicle repairs, including repairs of the engine, body or chassis, may be performed on residential property if the following requirements are met: 
1.  The vehicle must be registered to the property owner or tenant; and 
2.  The repairs must be made in an enclosed building (e.g., garage) or, if the vehicle is not in an enclosed building, the repairs must be completed within seven calendar days. 
d.  In multifamily zoning districts, storage of recreational vehicles or boats shall only be in designated areas and shall be screened from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. 
e.  Any new multifamily projects submitted after the adoption date of the ordinance from which this section is derived may be required to provide a storage area for vehicles and boats, depending upon project location and anticipated lifestyle of occupants. 
(2)  Prohibited parking. 
a.  The use of parking spaces required by this Code for parking vehicles other than family vehicles is prohibited. 
b.  Commercial boats or barges may not be used from a private residence for commercial purposes or a home occupation allowed by subsection 31-545. 
c.  Barges may not be moored in any residential zoning district, unless engaged in a bona fide construction or repair activity. 
(3)  Temporary and emergency parking and repair. The following are permitted on a temporary and emergency basis in residential zoning districts: 
a.  The temporary parking of a commercial vehicle on private property or in the adjoining swale of a public street in a residential district where construction is underway. Such construction shall have a valid city building permit properly displayed on the premises. 
b.  Deliveries by tradesmen or the use of commercial vehicles or trailers in making service calls. 
c.  The emergency parking of a disabled vehicle. However, a disabled vehicle shall be removed from a public right-of-way within 24 hours. 
d.  The loading or unloading of a recreational vehicle or trailer before or after an off-premises trip. However, in no case shall the loading or unloading period exceed 24 hours. 
(d)  Nonresidential zoning districts: parking and storage. The following regulations apply to all nonresidential zoning districts including, but not limited to, commercial, industrial and utility districts: 
(1)  Any vehicle, boat or trailer that is abandoned or junked shall not be placed in a parking space required by this Code. 
(2)  The storage of recreation vehicles and boats shall only be permitted when allowed by the applicable zoning district regulations as a primary use or accessory use, and if not stored in a parking space required by this Code. 
(e)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Government, utility and towing vehicles. A commercial vehicle or vehicles operated by one of the following entities is exempt from the supplemental parking regulations in this subsection if the vehicle is being used to perform a public service: 
a.  Any governmental agency; 
b.  A contractor or subcontractor working for the city; or 
c.  A utility operating in the city, or a contractor or subcontractor working for such a utility for the installation, maintenance, adjustment or repair of a utility facility. 
However, a towing company or other business entity shall not be exempt solely because it is employed by the city to provide towing or other services. 
(2)  Churches, day care, nursing homes and adult care living facilities. Buses and other vehicles operated by a church, day care, nursing home or adult care living facility to transport people are exempt from the off-street parking regulations in this subsection when parked on the property of the church, day care, nursing home or adult day care facility which operates the bus or vehicle. 
(f)  Waivers. 
(1)  The director of community development and environmental control (CDEC) may waive one or more regulations in this subsection, if the criteria in paragraph (3) below are met. 
(2)  Any administrative determination made by the director of CDEC regarding a waiver request may be appealed by the code enforcement board. Each appeal shall be made in writing and shall clearly indicate the nature of the appeal. 
(3)  The director of CDEC and the code enforcement board shall determine that the following criteria are met in order to grant a waiver. 
a.  Existence of special conditions or circumstances. That a special condition or circumstance exists which is peculiar to the lands, structures or building involved in the application, and that the special condition or circumstance was in existence at the time the ordinance from which this section is derived was adopted. 
b.  Conditions not created by applicant. That the special conditions or circumstances did not result from the actions or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  Special privileges not conferred. That granting the requested waiver will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied to other lands, buildings or structures. 
d.  Hardship conditions exist. That literal enforcement of the provisions of this section would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant, and would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of existing ordinances. 
(g)  Penalties and special provisions. 
(1)  A person in violation of this subsection shall be punished in accordance with the procedures for the code enforcement board, as per chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  A person in compliance with the existing zoning regulations but in violation of this section shall be given a reasonable time, up to 30 days, in which to comply with this section. 
(h)  Definitions. The definitions of the following terms shall apply when used in this subsection: 
    Boat means any vessel, as defined by Florida Statutes, including barges and airboats, designed, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
    Camper means a structure designed or used for human habitation, which can be attached to or detached from a pickup truck, and has sufficient headroom for an adult six feet in height to stand upright. 
    Equipment means any motor vehicle, trailer or implement used in agriculture, construction or industry, and only incidentally operated or moved over public highways. The term includes, but is not limited to, farm tractors and implements, bulldozers, cranes, excavators, forklifts, motor graders, road rollers, tow trucks, mixers, earth movers, compressors, generators and lot-clearing equipment. The term shall not include lawn mowers, edgers, wheelbarrows and other lawn maintenance equipment for primary use on the premises. 
    Pickup truck means any motor vehicle designed primarily for the transportation of property within a permanently attached, open cargo bed. 
    Property owner means, when used in relation to private property, the recorded owner of the property appearing in the records of Palm Beach County, Florida. This shall include, if under lease, rental agreement or on loan under any arrangement, gratuitous or otherwise, the individual or firm having possession or control of the premises. 
    Screening means a visual barrier consisting of an opaque fence or wall, dense vegetation or other permitted structure which does not exceed the maximum height limitation set forth by the applicable zoning district regulations. 
    Swale means that area of a public street between the pavement and the limiting property line of the right-of-way. 
    Trailer means a vehicle, without motor power, designed for carrying property and to be drawn by another motor vehicle. 
    Truck means any motor vehicle, including buses and vans, with a carrying capacity over one ton and which is designed, used and maintained primarily for the transportation of property or persons. 
    Vacant lot means any parcel of land without structures or other physical improvements. 
    Vehicle, family means a typical family car, panel or pickup truck, van, jeep or similar type. Truck or van types not to exceed one ton of carrying capacity. 
    Vehicle, off-road means any motor vehicle designed primarily for operation on land other than improved roads. 
    Vehicle, operable means a vehicle which can move under its own power in a legal and safe manner, and which has a current license tag properly displayed. 
    Vehicle owner means an individual or firm to which a vehicle is registered, and whose name appears on the motor vehicle certificate of title. This shall include the individual or firm having possession or control of the vehicle, if under lease or rental agreement, or on loan under any type of arrangement, gratuitous or otherwise. 
    Vehicle, recreational means any vehicle designed for off-road recreation or as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel which either has its own power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, specifically including a travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper and motor home. 
(Ord. No. 2152, § 3(B)(23.AA-25.V), 3-17-82; Ord. No. 2213, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 2629, § 1, 9-21-94) 
Sec. 31-580. - Off-site valet parking. 
(a)  Off-site valet parking may be allowed by petition to the City of Riviera Beach City Council from a business that is located within the Town of Palm Beach Shores limits, who is requesting to use an existing parking facility within the City of Riviera Beach. 
(b)  Off-site valet parking may be allowed only in nonresidential zoning districts and only when it is not practical to provide required parking on-site. The applicant is required to demonstrate that special circumstances exist which limit the number of on-site parking spaces. 
(c)  Off-site parking shall be provided only on existing parking lots within the City of Riviera Beach, which have parking spaces that are not in use during the determined time of valet use, and can be reserved for such purposes. 
(d)  The approval of off-site valet parking shall be through a joint agreement by a business located within the Town of Palm Beach Shores and the business or property owner of the off-site parking lot located within the City of Riviera Beach. The City of Riviera Beach's public parking lots may not be used for off-site valet parking. 
(e)  All requests for off-site valet parking shall be considered for approval by the city council, after receiving an advisory recommendation from the planning and zoning board. 
(f)  Approved off-site valet parking agreements are required to be renewed by the city council annually. Application for renewal will be considered for approval by the city council annually. The granting of off-site valet parking shall be construed as a privilege subject to modification or termination by the city council each year at renewal time, and no person may reasonably rely on a continuation of that privilege. The city council reserves the right to revoke the joint parking agreement at any time. 
(g)  The off-site valet parking application fee shall be $1,200.00 for each request and $1,000.00 for annual renewal. 
(h)  If, prior to renewal time, the city manager determines that the business has either violated a condition of renewal or is operating in a manner harmful to the public health, safety or welfare based upon the criteria specified in this section, the city manager may place on the city council agenda the matter of revoking the joint parking agreement. 
(i)  The specific criteria for city council consideration in making the decision to grant or deny off-site valet parking are as follows: 
(1)  Off-site parking. The amount of off-site parking in relation to demands created by the business wanting to use property in the city for additional parking; the adverse impact on adjacent residential areas of any illegal or hazardous parking. 
(2)  Law enforcement activities. The amount and degree of law enforcement activities generated by operating the off-site valet parking business. 
(3)  Effect on neighboring properties. The adverse effects, if any, that the off-site valet parking will have on neighboring properties, especially with respect to the effects of noise, parking and glare from headlights on nearby residential properties. 
(4)  Noise. Such approvals shall be granted only to those businesses that will not disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(5)  Vehicle route. The business requesting to use properties within the city for off-site valet parking must provide a detailed vehicle route that will not create hazardous conditions to neighboring properties or to the city's residents. 
(j)  The owner or owners of record of a property for which joint valet parking is requested shall be responsible for preparing a written agreement between the owner or owners of the parking areas to be used indicating the terms under which the joint parking shall be used. The agreement shall be approved by the city attorney before final approval is given by the city council and the agreement shall include the following: 
(1)  A list of the names and ownership interest of all parties to the agreement and contain the signature of those parties. 
(2)  A site plan showing the area of proposed parking and the proposed vehicle route. 
(3)  A description of the area of joint parking, specifically reserving the area for such use and leaving it unencumbered by any conditions which would interfere with that use. 
(4)  A demonstration as to how the joint parking arrangement will not negatively affect residential property in the area. 
(k)  Any changes in uses or other conditions must be reviewed and approved by the city council. The applicant shall: 
(1)  Submit new joint parking use parameters, and an application to officially amend the agreement approval for the property, as appropriate; or 
(2)  Revise or nullify the joint parking agreement, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2890, § 2, 1-3-01) 
Secs. 31-581-31-595. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FLORIDA FRIENDLY LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4014, § 1, adopted June 20, 2012, repealed former Art. VIII, §§ 31-596-3-605 in its entirety and enacted new regulations as herein set out. Former Art. VIII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2832, § 1, adopted Sept. 1, 1999. 

Sec. 31-596. - Purpose. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be known herein as the "Florida Friendly Landscape Code" and "landscape code". The provisions of this article shall be a minimum standard for landscape requirements within the municipal limits. The following items encompass the purpose of this article: 
(1)  To establish minimum standards for the development, installation, and maintenance of landscaping that incorporate Florida Friendly landscape principles within the city limits without inhibiting creative landscape design, construction and management. 
(2)  To provide minimum standards for landscaping new development or redevelopment, including parking areas and required buffers. 
(3)  To promote the establishment and maintenance of diverse, functional and sustainable landscapes and plant communities that maximize the storage of sequestered carbon, aide in stormwater management, improve air quality, and conserve energy and that also reduce greenhouse gasses and minimize supplemental watering. 
(4)  To protect and enhance local aesthetic character while increasing biodiversity and wildlife habitat. 
(5)  To provide economic and social benefits by incorporating plant material as a function of sustainability and as an integral part of urban development and community within the city. 
(6)  To promote water conservation, water quality improvement, and vegetation protection objectives by providing for: 
a.  The implementation of Florida Friendly Landscaping principles as identified by the Florida Yards and Neighborhoods program operated by the University of Florida's Institute of Food and Agricultural Services Extension ("UF/IFAS Extension") and Best Management Practices ("BMPs") identified in the Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries (2008), and as provided by law. 
b.  The use and proper placement of site-appropriate plant materials. 
c.  The preservation of existing native plant communities. 
d.  The reestablishment of native plant communities. 
e.  The elimination of invasive plant species. 
f.  The use of guidelines to minimize negative secondary and cumulative environmental effects associated with the misuse of fertilizers and pesticides. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-597. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. In the interpretation and application of this landscape code, these definitions take precedence in the event of conflict. 
    All words used in the present tense include the future; all words in the singular number include the plural and the plural the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is mandatory and the word "person" includes a firm, corporation, county, municipal corporation, or natural person. The term "council" shall mean city council of the City of Riviera Beach, and the word "city" shall mean the city of Riviera Beach. The word "used" shall be deemed to include the words "arranged", "designed", or "intended to be used", and the word "occupied" shall be deemed to include the words "arranged", "designed", or "intended to be occupied". Any word or term not interpreted or defined by this section shall be used with a common dictionary meaning of common or standard utilization. 
    Accent tree means any native tree used to compliment a landscape design, not meeting the definition of a shade tree, as listed Appendix B. 
    Appeal means any request for a review of a decision of an administrative determination of the community development director to the zoning board of adjustment. 
    Aquascape means the planting of aquatic and wetland plants in the enhancement, restoration, or creation of freshwater, estuarine, or marine systems. 
    Automatic controller means a mechanical or electronic device, capable of automated operation of valve stations to set the time, duration and frequency of a water application 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means a practice or combination of practices based on research, field-testing, and expert review, determined to be the most effective and practicable on-location means, including economic and technological considerations, for improving water quality, conserving water supplies and protecting natural resources. 
    Bioretention means an engineered process to manage stormwater runoff, using the chemical, biological and/or physical properties found in a natural, terrestrial-based community of plants, microbes and soils. 
    Buffer means a landscape area that may include walls, fences, berms, trees, shrubs, hedges, ground cover and other plant materials. 
    Buffer screen means a portion of a buffer which includes a six foot high, opaque vegetative landscape screen designed and maintained to visually screen a development or portion thereof from adjacent property within one year of construction and planting. 
    Canopy means one or more tree crowns in a given area. 
    Champion tree means the largest tree of a species which has been designated by the State Department of Agricultural and Consumer Services, Division of Forestry. 
    Clear trunk means the distance between the top of the root ball along the vertical trunk(s) of a tree to the point at which lateral branching or fronds begin. 
    Constant pressure/flow control means a device that maintains a constant flow, or pressure, or both. 
    Crown means the upper portion of a tree consisting of limbs, branches and leaves. (see canopy ) 
    Crown spread, average is determined by taking the widest horizontal distance (spread) of the crown and averaging it with a crown spread measurement taken at right angles to the widest measurement. 
    Developed landscape area means that portion of the property where pre-development vegetation is to be removed. 
    Diameter at breast height (DBH) circumference or caliper means the trunk diameter of a tree measured at 41/2 feet above ground level from the base of the tree. If the tree trunk forks below 41/2 feet above ground level, the city shall consider each trunk to be a tree. 
    Drip line means a vertical line extending from the outermost branches of a tree to the ground, provided that the same shall not be less than a ten-foot diameter circle, drawn through the center of the trunk of a tree. 
    Ecosystem means a characteristic assemblage of plant and animal life within a specific physical environment, and all interactions among and between species and their environment. 
    Emitter means the device used to control the applications of irrigation water. This term is used to refer to the low flow rate devices used in micro-irrigation systems. 
    Endangered species, threatened or rare species, species of special concern means a species listed as endangered, threatened or of concern by one or more of the following agencies: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission; Florida Department of Agricultural and Consumer Services; Florida Committee on Rare and Endangered Plants and Animals. 
    Environmentally sensitive land means areas which have unique ecological characteristics and/or functions, such as rare geological formations and/or features, or limited habitat suitable for rare species of plants and/or animals. 
    Evergreen means those trees, including broad-leafed and conifer evergreens that maintain their leaves year round. 
    Excessive lifting or lion-tailing means improperly pruning a tree in a manner that removes or thins all or most of the tree's lower and interior branches resulting in a clump of terminal foliage at the ends of branches. This results in a top-heavy tree, disfigures the tree's natural form and increases the chance for branch breakage and the likelihood of a tree to fall during a storm event. 
    Exempt tree or unprotected tree means a category 1 invasive tree recognized by the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council (FLEPPC), listed in Appendix A.1, or other specifically noted species found in Appendix A.2 of this landscape code, which is free from any tree protection requirements of this article. This appendix may be amended from time to time to be consistent with the most recently updated FLEPPC list. See nuisance species. 
    Filter means a device in irrigation distribution systems that separates sediment or other foreign matter. 
    Florida Friendly means practices, materials, or actions that help to preserve Florida's natural resources and protect the environment. 
    Florida Friendly Landscape. A landscape that incorporates the BMPs and philosophies promoted by programs such as Florida Yards and Neighborhoods/Environmental Landscape Management. Quality landscapes that conserve water, protect the environment, are adaptable to local conditions, and are drought tolerant. The principles of such landscaping include planting the right plant in the right place, efficient watering, appropriate fertilization, mulching, attraction of wildlife, responsible management of yard pests, recycling yard waste, reduction of stormwater runoff, and waterfront protection. Additional components include practices such as landscape planning and design, soil analysis, the appropriate use of solid waste compost, minimizing the use of irrigation, and proper maintenance; see F.S. Sec. 373.185(1)(b) "Florida-friendly landscaping" for statutory definition. 
    Groundcover means a low growing, dense plant species other than turf grass, used to cover the soil forming a continuous, low mass of foliage that is free of weeds. Ground cover must present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage at time of planting if used in lieu of grass. Complete coverage is required within 1 year of planting areas utilizing groundcover. 
    Grubbing means the removal of vegetation from land by means of digging, raking, dragging or otherwise disturbing the roots of vegetation in soil in which such roots are located. 
    Hardscape means areas such as patios, decks, driveways, paths and sidewalks that do not require irrigation. 
    Hatracking or tree topping means to improperly prune a tree in order to permanently maintain growth at a reduced height. It also means to flat-cut a tree, severing the leader or leaders. Hatracking involves pruning a tree by stubbing off mature wood larger than one inch in diameter; or reducing the total circumference or canopy spread not in conformance with National Arborists Society standards. 
    Hedge means a row of closely and evenly spaced shrubs or other vegetation planted to form a dense, continuous, unbroken visual screen. 
    High water use plants means plants that require irrigation to provide supplemental water on a regular basis in addition to natural rainfall, or are so identified by a regulatory agency having jurisdiction. When placed in a naturally high water table area appropriate to the plant such that irrigation is not required, such plants shall not be considered high water use for the purposes of this article. 
    Hydrozone means a distinct grouping of plants with similar water needs and climatic requirements. 
    Impervious area means a surface not allowing the passage of air and water to the root system of trees and other vegetation. Runoff is water applied to the soil or landscape that is not absorbed and flows from the area. A pervious area is a permeable surface area allowing passage of surface water and air to the root system of a tree. A pervious area shall be free of significant amounts of clay, shell, marl, limestone or other road-base material unless expressly permitted in the context thereof but the owner may surface it with turf blocks or similar nontoxic products. 
    Infiltration rate means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (inches per hour). 
    Installation and maintenance guarantee means a document or deposit which binds the developer or property owner of a development to guarantee the proper installation and maintenance of required landscape and irrigation materials for a set period of time, at 110 percent of the initial cost of obtaining and installing all landscaping elements. 
    Irrigated landscape area means all outdoor areas that require a permanent irrigation system. 
    Irrigation system means artificial watering systems designed to transport and distribute water to plants. 
    Irrigation zone means a grouping of soakers, sprinkler heads, bubblers or microirrigation emitters operated simultaneously by the control of one valve. 
    Land clearing means any development, vegetation removal, scrubbing, grading or other activity that alters the land it is located on. 
    Landscape means any combination of living plants (such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, palms or trees) and non-living landscape material (such as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch), but excluding paving. Decorative statues or sculptures are permissible but shall not substitute for any requirement. 
    Landscape construction documents or Landscape plan shall include a planting plan, a landscape layout plan, an irrigation plan, a grading and drainage plan, detail sheets, plant counts and written specifications. Plans shall be numbered, dated, North arrow indicated, scaled, and sealed by an appropriately licensed professional where required by F.S. ch. 481, Part II. 
    Landscape design means consultation for and preparation of planting plans drawn for compensation, including specifications and installation details for plant materials, soil amendments, mulches, edging, gravel, and other similar materials. Such plans shall include only recommendations for the conceptual placement of tangible objects for landscape design projects. Construction documents, details, and specifications for placement of tangible objects and irrigation systems shall be designed or approved by licensed professionals as required by law. 
    Landscape strip means a strip containing trees, barriers, ground cover or other plant material as required by this article. 
    Landscaped area means the entire parcel; less the building footprint, driveways, hardscapes such as decks and patios, and non-porous impervious areas. This landscaped area includes Florida-friendly landscaping as defined in F.S. § 373.185(1)(b). 
    Lawn grass shall include all species normally grown as permanent lawns in Palm Beach County; St. Augustine "Floratam" grass or Bahia grass are most commonly utilized. Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded, except that solid sod shall be used in areas subject to erosion. In areas where other than solid sod or grass is used, grass seed shall be sown as needed for immediate effect and protection until full coverage is otherwise achieved. Grass sod shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases at time of installation and in perpetuity. 
    Light pollution means any adverse effect of artificial lighting including but not limited to skyglow, glare, light trespass, and light clutter. 
    Low-flow point applicators means irrigation applicators with output less than 60 gallons per hour (gph). 
    Low maintenance area (no-mow-zone) means a designated area within a landscape that is planted and managed in order to minimize or eliminate the need for mowing, watering and fertilization. 
    Low maintenance riparian zone means an area that is at least ten feet wide adjacent to a water body which is planted and managed in order to minimize the need for maintenance such as mowing, watering, fertilizing, or similar. 
    Low water use plants means plants that do not need supplemental water beyond natural rainfall, or are so identified by a regulatory agency having jurisdiction. 
    Microclimate means the climate of a specific area in the landscape that has substantially differing sun exposure, temperature, or wind, than surrounding areas or the area as a whole. 
    Microirrigation (low volume) means the application of small quantities of water directly on or below the soil surface, usually as discrete drops, tiny streams, or miniature sprays through emitters placed along the water delivery pipes (laterals). Microirrigation encompasses a number of methods or concepts including drip, subsurface, bubbler, and spray irrigation, previously referred to as trickle irrigation, low volume, or low flow irrigation, that deliver water directly to plant root zones with a high degree of efficiency, no runoff, and little to no evaporation. 
    Moderate water use plants. Plants that need supplemental water during seasonal dry periods. 
    Moisture Sensing Device or Soil Moisture Sensor. A device to indicate soil moisture in the root zone for the purpose of controlling an irrigation system based on the actual needs of the plant. 
    Mulch means non-living, organic, materials used in landscape design to impede erosion, retain moisture, control weeds, enrich the soil and reduce soil temperature. 
    Native vegetation means any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to South Florida, specifically all or part of Palm Beach County, as shown in South Florida Water Management District's "WaterWise: South Florida Landscapes" (listed as Appendix B), or alternative scientifically recognized publication or peer reviewed journal such as: Wunderlin, R. P. 1998. Guide to the Vascular Plants of Florida. University Press of Florida, Gainesville. 
    New development means the construction of a building or structure on unimproved real property. 
    Nuisance species means an exotic invasive species recognized as such by the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council, Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Florida Department of Agriculture & Consumer Services, U.S. Department of Agriculture or similar, which include but are not limited to Australian Pine ( Casuarina equisetifolia ), Brazilian Pepper ( Schinus terebinthifolius ), and Melaleuca (Melaleuca quinquenervia). Also, reference F.S. § 369.251, "Invasive nonnative plants; prohibitions; study; removal; rules". 
    Palm means a plant belonging to the monocot order, of the family Palmae, distinguished by having unbranched single or multi-trunks crowned by large, compound pinnate or palmate leaves/fronds. 
    Parking area means all property used for off-street parking, including vehicular aisles and access ways, loading zones and other outdoor vehicular use areas. 
    Pervious paving materials means asphalt, concrete or other highly porous surface with an aggregate base allowing for rapid infiltration of water, thereby reducing runoff and allowing for groundwater recharge. These materials are traditionally used for walkways, driveways, and areas with light traffic as a low-impact development technique. 
    Plant bed means a defined area devoid of turfgrass in which plants are grown, often consisting of mulched groupings of trees, shrubs, ground covers, perennials and/or annuals. 
    Plant communities means an association of native plants that are dominated by one or more prominent species, or a characteristic physical attribute. 
    Planting plan means specifications and installation details for plant materials, soil amendments, mulches, edging, gravel, and other similar materials. 
    Point of connection (POC) means the location where an irrigation system is connected to a water supply. 
    Pop-up sprays means spray heads that pop up with water pressure and provide a continuous spray pattern throughout a given arc of operation. 
    Pressure tank means a pressurized holding tank for irrigation water coming from wells to minimize cycling of the water pump. 
    Pruning means the proper and legal cutting or trimming of tree limbs or palm fronds in accordance with national arborists standards or American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 Standard for tree care operations. Proper pruning creates improved tree health and appearance often extending the lifespan of a tree. Improper pruning can result in branch and trunk decay, fragility and increase susceptibility to disease and harmful insects. See hatracking. 
    Pruning, directional means a pruning technique that reduces the crown of a tree without topping or hatracking branches. This technique utilizes proper cuts, does not leave a stub, and does not disturb the branch collar and the branch bark ridge. This technique is most often used when a tree is or has the potential to interfere with a utility line or other obstruction. 
    Pump cycling means an irrigation pump coming on and shutting off frequently during operation of irrigation systems. 
    Rain sensor device means a low voltage electrical or mechanical component placed in the circuitry of an automatic irrigation system that is designed to turn off a sprinkler controller when precipitation has reached a pre-set quantity. 
    Remove or removal means actual or effective removal through killing, damaging, or destroying of any trees that are not exempt trees. 
    Renovation development means a development that includes: 
(1)  Additions to existing buildings or structures totaling 25 percent or more of the total gross floor area of all existing buildings or structures on the site inclusive of any additions made during the previous three years; or 
(2)  Improvements to existing buildings and site improvements consisting of any combination of repairs, reconstruction and alteration to a building or site the cumulative costs of which, according to most current edition of the Southern Building Code valuation (updated annually), equal or exceed $25,000.00. 
    Replacement tree or replacement vegetation means any number of trees or vegetation noted in Appendix B of this landscape code deemed acceptable by the community development director as substitute/mitigation for any number of trees or vegetation removed. 
    Restoration plan means a landscape plan required to address violations of this landscape code and prepared in accordance with the requirements outlined herein. 
    Runoff means water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape and flows from the area following irrigation or a storm event. 
    Shade tree means a tree that locally reaches a minimum height of 25 feet at maturity, providing relief from direct sunlight for at least six months of the year. 
    Shrub means any woody perennial plant of low height, characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from the base. Shrubs shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height and have a minimum 12-inch spread or be a three-gallon container size at planting. 
    Site appropriate plant means a plant that after establishment will thrive within the environmental conditions that are normal for a specific location without artificial supplements such as irrigation. 
    Skyglow means the illumination of the night sky or parts of it, most commonly created by artificial light sources. See light pollution. 
    Soil moisture sensor. See moisture sensing device. 
    Soil texture means the classification of soil based on the percentage of sand, silt, and clay in the soil. 
    Tree means a self-supporting, long-lived, perennial woody plant, often having many secondary branches supported clear of the ground on a single main stem or trunk with clear apical dominance, which is the phenomenon where the main central stem of the tree is dominant over other side stems. Mature height varies depending on species type. 
    Tree abuse means improperly pruning, cutting, hatracking, or shaping a tree to the extent that more that 25 percent of the canopy is removed within a year. Visual indications of tree abuse are stub cuts and/or ripping or tearing of bark below fresh cuts. 
    Turf and/or Turfgrass means a mat layer of monocotyledonous plants such as Bahia, Bermuda, Centipede, Paspalum, St. Augustine, and Zoysia. 
    Understory means the vegetative layer, especially smaller accent trees and shrubs, between the canopy and ground cover of a landscape. 
    Urban tree canopy (UTC) means the layer of leaves branches and stems of trees that cover the ground when viewed from above. 
    Vacant development means a building or buildings comprising a single development and having remained unoccupied for not less than 180 days. 
    Valve means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
    Vine means any plant with a long slender stem that trails or creeps on the ground or climbs by winding or attaching itself on a support such as walls, poles and trees. Vines shall be a minimum of 36 inches in height at planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens or walls to meet physical barrier requirements. 
    Visibility triangle means the area of land described as either of the following: 
(1)  The triangular area of property on each side of a driveway formed by the intersection of the driveway and the public right-of-way line with two sides of each triangle being ten feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two other sides; or 
(2)  The triangular area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two or more public rights-of-way. Two sides being 25 feet in length along the abutting public right-of-way lines and pavement edges, measured from their point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two other sides. 
    Volunteer plant means a plant that has been naturally deposited and germinated which was not intentionally planted or initially contemplated as part of a landscape plan. Unlike weeds, which are unwanted plants, a volunteer plant may be incorporated into the landscape design and encouraged to grow if appropriate. Water use zone. See hydrozone. 
    Xeriscape see Florida-friendly landscape. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-598. - Applicability. 
(a)  Specific application of the provisions of this article shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  All new, redeveloped, renovated or rehabilitated landscapes for public projects and private development projects, including, but not limited to, industrial, commercial, residential, and recreation projects, including new single-family and two-family homes; 
(2)  Developer-installed landscapes at entrances into and common areas of single-family and multi-family projects; and 
(b)  This article shall apply to all new residential or nonresidential development or to the expansion, renovation or redevelopment of existing development. Existing single-family dwellings and duplexes shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Maintenance of swales; visibility at intersections; pruning of trees; turf heights; weed maintenance; edging of curbs, sidewalks and roadways; exempt or prohibited plant species; native trees; tree canopy clearance; vegetation removal as it applies to street trees and/or trees required as part of a site and/or landscape plan approval or required to satisfy minimum landscaping requirements. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall apply to the development, redevelopment, renovation, and maintenance of all property within present or future incorporated areas of the city, which are subject to the city's Land Development Regulations and Code of Ordinances. All buildings, structures and changes of use requiring site plan review shall require a submittal of a landscape plan. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect, or other person authorized pursuant to F.S. §§ 481.301 through 481.329, as amended. Landscape plans for single-family and duplex dwellings may be prepared by the property owner instead of a landscape architect. 
(d)  No department shall issue a permit provided for herein in violation of this article. Compliance with this article will be confirmed via approval of permit application/landscape plan. The standards and requirements contained in this chapter are continuing and do not expire upon issuance of the final certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued for building, paving, grading or tree removal unless the construction documents comply with the provisions hereof. 
(f)  No new certificate of occupancy or certificate of use shall be issued until the requirements herein are met to the fullest extent possible, as determined by the community development director or designee. 
(g)  All city landscape service contractors will adhere to the practices outlined within. All new bid specifications and contracts will reflect this requirement immediately following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(h)  All new and renovated city facility landscapes will be designed in accordance with these principles and be constructed and installed utilizing Florida Friendly landscape methods and materials. 
(i)  The following activities or uses are explicitly exempted from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Bona fide agricultural activities, as defined by Florida statute; 
(2)  Turf grass and/or play areas associated with golf courses and specialized athletic fields; 
(3)  Any development that is governed via the approval of a final site development plan or a valid building permit issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives is exempted from retrofitting or meeting the specific provisions related to efficient irrigation. Existing development is not exempted from those provisions affecting management or maintenance; 
(4)  Rights-of-way for public utilities, including electrical transmission and distribution lines, and natural gas pipelines; 
(5)  Turf grass in stormwater management areas; 
(6)  Historically recognized community landmarks; 
(7)  Cemeteries; and 
(8)  Environmental restoration projects. 
(j)  If the provisions of this article conflict with other ordinances or regulations, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern or prevail to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-599. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following are exempt from the permitting and review process of this landscape code: 
(1)  The removal of trees or other landscape element severely damaged by fire, windstorm, lightning, or other acts of nature, which pose imminent danger to life or property: 
a.  Pruning or removal of damaged trees after a natural disaster or act of nature, such as a hurricane, shall be done according to current best management practices (ANSI A300 or similar). 
1.  If the vital structural elements of a tree have been compromised, the tree shall be removed and replaced with same or similar tree species. 
2.  If a lightly damaged tree maintains the necessary structural stability to regenerate, it is not to automatically be removed, as it may recover and obtain a desirable form with future maintenance and supervision. If said tree shows signs of deterioration, the tree shall be removed and replaced with same or similar tree species. 
(2)  The removal of landscaping specifically grown as landscape material for resale, including all licensed nurseries and botanical gardens; 
(3)  The removal of exempt or unprotected trees, as defined in Appendix A.1 and A.2 of this landscape code; 
(4)  The removal of damaged or hazardous trees in conjunction with a declared emergency. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-600. - General provisions. 
(a)  Low impact site design practices, such as preserving existing native trees and vegetation, shall be used whenever feasible. Where established vegetation is incorporated into the landscape design, irrigation of those areas shall not be required. Vegetation preserved in this manner may be counted towards the total number of required plants needed for site plan approval, at a ratio depending on the quality of the vegetation on site, but shall not substitute for landscaping required within buffer areas or parking areas elsewhere onsite. 
(b)  The plant palette and irrigation system shall be appropriate for site conditions, which include but are not limited to soil quality and type, elevations, available shade, and proximity to water bodies (fresh/salt water), taking into account that, in some cases, berms and soil improvement may enhance water use efficiency and plant health. 
(c)  All landscapes must be designed, planted and maintained in accordance with Florida Friendly landscaping principles. The percentage of landscaped area, excluding turfgrass areas, incorporating the use of high water use hydrozones shall be minimized to no more than 20 percent of the total non-turfgrass landscaped area. 
(d)  Plant material shall be grouped together by irrigation demand. The percentage of landscaped area requiring high water use irrigation hydrozones should be minimized, and substituted with native plants requiring lower amounts of water to survive and thrive whenever feasible. 
(e)  High water use hydrozones and turfgrass areas should be located away from impervious surfaces such as parking areas and sidewalks to avoid water runoff and wastage. Narrow strips of turfgrass shall be minimized or eliminated from landscape designs and replaced with low-maintenance ground covers or shrubs and mulch. 
(f)  Landscape plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of all applicable Florida and local laws, rules, regulations and ordinances. All landscape and irrigation system designs shall be consistent with the standards required by F.S. § 373.228, as amended. 
(g)  The landscape plan shall consider natural drainage elements and features that minimize runoff and maximize on-site infiltration. The use of pervious paving materials and surfaces is preferred and shall be encouraged where appropriate. Refer to the city's comprehensive plan for established pervious/impervious ratios. 
(h)  The landscape plan should consider the soil requirements for trees based on their size at maturity and their distance from adjacent paved/hardscape areas and utility infrastructure. Larger soil volumes lead to greater tree size, better tree health, longer tree life, greater environmental benefits, and reduced maintenance costs. 
(i)  Reclaimed or non-potable water should be used for irrigation if an acceptable source is determined to be available by the water provider. The use of cisterns and rain barrels for irrigation shall be encouraged when deemed appropriate. 
(j)  Landscaped areas shall be located on a site in such manner as to maximize preservation of existing trees with priority given to specimen trees and native shade tree species. 
(k)  The property owner shall not place impervious/hardscape areas within five feet of the base of an existing tree. Government beautification projects are exempt from this requirement. 
(l)  The property owner shall properly maintain mulch within all planting areas and around all trees to a depth of three inches. The type of mulch shall be specified on the landscape plan. The use of cypress mulch is discouraged in order to protect natural cypress wetlands and should be substituted with mulch comprised of eucalyptus, melaleuca, pine bark or pine straw or with recycled mulch or combination thereof. Inorganic materials, such as rock, and gravel absorb and re-radiate heat from the sun, increasing water loss from plants and soil and are not a viable substitute for organic mulch and should be used sparingly. 
(m)  The maximum percentage of gravel or decorative rocks used as mulch or landscape decoration shall not exceed 25 percent of the total required landscape area. 
(n)  Not less than 85 percent of a required shoreline buffer shall consist of native vegetation. 
(o)  An opaque, minimum six-foot high masonry wall or fence shall screen the storage area for all trash receptacles, including dumpsters. A hedge shall be installed around the perimeter of this screen. Dumpsters shall be sited so as not to be visible from the public right-of-way. Metal gates or similar, shall be used to screen trash receptacles from view from the public right-of-way. All dumpsters must be screened (to greatest extent possible) within one year after the adoption of this code. 
(p)  The owner shall exhibit all lighting details on or, included as a separate detailed lightning plan, in conjunction with all landscape plan submittals. Efforts shall be made to reduce light pollution, which include light trespass, and skyglow through the use of shielding and proper lighting elements. Proposed elements that will mitigate light pollution shall be described and noted on the plan. Lighting details shall be reviewed for public safety concerns in accordance with site plan review procedures. Standards for coastal lighting as described in Palm Beach County's Unified Land Development Code, Environmental Standards (Article 14) shall be incorporated when applicable. 
(q)  So long as parking areas remain screened from the public right-of-way and adjacent private property, landscape materials may be clustered, and hedges may be replaced or interrupted in areas, providing for decorative wall, berms and other creative landscape features, allowing for flexibility and creativity in design. The Community Development Director or designee must approve of such modifications in accordance with site plan review procedures, and modifications must be consistent with the intent of this landscape code. 
(r)  The required landscaping (not less than 20 percent of the total gross area) shall be increased by ten square feet for each additional parking space exceeding the minimum number of parking spaces required by the City of Riviera Beach Land Development Code. The additional landscaping shall be designed in accordance with the standards of these regulations. For each additional 100 square feet of impervious areas or fraction thereof, the owner shall provide one shade tree in addition to shrubs, ground cover, grasses and mulch. 
(s)  Landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by curbing and/or wheel stops. 
(t)  The base of each permitted freestanding sign shall be surrounded by a five foot plant bed around the perimeter of the sign. This five foot area shall be planted with low-growing plant material in a manner that will present a full and finished appearance within a six month period from planting. Completion of this requirement is mandatory prior to the final inspection and approval of any new freestanding sign or freestanding sign face change. 
(u)  The owner shall remove and eradicate all category 1 exotic nuisance vegetation as defined by the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council, listed in Appendix A.1, as part of the site preparation process before a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completeness shall be issued. 
(v)  The owner shall retain all native vegetation in an undisturbed state, in areas not requiring removal as part of the development plan, as indicated on a native vegetation tree survey. At minimum, 20 percent of the total gross area of the development site shall be landscaped and the landscaped areas shall be located in such manner as to maximize preservation of existing trees. Such areas of native vegetation shall be screened using a protective barrier during construction. The type of screening shall be approved by the department of community development before a permit to clear the property will be issued by the city. 
(w)  Vegetation that is set aside for preservation shall be protected from all on-site construction. Protective barriers shall be installed along the perimeter of all preserve areas and constructed at such intervals to prevent machinery from passing between them. No equipment or materials shall be permitted within set-aside areas, and dumping of excess soil, liquids, or other construction debris into preserved areas is prohibited. Removal or re-grading of soils within preservation areas is prohibited. Any damaged vegetation within the set-aside areas shall be replaced with vegetation equivalent to the vegetation that was destroyed. Protective barriers shall be established and remain around all preserve areas and trees until final landscape inspection approval. 
(x)  Existing healthy trees which have a caliper of one and one half inch DBH, or larger, and which are not prohibited trees, may be credited toward meeting the minimum number of required trees. However all buffers and parking areas are required to comply with the parking area landscape requirements. 
(y)  A tree removal permit or land clearing permit must be obtained from the city before removing any tree(s) with a DBH of three inches or greater, unless the tree is identified as exempt or unprotected. 
(z)  Please refer to the city's Code of Ordinances section 30-37, entitled, Natural features preservation, for additional preservation requirements for subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-601. - Appropriate plant selection, location, and arrangement. 
(a)  Plant selection should be based on the plant's adaptability to the existing conditions present, particularly considering appropriate hardiness zone, soil type and moisture conditions, light, mature plant size, desired effect, color and texture. Native plant species that are drought, wind and/or salt tolerant with some cold tolerance are preferred. Additionally, plants that have a high ecological value, (plants providing important or unique food sources or habitat for animals and/or insects) shall be incorporated into plant selection strategy. 
(b)  Plants shall be grouped in accordance with their respective water and maintenance needs. Plants with similar water and cultural (soil, climate, sun, and light) requirements shall be grouped together. The water use zones (hydrozones) shall be shown on the irrigation, layout, and planting plans (where required). Where natural conditions are such that irrigation is not required, the presence of site appropriate plants shall not be considered a high water use hydrozone. 
(c)  The combined size of all high water use hydrozones shall be limited to 20 percent of the total landscaped area. In landscapes irrigated with recycled water, the allowable size of all high water-use zones shall be limited to 50 percent of the total landscaped area. 
(d)  For purposes of determining prohibited and controlled plant species refer to the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services rule, Chapter 5B-57 Florida Administrative Code in addition to the list of plants specifically prohibited by this code. Plants named in this rule may not be used except as allowed in Chapter 5B-57. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-602. - Landscape plan and irrigation plan requirements. 
(a)  Prior to any lot clearing, or the development, redevelopment or renovation of any open space, vehicular use area, multifamily or nonresidential development, a permit from the building division shall be required. A landscape plan shall be submitted to and must be approved by the community development department's zoning division as part of the site plan review process, before the issuance of a building permit. All landscape plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements set forth in this landscape code. 
(b)  The following information is required on all landscape plans: 
(1)  Plans shall be signed and sealed per F.S., Ch. 481.321 "Seals; display of certificate number," which states "All final plans, specifications, or reports prepared or issued by the registered landscape architect and filed for public record shall be signed by the registered landscape architect, dated, and stamped or sealed electronically with his or her seal. The signature, date and seal constitute evidence of the authenticity of that to which they are affixed". Additionally, the parcel control number and address of the property location as well as the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, and the Florida registered landscape architect, architect, engineer or other applicable professional shall appear on the plan. 
(c)  Landscape plans shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  A minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet; 
(2)  Location of all trees, vegetation, or ecological communities to be removed and preserved, and tree survey if applicable; 
(3)  Location of all landscape material to be used with identification coding, including location and specifications of all inanimate materials, such as mulch, rocks, stepping stones and gravel; 
(4)  Landscape material schedule/table listing all plants being used with their scientific and common name and where applicable, cultivar name; spacing of plants, quantities and container size of each type of plant, height and spread of plant material at time of planting, and typical mature height and spread of landscape material; 
(5)  Indicate if plant material is native to South Florida and list the following categories as low, medium or high; rate of growth, drought tolerance, salt tolerance, light requirements, nutritional requirements, wind resistance and ecological importance (recognized as an important or unique food or shelter source for animals and/or insects) and include source of information; 
(6)  Typical planting illustration/details for trees, palms, shrubs, groundcover and sod; 
(7)  Location of existing and proposed water bodies and retention areas; 
(8)  Location and outline of existing buildings and site improvements to remain in addition to any proposed buildings and site improvements, including but not limited to structures such as sheds, pools, fountains, fences and retaining walls, pad-mounted units, green roof areas, planters; 
(9)  Existing and proposed elevations; 
(10)  Location of existing and proposed hardscape features such as driveways, sidewalks, vehicular use areas, parking spaces, cross-lot driving corridors; 
(11)  Location and type of site lighting; 
(12)  Location and dimensions of any freestanding signage; 
(13)  Location of all underground and overhead utilities and easements; 
(14)  Any other factors affecting the proposed use of the property. 
(d)  Irrigation plans shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  A minimum scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet; 
(2)  Location of existing trees, vegetation and ecological communities to remain, if applicable; 
(3)  Location of existing buildings, paving and site improvements to remain or proposed; 
(4)  Irrigation points of connection (POC) and design capacity; 
(5)  Water service pressure at irrigation POCs; 
(6)  Water meter size; 
(7)  Major components and location of the irrigation system, including all pumps, filters, valves, and pipe sizes and lengths; 
(8)  Reduced-pressure-principle backflow-prevention devices for each irrigation POC on potable water systems and specifications; 
(9)  Controller locations and specifications, with location of rain shut-off devices or soil moisture sensors; 
(10)  The irrigation legend will have the following elements: Separate symbols for all irrigation equipment with different spray patterns and precipitation rates and pressure compensating devices; general description of equipment; manufacturer's name and model number for all specified equipment; recommended operating pressure per nozzle and bubbler and low-flow emitter; manufacturer's recommended overhead and bubbler irrigation nozzle rating in gallons per minute or gallons per hour for low flow applicators; minimum (no less than 75 percent of maximum spray radius) and maximum spray radius per nozzle; and manufacturer's rated precipitation rate per nozzle at specified psi; and 
(11)  Zone layout plan (minimum scale 1? = 20') which indicates the following; 
a.  Head type, specifications and spacing; 
b.  Methods used to achieve compliance with landscape irrigation design standards and required irrigation zones as required by this article and F.S. § 373.228, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-603. - Installation and maintenance guarantee. 
(a)  In conjunction with landscape plan approvals, the property owner or lawful occupant shall provide an installation and maintenance financial guarantee or financial security totaling 110 percent of the cost of the landscape and irrigation, typically in the form of a landscape bond, or in an alternate form deemed acceptable by the community development director. 
(1)  The owner shall provide this financial guarantee or financial security before the city performs any landscape inspection or issues a certificate of occupancy. This financial guarantee ensures that the installation and maintenance of all required landscaping and irrigation systems are done in accordance with this landscape code and all other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(2)  In addition to this financial guarantee or financial security, a list shall be provided indicating the cost of all landscape materials utilized and reference the approved development/landscape plans it relates to. 
(3)  If at any time, the owner does not maintain the landscaping, the city may use the financial guarantee or financial security to maintain or replace dead or unacceptable plant materials and irrigation components after a written notice has been provided to the property owner. 
(4)  Once a two year period has passed from the date of the initial landscape inspection and approval, the property owner may request in writing, a final re-inspection in order for the city to release and return any and all remaining financial guarantee or financial security. This guarantee shall be released by the city after a location passes the final re-inspection, verifying that all plant material and irrigation has been maintained according to the approved landscape plan and applicable codes. 
a.  If a location fails a final re-inspection, the financial guarantee or financial security shall not be released to the property owner. A list of needed improvements will be provided to the property owner in an official letter from the community development department. Once the property owner completes these required improvements the financial guarantee or financial security shall be released. If these necessary improvements do not occur, the city may use the financial guarantee or financial security to maintain or replace landscape items as necessary. 
(b)  Once an installation and maintenance financial guarantee or financial security has been released, it is the property owner's responsibility to properly maintain all landscape elements, living and inorganic, according to all applicable city codes, in perpetuity. If a property owner fails to do so, code enforcement procedures may occur as required, in order to correct these inconsistencies. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-604. - Standards for preservation of native vegetation areas. 
(a)  This section shall apply to all new developments of five acres or more permitted after approval of this regulation that meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Parcels or lots independent of larger developments that are less than five acres in size shall not be subject to these native vegetation preservation set-aside requirements. Tree preservation ordinances and all other landscape requirements shall remain applicable to all development as described within the landscape regulations. 
(2)  This section mandates a total of ten percent of a site planned for development be set aside for preservation if that site is five acres or greater. When clearing, ten percent of the native vegetation on the site shall be preserved. If native vegetation is not present on site, established open space zoning and landscape ordinance criteria shall be followed. 
(3)  Native vegetation that is set aside for preservation shall be protected from all on-site construction. Protective barriers shall be installed along the perimeter of all preserve areas. Protective barriers shall be constructed at such intervals to prevent machinery from passing between them. No equipment or materials shall be permitted to be stored within the set-aside areas, and dumping of excess soil, liquids, or any other construction debris within the preservation areas is prohibited. Removal or re-grading of soils within preservation areas is prohibited. Any damaged vegetation within the set-aside areas shall be replaced with vegetation equivalent to the vegetation destroyed before any certificates of occupancy or other approvals are issued by the city. Utility easements and rights-of-way are exempt but should avoid preserved areas. 
(4)  Areas that are considered to be of high ecological importance should be given highest priority for protection. These areas include, but are not limited to, areas that have occurrences of federal and state listed species of flora and fauna, areas of high biological diversity, and areas that are in aquifer recharge zones. 
(5)  If more than one native terrestrial plant community is present on the site, areas representing all existing native plant communities shall be preserved onsite unless preserving more of one particular community is more ecologically significant or beneficial. 
(6)  High-quality native plant areas placed in preservation shall be retained in entirety, in their current or improved natural state, and protected into perpetuity regardless of ownership. This requirement may be negotiated to create contiguous preservation among plant communities. The developer shall prove to the city, through exhibits provided during the site plan approval process, that the highest ecologically valued land is being retained first in order to satisfy the set-aside requirement. If the preservation of the highest ecologically valued land produces undue burden on the development of the property, it is also the developer's responsibility to prove such hardship and provide an acceptable alternative for approval. 
(7)  Areas set aside for preservation should be contiguous parcels of land that are interconnected and considered viable habitat for wildlife to the extent practical. Small fragmented areas of preservation should be avoided when possible. 
(8)  Rights-of-way and areas determined to be future rights-of-way in the comprehensive plan, and utility or drainage easements shall not be allowed as designated set-aside areas. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-605. - Plant material standards and installation requirements. 
(a)  Plant material standards. 
(1)  At least 70 percent of all required landscaping in the form of trees, shrubs, ground cover, and grasses shall collectively consist of native vegetation, excluding turfgrass. The owner may select site appropriate native vegetation from Appendix B, or from the most current edition of South Florida Water Management District's "WaterWise: South Florida Landscapes" or similar. Additionally, native Florida species plant lists are available at www.sfwmd.gov. 
(2)  At least 60 percent of all required trees shall consist of a native, shade tree species. At least ten percent of all required trees shall consist of a native, accent tree species. Not more than 20 percent of all required trees shall be of a palm species. When palm species are used, they shall have a minimum of eight feet of clear trunk at time of planting. 
(3)  At least 25 percent of all required landscaping shall consist of plant material that is recognized as being ecologically significant (plants providing significant food sources or habitat for desirable wildlife; animals, birds and/or insects). 
(4)  All required shade trees shall meet the following requirements prior to planting: 
a.  Minimum trunk diameter of two inches DBH. 
b.  Minimum height of 12 feet. 
c.  Minimum of six feet clear trunk space. 
d.  Minimum average crown spread of five feet. 
(5)  All required accent trees shall meet the following requirements prior to planting: 
a.  Minimum trunk diameter of 11/2 inches DBH. 
b.  Minimum height of ten feet. 
c.  Minimum of five feet clear trunk space. 
d.  Minimum average crown spread of five feet. 
(6)  Newly installed plant material that fails to meet the above mentioned criteria will not be considered a tree and will not count towards the required number of trees during landscape inspection. If this should occur, the material shall either be replaced or, at the discretion of the community development director, additional plant material may be installed on site to mitigate for any lack of plant material. 
(7)  To increase landscape biodiversity and to minimize potential impacts of species-specific diseases or insects, it is important to have a variety of shade tree species planted on a site. If more than 5 shade trees are required, the minimum number of shade tree species planted shall be in accordance with the following table. 
Required Number of 
Shade Trees Minimum Number of 
Shade Tree Species 1-5 1 6-15 2 16-30 3 31-50 4 51-75 5 Over 75 6  
(8)  Any landscape plan proposing more that five shade trees shall ensure that a mixed composition of tree species is planted. At no time shall a landscape plan proposing more than five shade trees recommend a single species to comprise more that 65 percent of the trees required. 
(9)  Plant materials used in accordance with this article shall conform to the standards for Florida Grade One, or better, as provided for in the most current edition of Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, by the Division of Plant Industry, Department of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs, State of Florida. Sod shall be clean and visibly free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. Grass seed shall be delivered to the job site in bags with Florida Department of Agriculture tags attached indicating the quality control program. 
(10)  The owner shall plant turf areas with species locally grown as permanent lawns. The owner may sod, plug, sprig, or seed grass areas, provided he or she uses solid sod in swales or other areas subject to erosion. In areas where solid sod or grass seed is not used, grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. 
(b)  Installation. 
(1)  All required landscaping installed pursuant to this landscape code shall be installed according to accepted good planting practices and best management practices identified by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) or similar. All plants shall be installed so that the top of the root ball remains even with the soil grade. All trees, palms and shrubs shall be hosed in with water at the time of installation to eliminate any air pockets. 
(2)  Trees and palms shall be properly installed, staked/braced and mulched according to best management practices. Stakes and braces shall remain for a minimum of 12 months. 
(3)  The owner shall not plant tree species identified by the community development director as likely to cause damage to public roadways, public facilities or building foundations closer than 12 feet thereto. The owner may only plant these species within 12 feet of public roadways, public facilities or building foundations if the trees root system is completely contained within a container or barrier at least five feet square and five feet deep. The construction requirements shall be four inch thick concrete reinforced with No. 6 road mesh or equivalent. 
(4)  Trees of species whose canopy could be damaged by or could cause damage to overhead power lines shall not be planted closer than a horizontal distance of 15 feet from such overhead power lines. Right tree right place guidelines, which have been demonstrated by the Arbor Day Foundation and others, shall be used as guidelines for ensuring proper tree placement. 
(5)  When groundcover is used, it shall be installed to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage at time of planting if used in lieu of grass. Complete coverage is required within one year of planting areas utilizing groundcover. 
(6)  Vines shall be a minimum of 30 inches in height at planting. The owner may use them in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls to meet physical barrier requirements. 
(7)  Barricades shall be established and remain around protected areas until final landscape inspection approval. Protected existing trees and landscape areas shall remain free of construction debris and vehicles, stored material and chemicals or similar. 
(8)  For multifamily residential development and for all other nonresidential development, the owner must install all required landscaping according to the landscape plan and the requirements of this landscape code. The city will not issue a certificate of occupancy, certificate of use or similar authorization until the community development director or designee has verified that the required landscaping has been properly installed. 
(9)  Shrub plantings shall be spaced accordingly to plant size and material used. Hedges shall form a continuous visual screen one year after planting. 
(10)  All berms shall be constructed not to exceed a three to one slope and include adequate plant material and groundcover in order to prevent erosion. 
(11)  All new vegetation shall be located so as to provide unrestricted flow or access to drainage swales or utility easements or areas where frequent pruning is required to avoid interference with overhead power lines or similar. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-606. - Landscape maintenance. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  A regular irrigation maintenance schedule shall include but not be limited to checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation equipment; and resetting the automatic controller according to the season to reduce water and energy wastage. 
(2)  To maintain the original performance and design integrity of the irrigation system, repair of the equipment shall be done with the originally specified materials or their equivalents. 
(3)  Landscape maintenance for hire should be performed in accordance with recommendations in the Florida Green Industries Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources in Florida. 
(4)  Landscape maintenance by homeowners should be performed in accordance with recommendations of the University of Florida Cooperative Extension Service and Florida Yards & Neighborhoods publications. 
(5)  The owner and/or lawful occupant of real property landscaped as new development, renovation development, or vacant development pursuant to this landscape code are responsible for the maintenance of required landscaping in a healthy, growing condition. 
(6)  The owner and/or the lawful occupant of real property landscaped prior to the effective date of this landscape code are each responsible for the maintenance of all installed landscaping in a healthy, growing condition. 
(7)  The owner and/or lawful occupant shall maintain in a neat and orderly appearance, and keep free from refuse and debris all landscaped areas. All walls and fences shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from graffiti. 
(8)  The owner and/or lawful occupant of real property shall prune trees only as necessary to promote healthy growth or to avoid buildings, power lines or other structures. The owner shall not severely prune or "hatrack" trees to permanently maintain growth at a reduced height. Pruning shall be accomplished in accordance with current best management practices in accordance with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations, or similar. Directional pruning is currently recognized as a best management practice for avoidance of overhead power lines. 
(9)  All required landscaping installed, relocated or replaced, in accordance with this Landscape Code shall be replaced in the event said landscaping expires. If the new development, renovation development, or vacant development otherwise contains landscaping which meets the minimum requirements of this landscape code, the Community Development Director may waive the replacement tree requirements. 
(10)  The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the continued regular maintenance of all landscaping materials and shall keep them in healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, free from disease, pests, weeds, refuse and debris at all times. Property maintenance shall include: 
a.  Periodic watering shall occur to maintain healthy flora, minimize disease and stimulate deep root growth. 
b.  All pruning shall be in accordance with good horticultural standards as defined in the ANSI A300 Standards (or most current standards) as set forth by the Tree Care industry Association (f.k.a. the National Arborists Association) and approved by the American National Standards Institute (with the exception of Section 2.3.1 of the ANSI A300 Standards, which requires that pruning be performed only by arborists or arborist trainees). A copy of the ANSI A300 Standards shall be maintained by the department of community development and shall be available during regular business hours. Trees and shrubs shall not be severely pruned, hatracked, "hacked" or "headed back". A maximum of one-fourth of a tree canopy may be removed from a tree within a one year period, provided that the removal conforms to the standards of crown cleaning, crown thinning, crown raising, vista pruning, and crown restoration techniques. At the discretion of the community development director and based on the severity of the violation, a tree which is pruned in excess of these requirements shall either be replaced or shall be subject to corrective pruning by a certified arborist. 
c.  Turf shall be mowed as required to maintain a neat and orderly appearance. Weeds shall not exceed 12 inches in height on vacant and/or undeveloped properties. 
d.  All roadways, curbs and sidewalks shall be edged by the party responsible for installing and maintaining the grass adjacent to the roadway, curb and/or sidewalk when necessary to prevent encroachment of grasses. 
e.  Replacement of dead plant material shall be done under the provision of this article. 
f.  Removal of unprotected, prohibited, harmful and illegal plant species shall occur as outlined in this article. 
g.  All tree canopies that are planted on private property and overhang onto a public and/or private right-of-way shall remain clear from the ground level up to a height of seven feet over sidewalks or drainage areas, and to a height of eight feet over public alleys, streets or highways. 
(b)  Landscaping may be inspected as needed, to verify that standards established above are maintained. Such inspections shall be enforceable through the code enforcement division and their violation processes. The owner, tenant or their agent shall be notified in writing via mail by the city of any areas which are not being properly maintained and shall, within 30 calendar days from time of notification, address and rectify the deficiency. 
(c)  Any commercial tree service business, landscape company, lawn service business or other similar or related businesses violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to penalty as provided by section 1-11, and may also be subject to suspension of certificate of use and business tax receipt, or any other such remedies available by law. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-607. - Maintenance of sidewalk areas as public right-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of all property owners to maintain turf and landscaping which exists in street right-of-way swales and easements adjoining their properties. Turf grass in such areas shall not be allowed to exceed six inches in height. If another form of groundcover is utilized it shall meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Sidewalk areas shall be maintained by adjoining property owners and kept free of grass and weeds and shall be cleaned frequently enough to prevent accumulation of sand, dirt and trash. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-608. - Buffer setbacks for multifamily development, commercial and other nonresidential. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  In order to reduce visual, light, and noise impacts, a required buffer shall be located along the length of adjacent private property. 
(2)  The owner shall provide buffers for all developments seeking site plan approval as required by this landscape code. 
_____
(b)  Buffer setback width requirements. Except where the side or rear yards are smaller than the outlined buffer setback width requirements, the buffer setback width requirements for one-story developments are: 
Abutting single-family or two-family zoning district. 
Type of Use Side Yard (Ft.) Rear Yard (Ft.) Multifamily, 0.5 acre or less 15 20 Multifamily > 0.5 acres 25 25 Commercial and other nonresidential (other than industrial) 25 25 Industrial 30 30  
_____ 
Where the side or rear yards are smaller than the outlined buffer setback width requirements: 
(1)  Multifamily residential uses shall have buffer setback widths consisting of 40 percent of each of the side and rear yard widths; and 
(2)  Commercial and other nonresidential uses (other than industrial) shall have buffer setback widths consisting of 75 percent of each of the side and rear yard widths; and 
(3)  Industrial uses shall have buffer setback widths consisting of 90 percent of each of the side and rear yard widths. 
For multi-story developments, the buffer setback width is an additional ten feet for each additional or upper story, where applicable. 
(c)  Buffer landscaping. 
(1)  A buffer setback width shall consist of landscaping to include a buffer screen. 
(2)  The width of a buffer screen shall be 25 percent of the width of the required buffer setback width. 
(3)  A fence or wall included in a buffer shall be constructed to present a finished appearance to neighboring uses looking onto the site. 
(4)  The owner may provide an opening through a buffer area to facilitate pedestrian or vehicular traffic between developments subject to the approval of the community development director. 
(5)  Excluding the buffer screen area, a dry retention area may be located in a buffer setback width. Existing plant material within a dry retention area shall not be credited toward meeting the landscape requirements of this landscape code. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-609. - Development landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Single-family and two-family development. Single-family and two-family development, newly constructed, shall include, at a minimum, one existing or planted tree for every 2,500 square feet of lot area or fraction thereof. A minimum of six shrubs and at least one shade tree in the front yard and at least one shade tree in the rear yard shall be located on the property. The owner shall show required landscaping on an unofficial landscape plan submitted for Zoning Division approval and building permit. 
(b)  Multifamily residential development. 
(1)  Multifamily development shall provide a landscaped strip of land not less than ten feet wide between building walls and parking areas. Landscape materials shall be provided as follows: 
a.  The greater of one tree for every 20 linear feet of required landscape perimeter area, or one tree for every 200 square feet of planting area or a major portion thereof. Not less than 50 percent of trees, located between the building walls and parking areas shall be shade trees; and 
b.  A hedge or other durable landscape barrier not less than 24 inches in height at installation placed in a continuous manner along the building walls. 
(2)  A landscaped strip of land, not less than ten feet in depth, shall be located between the abutting right-of-way and parking areas. Landscape materials shall be provided as follows: 
a.  The greater of one tree for every 20 linear feet of required landscape perimeter area, or one tree for every 250 square feet of planting area or major portion thereof. No less than 75 percent of the trees, located between the abutting right-of-way and parking area shall be shade trees; 
b.  A hedge, wall, berm or other durable landscape barrier not less than three feet in height at installation shall be placed in a continuous manner along the landscape strip; and 
c.  A combination of grass, ground cover, or other landscape treatment excluding paving shall cover the remainder of the landscaped strip. 
(3)  The owner shall landscape all property, excluding the required landscape strip lying between the building and parking area, and the right-of-way and parking area, with grass, ground cover or low-growing shrubs. 
(4)  Multifamily residential development shall provide not less than one tree for each 1,500 square feet or fraction thereof, of development site. 
(5)  The owner shall landscape not less than 20 percent of the development site. 
(6)  The city will credit existing native vegetation and trees toward landscaping requirements. 
(c)  Commercial and other nonresidential development. A commercial or other nonresidential development being new development, renovation development or vacant development shall include one existing or planted tree for every 1,500 square feet, or fraction thereof, of development site. The owner shall landscape not less than 20 percent of the developed site. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-610. - Parking areas for multifamily and all nonresidential developments. 
(a)  Parking area landscaping adjacent to streets. The owner shall install landscaping on the site of a multifamily or nonresidential development including parking areas as follows: 
(1)  A landscaped strip of land not less than ten feet in width shall be located between the parking area and the abutting street. 
(2)  The landscaping provided within the landscaped strip shall include: 
a.  One tree for every 20 linear feet of required landscape strip planted singly or in clusters, not to be more than 50 feet apart when utilizing clustering techniques, located between the property line and the parking area; 
b.  A hedge, wall, berm or other durable landscape barrier of not less than 24 inches or three gallon containers at installation placed along the outside perimeter of the landscaped strip; 
c.  Other landscaping, such as shrubs or vines, planted three feet on-center or as appropriate to create reasonable coverage within six months after planting, along the street side of a wall; and 
d.  Grass, ground cover, or other landscape treatment and mulch. 
(3)  The owner shall plant shrubs intended to form a hedge in the landscaped strip at 24 to 30 inches on-center. 
(4)  Not less than 25 percent of the strip shall be ground cover or shrubs. 
(5)  At a minimum, the owner shall also landscape property located between the strip and parking area with grass or other ground cover. 
(b)  Parking area landscaping adjacent to private property. On the site of multifamily or a nonresidential development or redevelopment, including parking areas which abut private property, the owner shall install landscaping as follows: 
(1)  A landscaped strip of land not less than five feet in width shall be located between the parking area and the abutting private property. 
(2)  The landscaping provided within the landscaped strip shall include: 
a.  One tree for every 20 linear feet of required landscape strip planted singly or in clusters, not to be more than 50 feet apart, located between the common lot line and the abutting private property; 
b.  A hedge, wall, berm or other durable landscape barrier of not less than 24 inches or three-gallon containers at installation placed along the outside perimeter of the strip; 
c.  Other landscaping, such as shrubs or vines, planted five feet on-center along the street side of a wall; and 
d.  Grass, ground cover, or other landscape treatment. 
(3)  The owner shall plant shrubs intended to form a hedge in the landscaped strip at 24 to 30 inches on-center. 
(4)  Not less than 25 percent of the strip shall be ground cover or shrubs. 
(5)  At a minimum, the owner shall also landscape property located between the strip and parking area with grass or other ground cover. 
(c)  Parking area interior landscaping. 
(1)  For multifamily residential and all other nonresidential development, not less than 50 percent of the required landscaping shall be interior landscaping exclusive of required buffers. Interior landscaping shall be located around the periphery of structures and interspersed throughout parking areas. 
(2)  The owner shall provide a landscaped area not less than five feet wide, consisting primarily of shrubs and ground cover, along the sides of the building which abut a parking area. A landscaped area not less than three feet in width shall be provided along the sides and rear of a building where abutting an on-site service or access driveway. The landscaping located along the sides and rear of buildings, which abut a parking area or driveway(s), shall include a hedge, one tree for every 20 linear feet, and ground cover. The owner may cluster this landscaping to allow for creativity and flexibility in design, with the approval of the community development director. 
(3)  Interior landscaping shall include not less than one tree for every 50 square feet or fraction thereof of interior landscaped area. Interior landscaped areas shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving. 
(4)  Vehicles may not encroach into any landscaped area. Curbs and wheelstops shall be utilized in all parking and drive areas. 
(5)  The owner shall provide interior landscaped islands between every ten parking spaces. Each interior island shall be not less than six feet in width. Each interior island shall contain not less than one shade tree and a combination of shrubs, ground cover, grass, and mulch. 
(6)  The owner shall provide terminal landscaped islands at the end of each parking row. Terminal landscaped islands shall be not less than ten feet in width and one parking space in length. Each terminal island shall contain not less than one shade tree and a combination of shrubs, ground cover, grass and mulch and shall be curbed. 
(7)  The owner shall provide interior landscaped medians not less than six feet in width between every interior row of parking spaces. The owner shall landscape interior medians with not less than one shade tree every 20 linear feet thereof planted singly or in clusters. No trees shall be located more than 50 feet apart and a combination of shrubs, ground cover, grass and mulch shall be used. 
(8)  Not less than 50 percent of trees used in parking area interior landscaping shall be shade trees. 
(9)  The owner shall not use interior and terminal landscaped islands and medians for surface water storage. All interior and terminal landscaped islands and medians must be filled or crowned, and curbed. 
(10)  Underground parking structures and multi-level parking structures shall have a landscaped buffer setback width of 20 feet on the front lot line. The owner shall measure the landscaped buffer setback width at right angles to the property line unless parts of the district regulations specify a wider area. 
(d)  Visibility triangles. All landscaping within a visibility triangle shall provide unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between 21/2 feet and six feet. It shall comply with the most current edition of the Florida Department of Transportation Roadway and Traffic Design Standards, Index 546, regarding visibility triangles. The city shall require that trees or palms have limbs and foliage trimmed so no limbs or foliage extends into the cross-visibility area provided the location does not itself create a traffic hazard. The owner shall not locate landscaping, except grass, ground cover or low-growing shrubs closer than three feet from the edge of any driveway pavement. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-611. - Turf areas. 
(a)  Irrigated turf shall not be treated as fill-in material but rather a planned element of the landscape. All turf areas shall utilize grass species suitable as permanent lawns in Southeast Florida. Turf shall be placed so that it can be irrigated using separate zones. While turf areas provide many practical benefits in a landscape, how and where it is used can result in a significant reduction in water use. 
(b)  Turf grass areas are excluded from the high water use hydrozone designation (a maximum of 20 percent of the total landscaped area may be installed with a high water use designation), however, turf areas shall be identified on the landscape plan and shall meet the maximum coverage percentages required below: 
(1)  Single-family and duplex dwellings are allowed to incorporate a maximum of 60 percent total landscape coverage consisting of turfgrass. 
(2)  Multiple family dwellings are allowed to incorporate a maximum of 55 percent total landscape coverage consisting of turfgrass. 
(3)  Commercial, retail and office developments are allowed to incorporate a maximum of 50 percent total landscape coverage consisting of turfgrass. 
(4)  Industrial development are allowed to incorporate a maximum of 45 percent total landscape coverage consisting of turfgrass. 
(5)  Other uses are allowed to incorporate a maximum of 45 percent total landscape coverage consisting of turfgrass. 
(c)  Irrigated turfgrass areas shall be consolidated and limited to those areas on the site that receive pedestrian traffic, provide for recreation use, provide cover for septic tank drainfields and required drainfield reserve areas, provide access to easements, or provide soil erosion control such as on slopes or in swales; and where turfgrass is used as a design unifier, or other similar practical use. No turfgrass that requires mowing shall be allowed on slopes greater than 4:1 or within 6 feet of the edge of a waterbody, except where adjacent to seawalls and bulkheads or needed to control erosion. 
(d)  One of the most common reasons for turf failure is over-irrigation. Irrigation systems shall be designed in accordance to this article and operated in accordance with section 20-124, Water use restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-612. - Efficient irrigation. 
(a)  If an irrigation system is desired, water can be conserved through the use of a properly designed and managed irrigation system. The following is recommended. Irrigation scheduling information, with instructions for seasonal timer and sensor changes, is provided to the owner at the time of installation. An irrigation valve site map detailing valve locations, gallons per minute demands, precipitation rates, plant types within valve circuits, and operating pressure requirements for each valve may be developed. This map shall be attached inside each irrigation controller or be kept in another readily available location if it is not practical to insert it in a small controller. 
(b)  The irrigation system shall be designed to correlate to the organization of plants into hydrozones. The water use zones shall be shown on the irrigation plan (where plan is required). all plants (including turf) require watering during establishment. Temporary equipment may be installed to facilitate establishment. 
(c)  Irrigation must be conducted in accordance with South Florida Water Management District restrictions. 
(d)  Moisture sensing and/or rain shut-off switch equipment shall be required on automatic irrigation systems to avoid irrigation during periods of sufficient soil moisture. Said equipment shall consist of an automatic mechanical or electronic sensing device or switch that will override the irrigation cycle of the sprinkler system when adequate rainfall has occurred. 
(e)  The installation of tracer wire along main lines and laterals is strongly encouraged to permit easy location and prevent inadvertent cutting of pipes. 
(f)  If the water supply for the irrigation system is from a well, a constant pressure flow control device or pressure tank with adequate capacity shall be required to minimize pump "cycling". 
(g)  Check valves must be installed at irrigation heads as needed to prevent low head drainage and puddling. 
(h)  Nozzle precipitation rates for all heads within each valve circuit must be matched to within 20 percent of one another. 
(i)  No water spray from irrigation systems shall be applied under roof overhangs. 
(j)  Irrigated areas shall not be less than three feet wide, except when using micro or drip irrigation. 
(k)  A pressure-regulating valve shall be installed and maintained if static service pressure exceeds 80 pounds per square inch. The pressure-regulating valve shall be located between the meter and the first point of water use, or first point of division in the pipe, and set at not more than 50 pounds per square inch when measured at the most elevated fixture in the structure served. This requirement may be waived if satisfactory evidence is provided that high pressure is necessary in the design and that no water will be wasted as a result of high-pressure operation. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-613. - Soils. 
(a)  Where landscape plans are required, applicants are encouraged to seek a soil analysis performed by a reputable soil testing lab to determine the soil texture, indicating the percentage of organic matter; measurement of pH, and total soluble salts; and estimated soil infiltration rate. 
(b)  Existing horticulturally suitable topsoil shall be stockpiled and re-spread during final site grading. 
(c)  Any new soil required shall be similar to the existing soil in pH, texture, permeability, and other characteristics, unless evidence is provided that a different type of soil amendment approach is justified. 
(d)  The use of solid waste compost as a soil amendment is encouraged when and where deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-614. - Yard waste management, composting and use of mulches. 
(a)  Yard wastes and vegetative debris shall not be intentionally or accidentally washed, swept, blown, disposed of or stored by wetlands, shorelines, into ditches or swales, near stormwater drains, or onto sidewalks or roadways. 
(b)  Shredded yard clippings and leaves should be used for mulch or be composted for use as fertilizer. However, diseased plant material should not be mulched and should be properly disposed of to avoid spreading disease. 
(c)  Composting of yard wastes provides many benefits and is strongly encouraged. The resulting materials are excellent soil amendments and conditioners. Other recycled solid waste products are also available and should be used when appropriate. 
(d)  Grass clippings are a benefit to lawns, replacing nutrients drawn from the soil and as mulch that helps retain moisture, lessening the need to irrigate. Grass clippings should be left on your lawn. Mulching mowers are recommended, because the grass clippings are chopped very finely. If a conventional mower equipped with a side discharge chute is used, the following practices should be employed: When mowing near the shoreline, direct the chute away from the waterbody. When mowing upland areas, direct the chute back onto the yard, not onto the road or driveway. 
(e)  Mulches applied and maintained at appropriate depths in planting beds assist soils in retaining moisture, reducing weed growth, and preventing erosion. Mulch can also be used in conjunction with ground covers in places where conditions aren't adequate for or conducive to growing quality turf. Mulches are typically wood bark chips, wood grindings, pine straws, nut shells, and shredded landscape clippings or a combination thereof. 
(f)  A layer of organic mulch three inches deep shall be specified on the landscape plans in plant beds and around individual trees in turfgrass areas. Use of byproduct or recycled mulch is recommended. Mulch is not required in annual beds. Mulch rings should extend to at least three feet around freestanding trees and shrubs. All mulch should be renewed periodically as needed to maintain a depth of three inches. Mulches should be kept at least six inches away from any portion of a building or structure, or the trunks of trees. Plastic sheeting or other impervious materials shall not be used under mulched areas. 
(g)  No compost bin or pile shall be established within five feet of any property line or easement. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-615. - Fertilizer and pesticide management. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to all fertilizer applications within the city of Riviera Beach with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Bona fide farm operations as defined in the Florida Right to Farm Act, F.S. § 823.14, as amended, provided that fertilizers are applied in accordance with the appropriate best management practices manual adopted by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Office of Agricultural Water Policy for the crop in question; and 
(2)  Fertilizer applications for golf courses, parks, and athletic fields shall follow the provisions as indicated in Rule 5E-1.003(2)(d), F.A.C, as amended. 
(a)  Fertilizer management. 
(1)  All applications of fertilizer, other than by private homeowners on their own property, should be made in accordance with the most current version of the Florida Green Industries Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources in Florida and recommendations of the University of Florida Cooperative Extension Service. 
(2)  Private homeowners are encouraged to utilize the recommendations of the University of Florida IFAS Florida Yards and Neighborhoods program and the University of Florida IFAS Fact Sheet ENH-860. 
(3)  Fertilizers applied to turf and/or landscape plants shall be formulated and applied in accordance with requirements and directions as provided on the fertilizer bag and by Rule 5E-1003(2), F.A.C. Nitrogen or phosphorus fertilizer shall only be applied to turf or landscape plants during growth periods, not during dormant periods. These fertilizers shall not be applied except as provided for by the directions on the fertilizer bag unless a soil or plant tissue deficiency has been verified by UF/IFAS Extension or another accredited laboratory or test. 
(4)  No applicator shall apply fertilizers containing nitrogen and/or phosphorus to turf and/or landscape plants during times which a flood, tropical storm, or hurricane watch or warning issued by the National Weather Service is in effect for any portion of Palm Beach County. 
(5)  Fertilizer shall not be applied within ten feet, or three feet if a deflector shield or drop spreader is used, of any pond, stream, watercourse, lake, canal, or wetland or from the top of a seawall. Newly planted turf and/or landscape plants may be fertilized in this zone only for the first sixty day establishment period, but caution shall be used to prevent direct deposition of nutrients into the water. 
(6)  A voluntary ten-foot low maintenance zone is strongly recommended, but not mandated, from any pond, stream, water course, lake, wetland or from the top of a seawall. A swale/berm system is recommended for installation at the landward edge of this low maintenance zone to capture and filter runoff. No mowed or cut vegetative material should be deposited or left remaining in this zone or deposited in the water. Care should be taken to prevent the over-spray of aquatic weed products in this zone. 
(7)  Spreader deflector shields are required when fertilizing via rotary (broadcast) spreaders. Deflectors must be positioned such that fertilizer granules are deflected away from all impervious surfaces, fertilizer-free zones and water bodies, including wetlands. 
(8)  Fertilizer shall not be applied, spilled, or otherwise deposited on any impervious surfaces. 
(9)  Any fertilizer applied, spilled, or deposited, either intentionally or accidentally, on any impervious surface shall be immediately and completely removed to the greatest extent practicable. Fertilizer released on an impervious surface must be immediately contained and either legally applied to turf or any other legal site, or returned to the original or other appropriate container. 
(b)  Pesticide management. 
(1)  All landscape applications of pesticides for hire should be made in accordance with State and Federal Law and with the most current version of the Florida Green Industries Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources in Florida. 
(2)  Property owners and managers are encouraged to use an Integrated Pest Management Strategy as currently recommended by the University of Florida Cooperative Extension Service publications. 
(3)  When utilizing pesticides, all label instructions are state and federal law and must be adhered to. The Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services is ultimately responsible for enforcement of pesticide laws. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-616. - Shoreline considerations. 
    Grading and design of property adjacent to bodies of water shall conform to federal, state and local regulations which may include but is not limited to the use of berms or retention ditches to intercept surface runoff of water and debris that may contain fertilizers or pesticides. 
    No grasses that require mowing shall be allowed within six feet of the water's edge, except where seawalls and bulkheads exist or where needed for erosion control. When mowing near the shoreline, direct the chute away from the water body. Riparian or littoral zone plants that do not require mowing or fertilization should be planted in these areas. See the most recent version of the Florida Waterfront Property Owners Guide for more information. Where water levels vary considerably, care must be taken in the selection of these plants. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-617. - Volunteer plants. 
    Volunteer plants are part of a natural succession found within plant communities and help to provide shade, clean air and water management benefits. Any identified noninvasive plant, growing in a suitable location, without interfering or potentially interfering with utilities, lines-of-sight, or structures, shall be allowed to grow. A volunteer plant meeting the aforementioned description shall be maintained according to this article. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-618. - Violations, enforcement and penalty. 
    The community development director or designee shall issue a stop work order to any person found in the act of cutting down, destroying, damaging, or removing vegetation or landscaping in violation of this landscape code. The steps involved are listed: 
(1)  A stop work order is issued by the city; 
(2)  The code enforcement division will cite the property owner; 
(3)  The city requires a restoration plan or the correction of the violation(s), per the discretion of the community development director, in accordance with this landscape code; 
(4)  The community development director or designee accepts a restoration plan and/or the violation correction(s). If the violation is corrected, the community development department will notify the code enforcement administrator or designee; 
(5)  Work resumes, and permits can be issued. 
(a)  Violations for damaging, destroying or improperly pruning trees. 
(1)  Violations will be issued by the code enforcement division for all violations of this landscape code, as provided below. 
a.  If a protected tree is improperly pruned severely enough to be classified as tree abuse, a maximum fine of $1000.00 per tree may be assessed by the code enforcement special master to the property owner and/or individual responsible for the infraction. Correcting improper pruning cuts on a tree may be required, if long-term benefits are expected. The cost of correcting improper cuts shall be incurred by the property owner and/or individual responsible for the infraction. 
(b)  Violations for removal of trees without a permit. 
(1)  Violations will be issued by the code enforcement division if a protected tree, or tree required by a landscape plan, with a DBH greater than three (3) inches is removed without permit. A minimum fine of $200.00 as well as a fine of $100.00 for each inch of tree trunk measured at DBH (or estimation thereof) may be assessed to the property owner and/or individual responsible for the infraction by the code enforcement special master. 
(2)  Violations will be issued by the code enforcement division if any protected palm or palm tree required by a landscape plan is removed without a permit. A fine of $100.00 may be assessed for each foot of clear trunk and will be assessed to the property owner and/or individual responsible for the infraction by the code enforcement special master. 
a.  If the community development director is unable to determine the number of protected trees removed, the owner shall correct the violation by paying a fine of up to $15,000.00 per acre, or fraction thereof, of the land cleared. The code enforcement special master shall assess this fine. No work shall proceed on the property until a restoration plan has been approved by the community development department and the fine has been paid to the city. 
b.  A person aggrieved by an administrative order, determination or decision may appeal to the circuit court. 
c.  The city shall deem a separate offense to have been committed for each tree removed, damaged, or destroyed contrary to the provisions of this section. 
d.  In addition to other remedies and notwithstanding the existence of an adequate remedy at law, the City of Riviera Beach may seek injunctive relief in the circuit court to enforce the provisions of this section. The city shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees and costs, including applicable fees and costs in action where the city is successful in obtaining affirmative relief. 
(3)  A restoration plan is required. All violations of this landscape code involving the unauthorized removal of trees and vegetation shall require the landowner to file a restoration plan as provided for below. The primary consideration of the restoration plan shall be to return the affected portion of the site to its natural state. If this is impossible, it shall mitigate the negative effects of the violation over the entire site to the greatest extent possible. The community development director or designee shall inspect the implementation of the plan, which may require any monetary guarantees deemed necessary to insure the maintenance and survival of the implemented restoration plan. 
(4)  A stop work order shall be issued for all sites in violation, upon which construction has been authorized. The City of Riviera Beach shall issue no further city permits for the subject property or project, or attendant inspections completed, until the owner corrects such violations, or the community development director has accepted a restoration plan. This shall include the certificate of occupancy for the attendant structure. 
(5)  This landscaping code outlines criteria for the restoration plan. When the unauthorized removal of landscaping has occurred, the owner or developer shall submit a restoration plan to the community development department within 30 days after the code enforcement division has cited him or her for such violation. In evaluating a proposed restoration plan, the community development director shall consider the following: 
a.  The cross-sectional area of trees removed, at DBH; 
b.  The specific aesthetic character of the materials removed; 
c.  The amount of native vegetation the owner has removed without the authorization of the community development department; 
d.  Any special function of the material carried out as a screen or buffer; and 
e.  The amount of other natural materials preserved on the site and the opportunities for planting additional landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-619. - Hardship relief. 
    Where a landowner is unduly burdened by the strict application of this landscape code, said landowner may apply to the community development director for hardship relief. Also, an administrative waiver in accordance with section 20-127 of the city's Code of Ordinances may be granted by the utility district director, or designee, for individual water use requests if the applicant can demonstrate particular hardships and acceptable reasons for the requested waiver. 
(a)  Hardship . The design and development of a renovation development, a vacant development, or any other parcel exhibiting a hardship may preclude a literal compliance with all the landscape design, installation and irrigation requirements of this article. 
(b)  Reduction in landscaping permitted. The community development director may allow a reduction in required landscaping that may reasonably and economically accommodate a particular hardship. 
(c)  Criteria for reduction. A reduction in required landscaping may be allowed, subject to one or more the following criteria being applicable to a property or development: 
(1)  That existing property improvements, including buildings, parking or similar items, preclude complete compliance with required landscaping; or 
(2)  The reduction in required landscaping represents the smallest reduction possible; or 
(3)  The site, when vacant, possesses irregular boundaries, restrictive easements or similar circumstances that restrict the ability to install landscaping; or 
(4)  The site has been adversely affected by prior governmental action, such as expansion of public road right-of-way; or 
(5)  The hardship is not caused by the action of the property owner; or 
(6)  The reduction in landscaping is not based solely or principally on economic reasons. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-620. - Informational material. 
    From time to time, staff shall prepare and distribute informational material which is designed to educate the general public of the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Sec. 31-621. - Conflicts and relationships to other laws. 
(a)  Whenever regulations or restrictions imposed by this article conflict with other ordinances or regulations, or are either more or less restrictive than regulations or restrictions imposed by any governmental authority through legislation, rule or regulation, the regulations, rules or restrictions which are more restrictive or which impose the highest standards or requirements shall govern. Regardless of any other provision of this article, no land shall be used and no structure erected or maintained in violation of any state, local, or federal pollution control or environmental protection law or regulation. 
(b)  A deed restriction or covenant imposed by a homeowner's association may not prohibit or be enforced so as to prohibit any property owner from implementing Florida Friendly Landscaping on his or her land or create any requirement or limitation in conflict with any provision in Part II of Chapter 373, F.S., as amended, or a water shortage order, other order, consumptive use permit, or rule adopted or issued pursuant to Part II of Chapter 373, F.S., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
APPENDIX - A (A.1 and A.2) - PROHIBITED VEGETATION 
    Those plant species listed below are defined as Category 1 nuisance and invasive exotic vegetation by the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council's (FLEPPC) 2009 Invasive Plant Species List (www.fleppc.org), and shall not be planted, maintained or permitted to remain on sites receiving site plan approval (including small-scale development). The following list is current as of the approval of the ordinance from which this article derives but is subject to change, historically updated by the FLEPPC every two years. Please refer directly to the FLEPPC for the current Category 1 list. The removal of prohibited plant species shall be in conjunction with any new land development request, site plan modification or building permit with a valuation over $2,500.00, unless the community development director determines that the removal of the prohibited plant species places an undue burden on the property owner. Furthermore, the sale of prohibited plant species is not permitted within the city. 
APPENDIX - A.1 
(1)  Rosary pea ( Abrus precatorius ). 
(2)  Earleaf acacia ( Acacia auriculiformis ). 
(3)  Mimosa, silk tree ( Albizia julibrissin ). 
(4)  Woman's tongue ( Albizia lebbeck ). 
(5)  Coral ardisia ( Ardisia crenata ). 
(6)  Asparagus fern ( Asparagus densiflorus ). 
(7)  Orchid tree ( Bauhinia variegata ). 
(8)  Bishopwood ( Bischofia javanica ). 
(9)  Santa Maria, Mastwood, Alexandrian Laurel ( Calophyllum antillanum ). 
(10)  Australian pine ( Casuarina equisetifolia ). 
(11)  Suckering Australian pine ( Casuarina glauca ). 
(12)  Camphor tree ( Cinnamomum camphora ). 
(13)  Taro, wild taro ( Colocasia esculenta ). 
(14)  Leather leaf ( Colubrina asiatica ). 
(15)  Carrotwood ( Cupaniopsis anacardiodes ). 
(16)  Winged yam ( Dioscorea alata ). 
(17)  Air potato ( Dioscorea bulbifera ). 
(18)  Water-hyacinth ( Eichornia crassipes ). 
(19)  Surinam cherry ( Eugenia uniflora ). 
(20)  Laurel fig ( Ficus microcarpa ). 
(21)  Hydrilla ( Hydrilla verticillata ). 
(22)  Green hygro ( Hygrophila polysperma ). 
(23)  West Indian marsh grass ( Hymenachne amplexicaulis ). 
(24)  Cogon grass ( Imperata cylindrica ). 
(25)  Water spinach ( Ipomoea aquatica ). 
(26)  Gold-Coast jasmine ( Jasminum dichotomum ). 
(27)  Brazilian jasmine ( Jasminum fluminense ). 
(28)  Lantana, shrub verbena ( Lantana camara ). 
(29)  Glossy privet ( Ligustrum lucidum ). 
(30)  Chinese privet, hedge privet ( Ligustrum sinense ). 
(31)  Japanese honeysuckle ( Lonicera japonica ). 
(32)  Peruvian primrosewillow ( Ludwigia peruviana ). 
(33)  Tropical American water grass ( Luziola subintegra ). 
(34)  Japanese climbing fern ( Lygodium japonicum ). 
(35)  Old world climbing fern ( Lygodium microphyllum ). 
(36)  Cat's claw vine ( Macfadyena unguis-cati ). 
(37)  Sapodilla ( Manilkara zapota ). 
(38)  Melaleuca, paper bark ( Melalueca quinquenervia ). 
(39)  Natal grass ( Melinis repens ). 
(40)  Catclaw mimosa ( Mimosa pigra ). 
(41)  Heavenly bamboo, nandina ( Nandina domestica ). 
(42)  Sword fern ( Nephrolepis cordifolia ). 
(43)  Asian sword fern ( Nephrolepis multiflora ). 
(44)  Burma reed, cane grass ( Neyraudia renaudiana ). 
(45)  Snowflake, ( Nymphoides cristata ). 
(46)  Sewer vine, onion vine ( Paederia cruddasiana ). 
(47)  Skunk vine ( Paederia foetida ). 
(48)  Torpedo grass ( Panicum repens ). 
(49)  Napier grass ( Pennisetum purpureum ). 
(50)  Water-lettuce ( Pistia stratiotes ). 
(51)  Strawberry guava ( Psidium cattleianum ). 
(52)  Guava ( Psidium guajava ). 
(53)  Kudzu ( Pueraria montana ). 
(54)  Downy rose-myrtle ( Rhodomyrtus tomentosa ). 
(55)  Natal grass ( Rhynchelytrum repens ). 
(56)  Mexican Petunia ( Ruellia brittoniana ). 
(57)  Water spangles ( Salvinia minima ). 
(58)  Chinese tallow tree, popcorn tree ( Sapium sebiferum ). 
(59)  Scaevola, half-flower, beach naupaka ( Scaevola sericea ). 
(60)  Schefflera, umbrella tree ( Schefflera actinophylla ). 
(61)  Brazilian pepper ( Schinus terebinthifolius ). 
(62)  Wrights nutrush ( Scleria lacustris ). 
(63)  Climbing cassia, Christmas cassia, Christmas senna ( Senna pendula ). 
(64)  Wetland nightshade, aquatic soda apple ( Solanum tampicense ). 
(65)  Tropical soda apple ( Solanum varium ). 
(66)  Arrowhead vine ( Syngonium podophyllum ). 
(67)  Jambolan plum, java plum ( Syzigium cumini ). 
(68)  Incised halberd fern ( Tectaria incisa ). 
(69)  Seaside mahoe ( Thespesia populnea ). 
(70)  Small-leaf spiderwort, green or white-flowered wandering jew ( Tradescantia fluminensis ). 
(71)  Para grass ( Urochloa mutica ). 
APPENDIX - A.2 
    In addition to those species listed in appendix A.1 above, due to cold tolerance problems, intrusiveness into water/sewer lines, invasive growth habits and/or lack of wind resistance, the following species shall also be prohibited: 
(1)  Ficus (all species except Strangler fig ( Ficus aurea ), Shortleaf fig ( Ficus citrifolia ), Creeping fig ( Ficus repens, Ficus pumila ), Rusty fig ( Ficus rubiginosa ), and Moreton Bay Fig ( Ficus macrophylla ). Ficus benjamina is permitted only in single-family residential areas if maintained as a hedge with a maximum height of 15 feet. 
(2)  Norfolk Island pine ( Araucaria heterophylla ). 
(3)  Silk oak ( Grevillea robusta ). 
(4)  Eucalyptus (all species). 
(5)  Ear tree ( Enterolobium cyclocarpum ). 
(6)  Sea hibiscus, Mahoe ( Hibiscus tiliaceus ). 
(7)  African tulip tree ( Spathodea campanulata ). 
(8)  Vera wood ( Bulnesia arborea ). 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
APPENDIX - B - NATIVE VEGETATION 
    Those plant species listed below are defined as Native Florida Species, primarily within SFWMD's document, "WaterWise: South Florida Landscapes", available via (www.sfwmd.gov). The following list is not exhaustive and may be updated as necessary. 
Native Shade Tree Species: 
(1)  Ash, Pop ( Fraxinus caroliniana ). 
(2)  Birch, River ( Betula nigra ). 
(3)  Blackgum ( Nyssa sylvatica ). 
(4)  Buttonwood ( Conocarpus erectus ). 
(5)  Common Persimmon ( Diospyros virginiana ). 
(6)  Cypress, Bald ( Taxodium distichum ). 
(7)  Cypress, Pond ( Taxodium ascendens ). 
(8)  Elm, Florida ( Ulmus americana var. floridana ). 
(9)  Gumbo Limbo ( Bursera simaruba ). 
(10)  Hickory, Mockernut ( Carya tomentosa ). 
(11)  Hickory, Pignut ( Carya alba = Carya glabra ). 
(12)  Hornbeam, American ( Carpinus caroliniana ). 
(13)  Jamaican Dogwood ( Piscidia piscipula) 
(14)  Magnolia, Southern ( Magnolia grandiflora ). 
(15)  Mahogany ( Swietenia mahagoni ). 
(16)  Maple, Red ( Acer rubrum ). 
(17)  Mastic ( Sideroxylon foetidissimum = Mastichodendron foetidissimum ). 
(18)  Mulberry, Red ( Morus rubra ). 
(19)  Oak, Laurel ( Quercus laurifolia ). 
(20)  Oak, Live ( Quercus virginiana ). 
(21)  Oak, Sand Live ( Quercus geminata ). 
(22)  Oak, Turkey ( Quercus laevis ). 
(23)  Oak, Water ( Quercus nigra ). 
(24)  Paradise Tree ( Simarouba glauca ). 
(25)  Pine, Loblolly ( Pinus taeda ). 
(26)  Pine, Long-leaf ( Pinus palustris ). 
(27)  Pine, Sand ( Pinus clausa ). 
(28)  Pine, Slash ( Pinus elliottii ). 
(29)  Pine, South Florida Slash ( Pinus elliottii var. densa ). 
(30)  Red Bay ( Persea borbonia ). 
(31)  Satinleaf ( Chrysophyllum oliviforme ). 
(32)  Seagrape ( Coccoloba uvifera ). 
(33)  Short Leaf Fig ( Ficus citrifolia ). 
(34)  Southern Catalpa ( Catalpa bignonioides ). 
(35)  Strangler Fig ( Ficus aurea ). 
(36)  Sugarberry ( Celtis laevigata ). 
(37)  Swamp Tupelo ( Nyssa sylvatica var. biflora ). 
(38)  Sweetgum ( Liquidambar styraciflua ). 
(39)  Sycamore ( Platanus occidentalis ). 
(40)  Tulip Tree ( Liriodendron tulipifera ). 
(41)  Wild Tamarind ( Lysiloma latisiliquum ). 
Native Accent Tree Species: 
(1)  Acacia, Sweet ( Acacia farnesiana ). 
(2)  Black-Calabash ( Amphitecna latifolia ). 
(3)  Blolly ( Guapira discolor ). 
(4)  Cedar, Southern Red ( Junipera virginiana = Juniperus silicicola ). 
(5)  Cherry Laurel ( Prunus caroliniana ). 
(6)  Crabwood ( Gymnanthes lucida ). 
(7)  Dogwood, Flowering ( Cornus florida ). 
(8)  East Palatka Holly ( Ilex x attenuata 'East Palatka ). 
(9)  Fiddlewood ( Citharexylum spinosum = Citharexylum fruticosum ). 
(10)  Florida Soapberry ( Sapindus saponaria = Sapindus marginatus ). 
(11)  Geiger Tree ( Cordia sebestena ). 
(12)  Hercules' Club ( Zanthoxylim clava-herculis ). 
(13)  Hickory, Scrub ( Carya floridana ). 
(14)  Holly, American ( Ilex opaca ). 
(15)  Holly, Dahoon ( Ilex cassine ). 
(16)  Holly, Yaupon ( Ilex vomitoria ). 
(17)  Ironwood, Black ( Krugiodendron ferreum ). 
(18)  Joewood ( Jacquinia keyensis ). 
(19)  Lignum Vitae (Guaiacum sanctum). 
(20)  Loblolly Bay (Gordonia lasianthus). 
(21)  Mangrove, Black ( Avicennia germinans ). 
(22)  Mangrove, Red ( Rhizophora mangle). 
(23)  Mangrove, White ( Laguncularia racemosa ). 
(24)  Oak, Chapman ( Quercus chapmanii ). 
(25)  Pigeon Plum ( Coccoloba diversifolia ). 
(26)  Pitch Apple, Autograph Tree ( Clusia rosea). 
(27)  Plum, Flatwoods (Prunus umbellata). 
(28)  Pond Apple (Annona glabra). 
(29)  Princewood (Exostema caribaeum) 
(30)  Red Stopper ( Eugenia rhombea ). 
(31)  Redberry Stopper ( Eugenia confusa ). 
(32)  Redbud ( Cercis canadensis ). 
(33)  Silver Buttonwood ( Conocarpus erectus var. sericeus ). 
(34)  Spanish Stopper ( Eugenia foetida ). 
(35)  Strongbark ( Bourreria suculenta ). 
(36)  Summer Haw ( Crataegus flava ). 
(37)  Swamp Bay ( Persea palustris ). 
(38)  Sweetbay ( Magnolia virginiana ). 
(39)  Wild Cinnamon ( Canella alba ). 
(40)  Wild Dilly ( Manilkara bahamensis ). 
(41)  Wild Lime ( Zanthoxylum fagara ). 
(42)  Willow-leaved, Bustic ( Sideroxylon salicifolium = Dipholis salicifolia ). 
Native Palm-Like Species: 
(1)  Buccaneer Palm, Cherry Palm ( Pseudophoenix sargentii ). 
(2)  Cabbage Palm ( Sabal palmetto ). 
(3)  Dwarf Palmetto ( Sabal minor ). 
(4)  Florida Royal Palm ( Roystonea regia = R. elata ). 
(5)  Needle Palm ( Rhapidophyllum hystrix ). 
(6)  Paurotis Palm ( Acoelorrhaphe wrightii ). 
(7)  Saw Palmetto ( Serenoa repens ). 
(8)  Scrub Palmetto ( Sabal etonia ). 
(9)  Silver Palm ( Coccothrinax argentata ). 
(10)  Thatch Palm ( Thrinax parviflora ). 
(11)  Thatch Palm, Florida ( Thrinax radiata ). 
(12)  Thatch Palm, Key ( Thrinax morrisii ). 
Native Shrub Species: 
(1)  Adam's Needle ( Yucca filamentosa ). 
(2)  Apple, Seven-year ( Genipa clusifolia = Casasia clusifolia ). 
(3)  Bahama Coffee ( Psychotria ligustrifolia ). 
(4)  Bay Cedar ( Suriana maritima ). 
(5)  Beach Elder ( Iva imbricata ). 
(6)  Beautyberry ( Callicarpa americana ). 
(7)  Black Torch ( Erithalis fruticosa ). 
(8)  Blueberry, Shiny ( Vaccinium myrsinites ). 
(9)  Buckthorn, Tough ( Sideroxylon tenax = Bumelia tenax ). 
(10)  Buttonbush ( Cephalanthus occidentalis ). 
(11)  Caper, Jamaican ( Capparis cynophallophora ). 
(12)  Cassia, Bahama ( Senna mexicana var. chapmanii ). 
(13)  Christmas Berry ( Lycium carolinianum ). 
(14)  Coontie, Arrowroot ( Zamia integrifolia ). 
(15)  Coral Bean ( Erythrina herbacea ). 
(16)  Cotton, Wild ( Gossypium hirsutum ). 
(17)  Eastern Gamagrass ( Tripsacum dactyloides ). 
(18)  Elderberry ( Sambucus canadensis ). 
(19)  Firebush ( Hamelia patens ). 
(20)  Florida Boxwood ( Schaefferia frutescens ). 
(21)  Florida Flame Azalea ( Rhododendron austrinum ). 
(22)  Florida Gamagrass ( Tripsacum floridanum ). 
(23)  Florida Privet ( Forestiera segregata ). 
(24)  Florida-Anise ( Illicium floridanum ). 
(25)  Gallberry ( Ilex glabra ). 
(26)  Green Cocoplum ( Chrysobalanus icaco ). 
(27)  Holly, Dwarf Yaupon ( Ilex vomitoria 'Nana' ). 
(28)  Inkberry ( Scaevola plumieri ). 
(29)  Lyonia, Rusty ( Lyonia ferruginea ). 
(30)  Maidenbush ( Savia bahamensis ). 
(31)  Marlberry ( Ardisia escallonioides ). 
(32)  Myrsine ( Rapanea punctata ). 
(33)  Oakleaf Hydrangea ( Hydrangea quercifolia ). 
(34)  Pinxter Azalea ( Rhododendron canescens ). 
(35)  Possum Haw ( Viburnum nudum ). 
(36)  Red Tip Cocoplum ( Chrysobalanus icaco 'Red Tip' ). 
(37)  Rough Velvet Seed ( Guettarda scabra ). 
(38)  Sea Lavender ( Argusia gnaphalodes (= A. volubilis) ). 
(39)  Silver Buttonwood ( Conocarpus erectus var. sericeus ). 
(40)  Simpson Stopper ( Myrcianthes fragrans ). 
(41)  Softleaf Coffee ( Psychotria sulzneri ). 
(42)  Spanish Bayonet ( Yucca aloifolia ). 
(43)  Spicewood ( Calyptranthes pallens ). 
(44)  Swamp Mallow ( Hibiscus coccineus ). 
(45)  Sweetspire, Virginia ( Itea virginica ). 
(46)  Tetrazygia ( Tetrazygia bicolor ). 
(47)  Tropical Sea Oxeye Daisy (Borrichia arborescens). 
(48)  Varnish Leaf ( Dodonaea viscosa ). 
(49)  Walter's Viburnum ( Viburnum obovatum ). 
(50)  Wax Myrtle ( Myrica cerifera ). 
(51)  White Indigo Berry ( Randia aculeata ). 
(52)  Wild Coffee ( Psychotria nervosa ). 
(53)  Wild Olive ( Osmanthus americanus ). 
(54)  Wild Rosemary ( Conradina canescens ). 
(55)  Wild Sage, Buttonsage ( Lantana involucrata ). 
(56)  Yellow Anise ( Illicium parviflorum ). 
(57)  Yellow Necklace Pod ( Sophora tomentosa var. truncata ). 
Native Groundcover and Grass Species: 
(1)  Aster, Stokes ( Stokesia laevis ). 
(2)  Black-eyed Susan ( Rudbeckia hirta ). 
(3)  Blanket Flower ( Gaillardia pulchella ). 
(4)  Blue Flag Iris ( Iris hexagona ). 
(5)  Blue Porterweed ( Stachytarpheta jamaicensis ). 
(6)  Blue-eyed Grass ( Sisyrinchium angustifolium ). 
(7)  Butterfly Weed ( Asclepias tuberosa ). 
(8)  Cardinal Flower ( Lobelia cardinalis ). 
(9)  Cinnamon Fern ( Osmunda cinnamomea ). 
(10)  Climbing Aster ( Aster carolinianus = Symphyotrichum carolinianum ). 
(11)  Common Tickseed ( Coreopsis leavenworthii ). 
(12)  Dotted Horsemint ( Monarda punctata ). 
(13)  Giant Leather Fern ( Acrostichum danaeifolium ). 
(14)  Giant Sword Fern ( Nephrolepis biserrata ). 
(15)  Golden Creeper ( Ernodea littoralis ). 
(16)  Gopher Apple ( Licania michauxii ). 
(17)  Green Eyes ( Berlandiera subacaulis ). 
(18)  Iris, Virginia ( Iris virginica ). 
(19)  Lizard's Tail ( Saururus cernuus ). 
(20)  Lopsided Indiangrass ( Sorghastrum secundum ). 
(21)  Paint Brush ( Carphephorus corymbosus ). 
(22)  Quailberry ( Crossopetalum ilicifolium ). 
(23)  Powderpuff ( Mimosa strigillosa ). 
(24)  Prickly Pear Cactus ( Opuntia humifusa ). 
(25)  Purple Coneflower ( Echinacea purpurea ). 
(26)  Purple Lovegrass ( Eragrostis spectabilis ). 
(27)  Rain Lily ( Zephyranthes atamasco ). 
(28)  Royal Fern ( Osmunda regalis ). 
(29)  Sage, Lyre-Leaved ( Salvia lyrata ). 
(30)  Sage, Tropical Red ( Salvia coccinea ). 
(31)  Saltgrass ( Distichlis spicata ). 
(32)  Shrub Verbena ( Lantana depressa ). 
(33)  Smooth Water-Hyssop ( Bacopa monnieri ). 
(34)  Snowberry ( Chiococca alba = C. pinetorum ). 
(35)  Southern Shield Fern ( Thelypteris kunthii ). 
(36)  Wild Columbine ( Aquilegia canadensis ). 
(37)  Wild Petunia ( Ruellia caroliniensis ). 
(38)  Wiregrass ( Aristida stricta = A. beyrichiana ). 
(39)  Yellow Canna ( Canna flaccida ). 
(40)  Yellowtop ( Flaveria linearis ). 
Native Groundcover and Grass Species Appropriate for Coastal Dune Areas: 
(Note: species appropriate for dune areas may also be suitable for inland landscape design.) 
(1)  Baybean ( Canavalia rosea ). 
(2)  Beach Morning Glory ( Ipomoea imperati = I. stolonifera ). 
(3)  Beach Sunflower ( Helianthus debilis ). 
(4)  Beach Peanut ( Okenia hypogaea ). 
(5)  Bitter Panicgrass ( Panicum amarum ). 
(6)  Muhly Grass ( Muhlenbergia capillaris ). 
(7)  Railroad Vine ( Ipomoea pes-caprae ). 
(8)  Saltgrass ( Distichlis spicata ). 
(9)  Saltmeadow Cord Grass ( Spartina patens ). 
(10)  Sand Cord Grass, Switchgrass ( Spartina bakeri ). 
(11)  Seacoast Marshelder ( Iva imbricata ). 
(12)  Seashore Dropseed ( Sporobolus virginicus ). 
(13)  Seashore Paspalum ( Paspalum vaginatum ). 
(14)  Seaside Gentian ( Eustoma exaltatum ). 
(15)  Seaside Goldenrod ( Solidago sempervirens ). 
(16)  Sea Oats ( Uniola paniculata ). 
(17)  Sea Oxeye Daisy ( Borrichia frutescens ). 
(18)  Sea Purslane ( Sesuvium portulacastrum ). 
(19)  Sea Rocket ( Cakile lanceeolata ). 
(20)  Spider Lily ( Hymenocallis latifolia ). 
(21)  Verbena, Beach ( Glandularia (Verbena) maritima ). 
Native Vine Species: 
(1)  Blue Jacquemontia ( Jacquemontia pentanthos ). 
(2)  Coral Honeysuckle ( Lonicera sempervirens ). 
(3)  Corky-stem Passion Flower ( Passiflora suberosa ). 
(4)  Crossvine ( Bignonia capreolata ). 
(5)  Muscadine Grape ( Vitis rotundifolia ). 
(6)  Passion Flower ( Passiflora incarnata ). 
(7)  Trumpet Vine ( Campsis radicans ). 
(8)  Virginia Creeper ( Parthenocissus quinquefolia ). 
(9)  Yellow Jessamine ( Gelsemium sempervirens ). 
(Ord. No. 4014, § 1, 6-20-12) 
Secs. 31-622-31-690. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - LAND DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION FEES 

Sec. 31-691. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide a fee schedule for various land development review activities undertaken by the city, as well as establish the procedures for payment. Due to the length and context of the revised updated land development application fee schedule, it shall be maintained on file and may be reviewed at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 1, 4-6-88; Ord. No. 3062, § 1, 6-17-09) 
Sec. 31-692. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3062, § 1, adopted June 17, 2009, repealed § 31-692, which set out the land development application fee schedule and derived from Ord. No. 2366, § 1, adopted April 6, 1988; Ord. No. 2882, § 2, adopted Dec. 20, 2000; and Ord. No. 2938, § 1, adopted March 5, 2003. See § 36-691 for provisions pertaining to the land development application fee schedule. 
Secs. 31-693-31-710. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT AND PUBLIC FACILITY CAPACITY 

Sec. 31-711. - Adequacy of public facilities and services. 
    Public facilities and services shall be determined to be adequate to serve the needs of a proposed development when traffic circulation, recreation, drainage and flood protection, potable water, solid waste and sanitary sewer public facilities and services will be available to meet established level-of-service standards, consistent with F.S. ch. 163 and the concurrency management provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 2, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-712. - Level of service standards. 
(a)  Generally. New development shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available design capacity to sustain the following levels of service as established in the city comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Streets. 
(1)  Level of service C (peak hour and daily) on all arterials, collectors and local streets except on Broadway, Old Dixie Highway and Blue Heron Boulevard, which are D. 
(2)  Interstate 95 shall be designated a backlogged facility under a maintain service standard until such time as it is improved and will operate under a LOS D standard; this means during the interim traffic volumes shall be maintained within 110 percent of the 1989 level. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer. The city collection and treatment system shall accommodate an average daily flow of at least 135 gallons per person per day. 
(d)  Drainage. All new development shall detain on-site, the first inch of runoff or runoff from a one-hour storm that statistically occurs once in three years, whichever is greater; all ground floor elevations shall be above the 100-year storm elevations. The drainage system of new developments shall also be designed to comply with the water quantity and quality requirements of the appropriate permitting agency, but post-development runoff shall not exceed pre-development runoff. 
(e)  Water. The city water system shall provide 177 gallons per person per day at sufficient pressure to meet fire flow demands as determined by the fire chief; a storage capacity of at least 4,300,000 shall be maintained. 
(f)  Solid waste. City trucks and the county disposal system shall be able to accommodate six pounds per capita per day. 
(g)  Recreation. At least three acres of neighborhood and community public recreation land per 1,000 population are required. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 2, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-713. - Concurrency review procedures. 
(a)  Development subject to adequacy determination. Chapter 9J-5 of the Florida Administrative Code requires that no development permit (as defined in F.S. § 163.3164) shall be issued if it would cause a reduction in an adopted level of service. The concurrency management system application of this is as follows: 
(1)  New development. 
a.  Concurrency certification. Level-of-service standard compliance will be finally calculated and the facility capacity reserved at the time of approval of a site plan, single-family subdivision plat, enforceable developer's agreement, or if none of the above apply, building permit. This is in conformance with 9J-5.0055 of the Florida Administrative Code which requires a specific plan for development, including densities and intensities of development. See also subsection (3) of this section for exemptions to the above. 
b.  Courtesy concurrency determination. The city or the applicant may request a preliminary concurrency review at an earlier development permit stage, including rezonings, other types of subdivisions, special exceptions or variances. Such a review may also be requested for future land use map amendments or annexations. This review does not guarantee capacity reservation. 
(2)  Addition or change of use. Any building addition or a basic change of building use which increases public facility usage shall be subject to concurrency review. Only the incremental increase in facility capacity usage over the existing usage will be assessed for concurrency. 
(3)  Property which is exempt. 
a.  DRI. Development which is authorized by a development of regional impact (DRI) development order approved prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
b.  Vested projects. The criteria for determining whether a previously approved project is exempt from this article is as follows: If a site plan was approved after January 1, 1986, and a building permit based upon that site plan is obtained by January 1, 1993. If a site plan is not required, then concurrency must be met at the time of building permit application if such application is submitted after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, unless otherwise exempt. See subsection (4) of this section for vesting appeal process. 
c.  Houses. Development which is one single-family or duplex dwelling on a lot in single and separate ownership from adjacent lots. 
d.  Building use change. Any change of building use which clearly causes no increase in public facility usage due to the similarities of the uses or a reduction in all facility usages; however, any increase in required parking shall require a concurrency review. 
e.  Public uses. Development which is a government facility which the city council finds is essential to the health or safety of the city residents. 
(4)  Appeal process. Any applicant that is aggrieved by a decision of the director relative to vesting based upon expenditures made in reliance upon the existing code or other decision relative to whether or not a project is subject to concurrency review may appeal to the city council. 
(b)  Measurement of level-of-service capacities. 
(1)  Water and wastewater. Measurement of the capacity of water and wastewater treatment/storage facilities will be based on current design capacities. Project flows may be based upon the generation rates in tables II and III. Alternative methods or sources may be used but they must be acceptable to the director of utilities or city engineer. 
(2)  Roadways. The standard for measuring highway capacities shall be the state department of transportation table of generalized daily level-of-service maximum volumes. The measurement of capacity may also be determined by engineering studies or other data provided that analysis techniques are technically sound and acceptable to the city engineer. Traffic generation shall be based upon the rates contained in county Ordinance No. 89-19 (road impact fee ordinance) which provides the basis for table I, or the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Manual. The impact shall be presumed to be limited to the collector or arterial serving the local street giving access to the lot, or to the collector or arterial giving direct access to the lot. 
(c)  Traffic capacity review procedures. Traffic capacity review procedures shall be as follows: 
(1)  Projects generating less than 500 additional trips. If a development permit subject to concurrency review is for a project that generates less than 500 additional net trips per day, no county review is required. Capacity review will be performed by the city. The following steps shall be followed: 
a.  Traffic study. The applicant shall submit a traffic study by a professional engineer unless the project is exclusively residential with 50 or fewer units. In minor projects a traffic impact statement may be sufficient as determined by the city engineer. 
b.  Engineering review. The city engineer shall review the traffic statement or study to determine level of service compliance. 
(2)  Projects generating more than 500 additional trips. County review is required. If the project will add more than 500 net trips per day to the county and/or state system of collector and arterial streets, conformance to the county traffic performance ordinances shall be demonstrated (Ordinance Nos. 90-6 and 90-7, and any amendments thereto). The only exemptions from this subsection are if the project received a site-specific formal development permit prior to January 30, 1990, or in some other way is determined to be vested by the city attorney. Specifically, the following steps shall be followed; see the county ordinances for detailed procedures: 
a.  Traffic study. The applicant shall submit a traffic study by a professional traffic engineer unless the project is exclusively residential with 50 or fewer units. 
b.  Engineer review. The city engineer shall review the traffic study to determine conformance with county Ordinance No. 90-7 or request the county engineer to perform such a review. In the former case, the city engineer shall submit his review to the county engineer; the county engineer shall have 30 days to review the city engineer's report. See county Ordinance No. 90-6 for appeal procedures and required city procedures relative to previous approvals. 
(d)  Determination of concurrency. 
(1)  Capacity availability calculation. For purposes of this section, the capacity availability shall be determined by: 
Adding together: 
a.  The total design capacity of existing facilities operating at the required level of service; and 
b.  The total design capacity of new facilities that will become available concurrent with the impact of the development (must meet requirements in subsection (2) of this section). 
Then, subtracting from that number the sum of: 
c.  The design demand for the service created by existing development; and 
d.  The new design demand for the service (by phase or otherwise) that will be created concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development by the anticipated completion of other presently approved developments. 
(2)  Requirements for applicability of new facilities. The capacity of new facilities may be counted only if one or more of the following is shown: 
a.  For water, sewer, solid waste and drainage: 
1.  The necessary facilities are in place at the time a site plan or plat approval is issued; 
2.  Such approval is issued subject to the condition that the necessary facilities will be in place when the impacts of development occur; 
3.  Construction of the new facilities is under way at the time of site plan or plat approval; or 
4.  The new facilities are guaranteed at a specific time in an enforceable development agreement. An enforceable development agreement may include, but is not limited to, development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220 or an agreement or development order pursuant to F.S. ch. 380. 
b.  For recreation: 
1.  Subsections a.1-a.3 of this subsection; 
2.  The new facilities are the subject of a binding executed contract for the construction of facilities to be completed within one year of the time the development permit is issued; or 
3.  A development agreement whereby construction begins within one year. 
c.  For traffic: 
1.  The new facilities have been included in a financially feasible five-year capital improvement program and construction is scheduled for the third year or earlier; or 
2.  Subsections b.1-b.3 of this subsection. 
(e)  Burden of showing compliance on applicant. The burden of showing compliance with these levels of service requirements shall be upon the applicant. In order to be approvable, applications for development approval shall provide sufficient and verifiable information showing compliance with these standards. 
(f)  Concurrency review fee. An applicant will be charged a concurrency review fee of $250.00. This fee will be used to defray the cost of the determination of concurrency. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 2, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-714. - Concurrency monitoring system. 
(a)  Responsibility. The planning director shall be responsible for monitoring development activity to ensure that when concurrency reviews are made, data on all existing and committed development and its impact on facilities subject to level-of-service standards has been recorded. Monitoring shall include periodic entry of building permit, demolition and certificate of occupancy data. 
(b)  Concurrency rights reservation and effective period. 
(1)  Capacity reservation. Compliance will be finally calculated and capacity reserved at time of final action of an approved site plan, single-family subdivision, building permit (if neither a site plan or single-family subdivision is required) or enforceable developer's agreement. Applications for these development permits shall be chronologically logged upon approval to determine rights to available capacity. 
(2)  Reservation period. A building permit application must be submitted within 18 months of site plan approval to preserve the concurrency reservation. An extension of six months may be issued by the city council. 
(3)  Developer agreement. Developer agreements as described in F.S. § 163.3220 et seq. shall have a valid concurrency period not to exceed five years. This concurrency period may be extended by mutual consent of the governing body and the developer, subject to a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 2, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-715. - Table of daily trip generation rates. 
Table I 
Daily Trip Generation Rates 
  Type of Land 
Development Activity Official Daily Trip 
 Generation Rate 
   Per Unit 
   or Area Pass-By Trip Rate 
(Percentage)* Residential: Single-family detached 10/DU - Attached housing 7/DU - Congregate living facility 2.145/DU - Mobile home 5/DU - Nonresidential: Drive-in bank 291/1,000 sq. ft. 46 Miniwarehouse 2.6/1,000 sq. ft.  0 Hotel 8.7 trips/room  0 Movie theatre 1.76 trips/seat  0 Racquet club 44.23 trips/court  0 Church/synagogue 0.19 trips/seat in sanctuary  0 Day care center 67/1,000 sq. ft. 10 Slow turnover restaurant 95.6/1,000 sq. ft. 15 High turnover restaurant 201/1,000 sq. ft. 15 New car sales 47.5/1,000 sq. ft.  0 General office (examples):  10,000 sq. ft. 24.39 trips/1,000 sq. ft.  0  50,000 sq. ft. 16.31 trips/1,000 sq. ft.  0 100,000 sq. ft. 13.72 trips/1,000 sq. ft.  0 150,000 sq. ft. 12.40 trips/1,000 sq. ft.  0 200,000 sq. ft. 11.54 trips/1,000 sq. ft.  0 300,000 sq. ft. 10.42 trips/1,000 sq. ft.  0 400,000 sq. ft. 9.70 trips/1,000 sq. ft.  0 500,000 sq. ft. 9.17 trips/1,000 sq. ft.  0 600,000 sq. ft. 8.77 trips/1,000 sq. ft.  0 700,000 sq. ft. 8.43 trips/1,000 sq. ft.  0 800,000 sq. ft. 8.16 trips/1,000 sq. ft.  0 Office building, medical 34.17/1,000 sq. ft.  0 Hospital 11.75/bed  0 Nursing home 2.597/bed  0 Warehouse 4.882/1,000 sq. ft.  0 Motel 10.189/room  0 General recreation 3/parking space  0 General industrial 6.967/1,000 sq. ft.  0 General commercial retail (examples): 10,000 sq. ft. 166.35 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 45 50,000 sq. ft. 94.71 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 44 100,000 sq. ft. 74.31 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 43 200,000 sq. ft. 58.93 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 41 300,000 sq. ft. 48.31 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 38 400,000 sq. ft. 43.00 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 36 500,000 sq. ft. 39.81 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 34 600,000 sq. ft. 37.69 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 32 800,000 sq. ft. 35.03 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 27 1,000,000 sq. ft. 33.44 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 23 1,200,000 sq. ft. 32.30 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 18 1,400,000 sq. ft. 31.62 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 14 1,600,000 sq. ft. 31.05 trips/1,000 sq. ft.  9 Nonresidential (short trip length): Fast food restaurant 632 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 30 Gas station 748 trips/station 58 Convenience store 887.056 trips/1,000 sq. ft. 45  
*Pass-by trip rate percentage means the percentage of trips which are passerby trips is set forth as a percentage of total trips and is a reduction to the official daily trip generation rate. If a different capture rate is established through an independent calculation, that different capture rate shall be utilized. 
Source: County Ordinance No. 89-19; Road Impact Fees. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 2, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-716. - Table of potable water design flows. 
Table II 
Potable Water Design Flows 
Facility Type Water Use, in Gallons Per Day Residential: Single-family house 375 Duplex, triplex, townhouse and apartment, per unit 270 Mobile home 108 Auditorium, per seat   5 Bar or cocktail lounge, per seat  21 Boarding school, students and staff, per person 108 Boardinghouse, per person  54 Bowling alleys, (including bar and food service, per lane) 215 Churches, per sanctuary seat   3 Churches, with kitchen, per sanctuary seat   7 Construction camps, semi-permanent, per person  54 Day schools: With cafeterias, gyms and showers, per pupil  27 Without cafeterias, gyms and showers, per pupil  16 With cafeterias but no gyms and showers, per pupil  21 Factories (no processing or industrial): With showers, per person  37 Without showers, per person  21 Hospitals: With laundry, per bed 270 Without laundry, per bed 214 Landscape and lawn, per square foot of area     0.35 Laundromats, per machine 428 Motels and hotels, per room 161 Movie theatres, per seat   5 Nursing homes, per bed 108 Offices, per person  21 Picnic parks: With bathhouse, shower and toilet  11 Toilets only   5 Public institutions, per person 108 Restaurants, including toilets: 24-hour, per seat  54 Not 24-hour, per seat  39 Drive-in, per car space  16 Cocktail lounge, per seat  21 Roominghouses, per day  39 Service stations: Full service stations: First two bays 810 Each additional bay 375 Self service stations, per fuel pump 108 Shopping centers, no food service or laundry, per square foot of floor space     0.10 Stores, no food service or laundry, per square foot of floor space     0.10 Swimming pools, per person  10 Warehouses, no food service or laundry, per square foot of floor space     0.10  
    In the case where the type of connection is not listed, then the most suitable one is to be used. 
    The city retains the authority to require appropriate information to be submitted in accordance with American Water Works Association (AWWA) standards to settle any dispute. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 2, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-717. - Table of sanitary sewer design flows. 
Table III 
Sanitary Sewer Design Flows 
Facility Type Water Use, in Gallons 
Per Day Residential: Single-family house 315 Duplex, triplex, townhouse and apartment, per unit 225 Mobile home  90 Auditorium, per seat   5 Bar or cocktail lounge, per seat  18 Boarding school, students and staff, per person  90 Boardinghouse, per person  45 Bowling alleys, including bar and food service, per lane 180 Churches, per sanctuary seat   3 Churches, with kitchen, per sanctuary seat   6 Construction camps, semipermanent, per person  45 Day schools: With cafeterias, gyms and showers, per pupil  23 Without cafeterias, gyms and showers, per pupil  14 With cafeterias but no gyms and showers, per pupil  18 Factories, no processing or industrial: With showers, per person  31 Without showers, per person  18 Hospitals: With laundry, per bed 225 Without laundry, per bed 180 Laundromats, per machine 360 Motels and hotels, per room 135 Movie theatres, per seat   5 Nursing homes, per bed  90 Offices, per person  18 Picnic parks: With bathhouse, shower and toilet   9 Toilets only   5 Public institutions, per person  90 Restaurants, including toilets: 24-hour, per seat  45 Not 24-hour, per seat  33 Drive-in, per car space  14 Cocktail lounge, per seat  18 Roominghouses, per day  33 Service stations: Full service stations: First two bays 680 Each additional bay 315 Self service stations, per fuel pump  90 Shopping centers, no food service or laundry, per square foot of floor space     0.10 Stores, no food service or laundry, per square foot of floor space     0.10 Warehouses, no food service or laundry, per square foot of floor space     0.10  
    In the case where the type of connection is not listed, then the most suitable one is to be used. 
    The city retains the authority to require appropriate information to be submitted in accordance with American Water Works Association (AWWA) standards to settle any dispute. 
(Ord. No. 2530, § 2, 5-1-91) 
Sec. 31-718. - Table of solid waste generation rates. 
Table IV 
Solid Waste Generation Rates 
Facility Type Generation, in Pounds 
Per Day Residential, per unit 8.9 Industrial and commercial: Factory/warehouse, per 100 sq. ft. 2 Office buildings, per 100 sq. ft. 1 Department store, per 100 sq. ft. 4 Supermarket, per 100 sq. ft. 9 Restaurant, per meal per day 2 Drug store, per 100 sq. ft. 5 Schools: Grade school: Per room 10 and, per pupil 1/4 High school: Per room 8 and, per pupil 1/4 Institutions: Hospital, per bed 8 Nursing home, per person 3 Home for aged, per person 3 Rest home, per person 3  
(Ord. No. 2530, § 2, 5-1-91) 
Secs. 31-719-31-725. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES TOWER AND ANTENNA SITING 

Sec. 31-726. - Title. 
    This article shall be entitled "Wireless Service Facilities Tower and Antenna Siting Ordinance," and shall be an amendment to the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2857, § 1, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 31-727. - Purpose. 
    The regulations and requirements establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless service towers and antennas and are intended to accomplish the following purposes: 
(1)  Protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city; 
(2)  Minimize potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas on residential areas and land uses; 
(3)  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(4)  Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community by strongly encouraging the replacement and/or co-location of antennas on new and preexisting facilities as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
(5)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(6)  Avoid potential damages to property from antenna and tower facilities by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified and maintained; and 
(7)  Enhance the ability of the providers of wireless and/or essential communications services to provide such services to the community through an efficient and timely application process. In furtherance of these goals, the city shall at all times give due consideration to the city's comprehensive plan, zoning map, existing land uses, future land uses and environmentally sensitive areas, including hurricane preparedness areas, in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas. 
(Ord. No. 2857, § 2, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 31-728. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below, and shall control over any other definitions contained in this Code: 
    Antenna means a transmitting and/or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in the offering of wireless and/or essential communications services that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies, wireless communications signals and other communications signals, including directional antennas such as panel and microwave dish antennas, and omnidirectional antennas such as whips, but excluding radar antennas, amateur radio antennas and satellite earth stations. 
    Backhaul network means the lines that connect wireless service facilities to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network. 
    Broadcasting facility means any telecommunication tower built primarily for the purpose of broadcasting AM, FM or television signals, including high definition television signals ("HDTV" or "digital TV" or "DTV"). 
    Co-located wireless service facility or co-located facility means the placement of a new wireless service facility on an existing tower, existing building or structure. 
    Effective radiated power means the product of the power supplied to the antenna and its gain relative to a half-wave dipole in a given direction. 
    Essential communications services means those communications services provided by the city and other governmental entities that directly relate to the health and safety of its residents including fire, police and emergency rescue. 
    Extraordinary conditions means subsequent to a hurricane, flood, or other natural hazard or subsequent to a defective finding on a previous inspection. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    Fair market value means the price at which a willing seller and willing buyer will trade. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Geographic search area means that initial circular area, which has a radius of no less than one mile except as otherwise provided, designated by a wireless provider or operator for a new tower. The geographic search area shall be determined based upon engineering considerations including grids, frequency coordination and levels of service consistent with good engineering practices. 
    Guyed tower means a tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Lattice tower means a tower that is constructed to be self-supporting by lattice type supports and without the use of guy wires or other supports. 
    Microwave dish antenna means a dish-like antenna used to link wireless service sites together by wireless transmission and/or receipt of voice or data. 
    Minor site plan refers to an application which seeks authority to co-locate a proposed facility, consistent with section 31-730 hereof. 
    Major site plan refers to an application which seeks authority to construct a new tower structure, consistent with section 31-730 hereof. 
    Monopole tower means a tower consisting of a single free standing pole or spire self-supported on a permanent foundation constructed without guy wires, ground anchors, or other supports. 
    Panel antenna means a flat, rectangular antenna or array of antennas, designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. 
    Wireless services means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services. Wireless services shall not be considered as essential services, public utilities or private utilities. 
    Wireless service facility or facility means a facility for the provision of wireless or essential communications services including without limitation cables, wires, lines, wave guilds, antennas, towers, other supporting structures, associated structures and any other equipment that is used or associated with the provision of such services. The term wireless service facility shall specifically exclude amateur radio transmitting towers and broadcasting (radio and television) facilities including without limitation high definition television facilities. An open video system is not a wireless service facility to the extent that it provides only video services. A cable system is not a wireless service facility to the extent that it provides only cable service. 
    State of the art means existing technology, which is readily available and compatible for a specific type of provider's technology, where the level of facilities, technical performance, capacity, equipment, components and service are equal to that developed and demonstrated to be more technologically advanced than generally available for comparable service areas. 
    Stealth facility means a facility that is disguised, hidden, part of an existing or proposed structure, and/or placed within an existing or proposed structure in a manner that makes it not readily identifiable as a wireless services facility. A stealth facility may or may not have a secondary function (e.g., bell tower, spire, flag pole, etc.). This term shall be synonymous with "camouflaged facility." 
    Tower height means the vertical distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad platform but not including any antenna or lighting rods which extend vertically from the highest point of the structure, which shall not extend more than ten feet above height of tower. 
    Tower means any structure, and support thereto, designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas intended for transmitting or receiving wireless or essential communication services, including lattice, monopole and guyed towers. The term includes wireless service facilities for the provision of commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services (telecommunications services using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses), common carrier wireless exchange access services, and essential communications services. The term does not include transmission towers, amateur radio transmitting towers and broadcast facilities, and shall not include mounting hardware or structures used to attach antennas to rooftops, or to prevent interference from or with other building-mounted structures, subject to the limitations of section 31-733 hereof. 
    Unlicensed wireless service means the offering of telecommunications service using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses, but does not mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite services. 
    Whip antenna means a cylindrical antenna that transmits signals in 360 degrees. 
(Ord. No. 2857, § 3, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 31-729. - Wireless service facility use regulations; applicability. 
    The following regulations shall apply to new wireless service facility uses as of the effective date of this article. It shall not govern any broadcasting facility, one owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator, or one used exclusively for receive-only antennas. Wireless service facilities shall not be regulated or permitted as an essential service, public utility, or private utility. No permit granted by the city under this article shall warrant the technical suitability of a proposed site, and the city shall not be held responsible for any interference with or from another wireless service facility. 
(Ord. No. 2857, § 4, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 31-730. - Application: Site plan submission and review requirements. 
    Every applicant for a tower or antenna shall at minimum submit the following to the city: 
(1)  Minor site plan. An applicant for the co-location of a wireless service facility shall submit a minor site plan that complies with this subsection. To further encourage the co-location of wireless service facilities, the city will attempt to review any submitted minor site plan within 30 days of the filing of a completed application. A minor site plan submission shall contain all of the following information, including applicable fees: 
a.  Certification. For all co-located facilities, a statement from a Florida-licensed engineer that certifies that the structure, including support structures and equipment buildings, if applicable, can support the additional load due to the co-location of facilities including, without limitations, weight and wind loads in effect at the time the structure was approved, consistent with applicable law. 
b.  Review and approval. A minor site plan shall be administratively reviewed and approved. The city may commission a review by a professional consultant with appropriate technical experience to review the plan and all supporting documentation. The cost of this review shall be borne by the applicant and shall not exceed $5,000.00; no review will commence until the cost recovery arrangement is finalized and no authorization by the city shall be issued until any payments due to the city by the applicant are paid in full. 
(2)  Major site plan. A major site plan submission shall contain all of the items required for a minor site plan, including additional applicable fees, and provide the following additional information: 
a.  Inventory of existing towers. 
1.  Each applicant shall submit an inventory of existing towers, antennas, and approved wireless service facilities within the search area identified in an application. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that no existing facility or structure can accommodate, as is or through modification, the proposed facility. Evidence to demonstrate that no existing facility or structure is suitable shall consist of any of the following: 
i.  An affidavit demonstrating that the applicant made diligent efforts to install or co-locate on an existing tower or other existing structure within the geographic search area, as determined by a qualified radio frequency engineer. 
ii.  An affidavit demonstrating that existing towers or structures located within the geographic search area, as determined by a certified radio frequency engineer, do not have the capacity to provide reasonable technical service consistent with the applicant's technical system, including but not limited to, applicable FCC requirements. 
iii.  Written technical evidence from a qualified radio frequency engineer that existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicable FCC requirements. 
iv.  Written technical evidence from a qualified radio frequency engineer that existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the proposed facility. 
v.  A written statement from a qualified radio frequency engineer that the proposed and existing facilities are incompatible due to electromagnetic/radio frequency interference or the new facility would otherwise interfere with public safety communications or the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other communications service enjoyed by surrounding properties. 
vi.  An affidavit that the fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner to share an existing tower or structure, or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
vii.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
viii.  The applicant demonstrates that state of the art technology used in the wireless service business and within the scope of applicant's FCC license, is unsuitable for the site involved. Costs of state of the art technology that exceed new tower development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable. 
2.  The city reserves the right to share inventory information with other applicants seeking to site wireless service facilities. However, in doing so, the city shall neither be responsible for the accuracy of the information, nor will it infer that any sites are available or suitable. 
b.  Engineering report. All proposals for a new tower shall submit a written report certified by a Florida-licensed electrical engineer who specializes in radio frequency engineering or wireless service facilities, except as otherwise provided herein. The report shall include: 
1.  A description of the geographical search area requirements; 
2.  A site development plan, drawn to scale, including without limitation, a legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel, if applicable, on-site and adjacent land uses, comprehensive plan and zoning classification of the site, a visual impact analysis and photo digitalization of the tower and all attachments including associated buildings and equipment containers at the property line, as well as at a distance of 250 feet and 500 feet from all properties within that range, or at other points agreed upon by the city and the wireless service facilities owner. 
3.  A projection of wind-load capacity for the proposed facility, provided by a licensed professional engineer. No tower shall be permitted to exceed its wind loading capacity as provided for by the standard building code at the time of original approval of the tower or structure on which the proposed facility is to be co-located; 
4.  A statement that the proposed tower facilities, and reception and transmission functions will not interfere with the visual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television or similar services as well as other wireless services enjoyed by surrounding properties; 
5.  A statement of compliance with the South Florida Building Code and all other applicable building codes, as amended from time to time, associated regulations and safety standards; 
6.  The effective radiated power of the facility and how it meets or exceeds the FCC's regulations on the environmental effects of radio frequency emission; 
7.  Any additional information deemed warranted by the city to assess compliance with applicable regulations. 
c.  Review and approval. A major site plan shall be reviewed by city staff and considered by the city council upon receipt of an advisory recommendation by the planning and zoning board: The city council shall consider an application within 180 days of the applicant's submission of a completed application. The city may commission a review by a professional consultant with appropriate technical experience to review the plan and all supporting documentation. Such review by a professional consultant shall be completed within 60 days of commencement consistent with this section. The cost of this review shall be borne by the applicant and shall not exceed $5000.00; no review will commence until the cost recovery arrangement is finalized and payment has been submitted by the applicant. If the city does not accept the full report provided as accurate, or if the city disagrees with any part of the report, the time in which an application is processed may be tolled, in the reasonable discretion of the city, pending further investigation. 
(Ord. No. 2857, § 5, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 31-731. - General requirements. 
(a)  Local, state and federal requirements. A wireless service facilities owner shall certify that all franchises/licenses/permits required by law have been obtained and shall file a copy of these with the city. The construction, operation and repair of a facility shall be in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal requirements. The construction, operation and repair shall be performed in a manner consistent with applicable industry standards, including the Electronic Industries Association. The facility must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, including radio frequency emissions standards, and any other agency of the local, state or federal government with the authority to regulate the facility prior to issuance of a building permit by the city. A statement shall be submitted by a licensed engineer certifying compliance with this subsection. If applicable standards and regulations require retroactive application, then the facility owner shall bring the facility into compliance with these standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of these standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute grounds for removal at the owner's expense. 
(b)  Environmental regulations. A wireless facility owner shall demonstrate compliance with applicable environmental laws including, without limitation, the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, as amended. Pub. L. 91-190, 83 Stat. 852 (1969), the Endangered Species Act, as amended, Pub. L. 93-205, 87 Stat. 884 (1969), the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, as amended, 40 Stat. 755 (1918), the Bald Eagle Protection Act, as amended, 54 Stat. 250 (1940), and the Golden Eagle Protection Act, as amended, Pub. L. 87-884, 76 Stat. 1246 (1962). A statement shall be submitted certifying compliance with this section prior to obtaining any building permit from the city. 
(c)  (1)  Inspection; reports. The city reserves the right to conduct periodic inspection of wireless service facilities other than co-located or roof-mounted facilities at the facility owner's expense to ensure structural and electrical integrity. Such periodic inspection shall take place no more than once every two years. Where the city does not possess the expertise to perform inspections as required herein, the city reserves the right to have such inspections performed by a licensed professional engineer at the applicants expense. If inspection determines noncompliance with applicable codes and standards (except in the case of a legal nonconforming use) then, upon notice, the owner shall have 30 days, or such other time as the city may allow, for good cause shown, to bring the facility into compliance. Failure to do so within the time allowed shall constitute grounds for the removal of the facility at the owner's expense. 
(2)  Wireless facility owners shall submit a report to the city certifying structural and electrical integrity every two years. The report shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of $200.00 to reimburse the city for the cost of review. 
(d)  Lighting. No signals, artificial lights, or illumination shall be permitted on any wireless service facility unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If required, the lighting shall be designed to minimize off-site impacts. Strobe lights will not be allowed. 
(e)  Signs. No signs, including commercial advertising, logo, political signs, flyers, flags, or banners, but excluding warning signs, shall be allowed on any part of an antenna or tower. Any signs placed in violation of this section shall be removed immediately at the facility owner's expense. In addition to other requirements set forth in the city's zoning code, the following warning signs shall be utilized in connection with the tower or antenna site, as applicable: (a) If high voltage is necessary for the operation of the tower, associated equipment, or backhaul network or accessory structures, "HIGH VOLTAGE-DANGER" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall surrounding the structure and spaced no more than 40 feet apart; (b) "NO TRESPASSING" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall surrounding the structure and spaced no more than 40 feet apart; (c) the height of the lettering of the warning signs shall be at least eight inches and the signs shall be installed at least five feet above the finished grade; (d) the warning signs may be attached to free standing poles if the content of the sign may be obstructed by landscaping. Warning signs shall contain all other information in compliance with FCC regulations. 
(f)  Equipment structure. 
(1)  Except for an equipment structure needed to operate an approved facility, accessory uses are prohibited unless otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the facility is located. The equipment structure shall not contain more than 450 square feet of gross floor area and shall not be more than ten feet in height, not including any platform structure (which shall be limited to no more than three feet), subject to the limitations of section 31-733(b)(2) herein. 
(2)  Where the equipment structure is located on the ground, it shall meet the minimum setbacks required for a principal building in the underlying zoning district. Where the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the total area occupied by such structure(s) shall not exceed ten percent of the roof area. This limitation may be waived by the city, in its reasonable discretion, where the structural integrity of the roof can be certified by the applicant, subject to any weight load limitations contained in the city code. Screening shall be required for all equipment structures to minimize the visual impact upon adjacent properties and the general public. 
(g)  Parking. Each facility site shall provide stabilized parking only for use by maintenance personnel. No vehicle storage shall be permitted. 
(h)  Security fencing. Towers and associated accessory building and equipment shall be enclosed by a security fence or wall that is a minimum of eight feet in height and may be equipped with an anti-climbing device or apparatus where appropriate. Such perimeter fencing shall be landscaped pursuant to subsection (l) hereof. 
(i)  Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage of vehicles or equipment is permitted. Equipment such as generators or equipment cabinets may, with prior notice to the city and at the city's discretion, be placed outdoors on site, on a temporary basis. 
(j)  Facility replacement. 
(1)  Modification to existing site. Up to 50 percent of the height of an existing lawful tower may be replaced as part of modifications made to provide for co-location of a new facility. Replacement of more than 50 percent shall be considered a new tower and shall meet all of the applicable requirements. 
(2)  Rebuilding damaged or destroyed existing site. Existing lawful wireless service facilities and towers that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt through administrative review and approval, provided the replacement facility is the same as the original in type, location and intensity or brings a previously nonconforming facility into greater conformance and no more than 50 percent of the facility is involved. If more than 50 percent of the facility is involved, it shall be considered a new facility that shall meet all of the applicable requirements; provided that replacement of entire facility with a tower type of less intensity (i.e., replacing guyed tower with monopole/stealth) shall be considered as a replacement of no more than 50 percent of the facility for purposes of this subsection. All replacement shall comply with the then applicable zoning and building codes, and building permits must be obtained within 90 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If the required permits are not obtained within 90 days from the date the tower or facility is damaged or destroyed, the facility shall be deemed abandoned. 
(k)  Removal of abandoned facility. Any tower or facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove it within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city. Failure to remove an abandoned tower or facility within the 90 days shall be grounds to remove it at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using it. 
(l)  Facility appearance. 
(1)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  The design of the equipment structure and any other associated permitted structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that minimize the visual impact and enhance compatibility with surrounding development. 
(3)  To the extent feasible, wireless service facilities shall be stealth facilities. The use of a tower or facility other than a stealth facility must be documented by the applicant as the only appropriate facility which the provider can use. This documentation may be verified, at the discretion of the city, with a licensed professional engineer at the applicants expense. 
(4)  Facilities must comply with the requirements of the city landscape code. The city may require landscaping in excess of those requirements in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent uses or zoning districts, provided that any such additional requirements shall not exceed 80 percent of the amount otherwise required. 
(5)  For co-located facilities, the antennas and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure to minimize the visual impact and enhance compatibility with surrounding development. 
(m)  Security fund. Every wireless service provider shall establish a security fund to secure the payment of removing a tower or wireless service facility that has been determined to be abandoned, to secure the payment of removing a tower facility that has been determined to be in noncompliance with this Code, and to provide the city a fund from which to deduct fines and penalties for noncompliance with this Code or other applicable laws. Such fund may be in the form of a cash deposit, letter of credit, corporate guarantee, indemnity bond or surety bond as determined by the city at its sole discretion. The amount to be provided for each tower shall be no less than $5,000.00; the amount for each antenna array shall be no less than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2857, § 6, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 31-732. - Siting alternatives hierarchy. 
(a)  Siting of a tower and/or wireless service facility shall be in accordance with the following siting alternatives hierarchy. The order of ranking, from highest to lowest, shall be 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B, 3A, 3B. Where a lower ranked alternative is proposed (e.g., 3A), the applicant must demonstrate that higher ranked options (e.g., 2A) are not feasible. 
(1)  Co-location on existing communications tower. 
a.  On city-owned site. 
b.  On non-city owned site. 
(2)  Co-location on existing building/other structure. 
a.  On city-owned site. 
b.  On non-city owned site. 
(3)  Development of new communications tower. 
a.  On city-owned site. 
b.  On non-city owned site. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to modify or waive the requirement for use on city owned public property. Nothing herein shall be construed to grant an absolute right of access to city property. A determination whether to grant or deny a waiver request shall be made in accordance with standards to be adopted by administrative regulation of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2857, § 7, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 31-733. - Co-location requirements. 
(a)  Use regulations. Co-location is permitted in the IL, IG, and CF zoning districts. Co-location may be permitted in the OP, CG, RM-20 and RMH-20 zoning districts, provided that the proposed facility qualifies as a stealth facility consistent with the definition set forth in section 31-728 hereof. Where co-located on an existing building or other structure, the facility shall be developed only as an accessory use. 
(b)  Height: 
(1)  Tower. In compliance with section 31-734(d). 
(2)  Building/other structure. The minimum height of the building/structure before installation of the wireless service facility shall be 50 feet. The maximum height of a wireless service facility/antenna shall not exceed 25 percent of the original height of the building or structure, including support structures. 
(c)  Antenna type and size. 
(1)  To minimize adverse visual impacts, the antenna used shall be in accordance with the following alternatives hierarchy. The order of ranking, from highest to lowest, shall be: (1) Stealth; (2) panel; (3) whip; and (4) dish. Where a lower ranked alternative is proposed (e.g., 3), the applicant must demonstrate that higher ranked options (e.g., 2) are not technically feasible. 
(2)  Omnidirectional (whip) antennas must not exceed three feet in diameter and 15 feet in height. 
(3)  Directional or panel antennas must not exceed 21/2 feet in width and eight feet in height. 
(4)  Microwave dish antennas located below 65 feet above the ground may not exceed six feet in diameter. Microwave dish antennas located 65 feet and higher above the ground may not exceed eight feet in diameter. Ground-mounted dish antennas must be located or screened so as not to be visible from adjacent properties and public streets. 
(d)  Modification. Modifications to a structure to accommodate the co-location of a wireless service facility are permitted subject to section 31-731(j). 
(e)  Future co-location. Unless demonstrated as infeasible, the wireless service facility shall provide for future co-location on the facility by other wireless service facilities and for city and public purposes. The siting applicant shall demonstrate that other potential service providers have been contacted to determine if their future needs can be accommodated through co-location on the site. The facility owner shall make every effort to design the site in a manner that allows for future co-location. 
    At a minimum, a monopole tower shall be built to accommodate a minimum of two wireless service providers. At a minimum, a self-support, lattice or guyed tower shall be built to accommodate a minimum of three wireless service facilities. 
(f)  Lease. The city may require, as a condition of entering into a lease agreement with the city, the dedication of space on the facility for public health and safety purposes, as well as property improvement on the leased space. Any dedications and improvements shall be negotiated prior to the execution of the lease. No lease granted under this section shall convey any exclusive right, privilege, permit or franchise to occupy or use the land of the city for delivery of wireless service or for any other purpose. No lease granted under this section shall convey any right, title, or interest in city owned land other than a leasehold, but rather shall be deemed only to allow the use of land for the limited purposes and term stated. No lease shall be construed as a conveyance of a title interest in the property. 
(g)  Site plan. An applicant for the co-location of a wireless service facility shall submit a minor site plan that complies with section 31-730(a). To further encourage the co-location of wireless service facilities, the city will attempt to review any submitted minor site plan within 30 days of the filing of a completed application. 
(h)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, a facility proposed exclusively for the provision of essential communications services shall be exempt from the stealth requirements of section 31-733(a) hereof, provided that such facility is to be co-located and within the IL, IG, CF, OP, CG, RM-20 or RMH-20 zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2857, § 8, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 31-734. - New tower requirements. 
(a)  Use regulations. New towers shall be permitted in the IL, IG, and CF zoning districts. New towers may be permitted as a special exception in the OP, CG, RM-20 and RMH-20 zoning districts, provided the facility qualifies as a stealth facility consistent with the definition set forth in section 31-728 hereof, subject to the same notice requirements and other procedures of section 31-61 of this Code. 
(b)  Minimum lot size. Standard of the applicable district. 
(c)  Minimum setbacks. 110 percent of the tower height. Setback requirements shall be measured from the base of the tower to the perimeter of the property on which it is located. 
(d)  Maximum height. Towers shall not be constructed at any heights in excess of those provided below. 
 Tower capable of maintaining a single antenna array: 100 feet 
 Tower capable of maintaining two antenna arrays: 130 feet 
 Tower capable of maintaining three or more antenna arrays: 150 feet. 
    Any antenna, lighting, lighting rod, lighting beacon or other wireless service facility shall not extend more than ten feet above the height of the tower. 
(e)  Minimum separation distance. Any wireless service facility tower shall be separated from any other tower, notwithstanding whether such other tower is within the incorporated area of the city, by a minimum distance of 1/2 mile. Separation distance shall be measured by a straight line between the bases of the towers. 
(f)  Lease. Where a wireless service facility is to be installed on city-owned property, a lease agreement acceptable to the city shall be provided. The city may require, as a condition of entering into a lease agreement, the dedication of space on the facility for public health and safety purposes, as well as property improvement on the leased space. Any dedications and improvements shall be negotiated prior to the execution of the lease. 
(Ord. No. 2857, § 9, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 31-735. - Variance provisions. 
    Where a proposed wireless service facility owner is able to demonstrate, based upon verifiable evidence, that its proposed facility cannot be developed under the terms of this article, the following will apply: 
(1)  A major site plan that meets the requirements of section 31-730(b)(1), (2) hereof shall be submitted. As part of the plan, the application shall clearly indicate the specific reasons why a variance is justified and provide supporting documentation. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a complete major site plan application, the city shall commission a review by a professional consultant with appropriate technical experience to review the plan and all supporting documentation. The cost of this review shall be borne by the applicant. No review shall commence until the cost recovery arrangement is finalized and no authorization shall be issued until all payments due to the city have been paid in full. 
(3)  In reviewing the proposal, the zoning board of adjustment may impose conditions it reasonably determines are warranted to minimize negative community impacts. 
(Ord. No. 2857, § 10, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 31-736. - Protection of the city and its residents. 
(a)  Indemnification. The city shall not enter into any lease agreement until and unless the city obtains adequate indemnity in the agreement from such provider. The indemnity must at minimum: 
(1)  Release the city from and against any and all liability and responsibility in or arising out of the construction, operation or repair of a wireless service facility, provided that such release from liability shall not apply to intentional or negligent acts or omissions of the city. Each wireless service facility owner must further agree not to sue or seek any money or damages from the city in connection with the above mentioned matters. 
(2)  Indemnify and hold harmless the city, its trustees, elected and appointed officers, agents, servants and employees, from and against any and all claims, demands, or causes of action of whatever kind or nature, and the resulting losses, costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys' fees, liabilities, damages, orders, judgments, or decrees, sustained by the city or any third party arising out of, or by reason of, or resulting from each wireless service facility operator, or its agents, employees or servants' negligent acts, errors or omissions. 
(3)  Provide that the covenants and representations relating to the indemnification provision shall survive the term of any agreement and continue in full force and effect as to the party's responsibility to indemnify. 
(b)  Insurance. The city may not enter into any lease agreement until and unless the city obtains assurance that an operator (and those acting on its behalf) has adequate insurance (amount to be determined at time of agreement). At a minimum, the following requirements must be satisfied: 
(1)  A wireless service facility owner shall not commence construction or operation of the facility without obtaining all insurance required under this section and approval of such insurance by the risk manager of the city, nor shall a wireless service facility owner allow any contractor or subcontractor to commence work on its contract or subcontract until all similar such insurance required of the same has been obtained and approved. The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire period the facility is in existence. If the operator, its contractors or subcontractors do not have the required insurance, the city may order such entities to stop operations until the insurance is obtained and approved. 
(2)  Certificates of insurance, reflecting evidence of the required insurance, shall be filed with the city's risk manager. The certificates shall be filed prior to the commencement of construction and once a year thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a lapse in coverage. The city shall be named as additional insured under all insurance contracts required by this section. 
(3)  These certificates shall contain a provision that coverages afforded under these policies will not be canceled until at least 30 days prior to written notice being given to the city risk manager. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under the laws of the State of Florida, and with a Best's Rating of A+, in order to gain acceptance. 
(4)  In the event that the insurance certificate provided indicates that the insurance shall terminate or lapse during the period of the lease agreement with the city, the wireless service facility owner shall furnish, at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the date of such insurance, a renewed certificate of insurance as proof that equal and like coverage has been secured for the balance of the lease agreement period. 
(5)  Comprehensive general liability. A wireless service facility owner and its contractors or subcontractors engaged in work on the operator's behalf, shall maintain minimum insurance in the amount of $5,000,000.00 to cover liability, bodily injury and property damage. Exposures to be covered are: premises, operations and those certain contracts relating to construction, installation or maintenance of the wireless service facility. Coverage shall be written on an occurrence basis and shall be included, as applicable, in the lease agreement between the city and the wireless service facility operator. 
(Ord. No. 2857, § 11, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 31-737. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who knowingly breaches any provision of this article shall upon receipt of written notice from the city be given a time schedule to cure the violation. Failure to commence to cure within 30 days and to complete cure, to the city's satisfaction, within 60 days, or such longer time as the city may specify, shall result in revocation of any permit or license and the city shall seek any remedy or damages to the full extent of the law. 
(Ord. No. 2857, § 12, 5-17-00) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1957 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1957 Code, as updated through February 6, 1991, which are included herein. Sections of the 1957 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1957 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-3 1-1-1-3 1-4 1-6 1-5 1-9 1-7, 1-8 1-10, 1-11 1-9 2-1 1-10 2-9 1-11, 1-12 2-2 1-13, 1-14 2-3, 2-4 2-1 2-5 2-2 2-26 2-6, 2-7 2-28, 2-29 2-7.1 2-27 2-8 2-6 2-9 2-8 2-11 2-7 2-12.1.2(a)- 
2-12.1.2(d) 2-61-2-64 2-12.2 2-41 2-12.2.1 2-42 2-12.3(a), 2-12.3(b) 2-76, 2-77 2-12.4(a), (b) 2-91 2-12.4(c), 2-12.4(d) 2-92, 2-93 2-12.5(a) 20-16 2-12.5(b), (c) 20-17 2-12.6 20-19 2-12.7 20-18 2-12.8 20-20 2-12.8.1(a)- 
2-12.8.1(c) 2-116-2-118 2-13.3 16-81 2-13.3(a), 2-13.3(b) 16-82, 16-83 2-20 2-176 2-22-2-24 2-177-2-179 2-26 2-196 2-29 2-197 2-32.1 2-198 2-34 2-211 2-34.1, 2-34.2 2-212, 2-213 2-34.4 2-214 2-35 2-311 2-35.1 2-312 2-36 2-313 2-36.1-2-36.8 2-331-2-338 2-40, 2-41 16-41, 16-42 2-43 16-43 2-43.1 16-44 2-60-2-67 16-61-16-68 2-120.2-2-120.9 14-22-14-29 2-120.10(1), 2-120.10(2) 14-30, 14-31 2-121 14-32 2-124 2-231 2-125 2-234 2-126 2-233 2-127-2-129 2-235-2-237 2-130 2-232 2-132 2-238 2-240 2-141-2-147 2-101-2-107 2B-1-2B-8 3-16-3-23 3-1 28-2 3-2, 3-3 28-56, 28-57 3-4(a), 3-4(b) 28-71, 28-72 3-4(b)(9) 28-4 3-4(c) 28-73 3-4(c)(1)-(7) 28-74 3-4(d) 28-91 3-4(e) 28-76 3-4(f) 28-3 3-4(g) 28-75 3-5 28-1 3-6(a) 28-109 3-6(c) 28-110 3-6(d) 28-114 3-7 28-106 3-8 28-108 3-9 28-38 3-10 28-123 3-11 28-92 3-12, 3-13 28-36, 28-37 3-14 28-40 3-15 28-124 4-1 3-1 4-2(a) 3-2 4-2(b) 3-4 4-3 3-3 4-4(a)-(e) 3-5 4-4(f) 3-6 4-4(g), 4-4(h) 3-5 4-5-4-10 3-7-3-12 5-1, 5-2 4-1 5-3.2 4-2 5-4 4-3 5-4.1 4-4 5-9 4-21 5-12, 5-13 4-22, 4-23 5A-1 23-1 5A-2 23-4 5A-3(a) 23-3 5A-3(b)-5A-3(e) 23-5-23-8 5A-4 23-2 5A-5(a) 23-9 5A-5(b)(1)-5A-5(b)(8) 23-41-23-48 5A-5(c), 5A-5(d) 23-24, 23-25 5A-5(e) 23-22 5A-6 23-23 5A-7 23-21 6-1-6-3 22-31-22-33 6-4 22-2 6-5, 6-6 22-34, 22-35 6-29-6-31 22-61-22-63 6-31.1 22-64 6-32-6-35 22-65-22-68 6-36 22-68 6-47-6-50 22-101-22-104 6-51-6-53 22-131-22-133 6-108-6-110 25-2-25-4 6-111 25-1 6-112, 6-113 25-5, 25-6 6-114 25-27 6-115-6-119 25-7-25-11 6-131 25-26 6-132-6-134 25-28-25-30 6-141 25-46 6-142 25-66 6-142(1)-6-142(5) 25-67-25-71 6-143-6-145 25-47-25-49 6A-1, 6A-2 9-42, 9-43 6A-3 9-41 6A-4 9-46 6A-5, 6A-6 9-44, 9-45 7-1, 7-2 5-1, 5-2 7-2.1 5-3 7-3-7-5 5-4-5-6 7-5.1 5-7 7-8 5-8 7-11 5-9 7-15 5-31 7-15.1 5-32 7-16, 7-17 5-33, 5-34 7-18 5-38 7-19-7-21 5-35-5-37 7-24 5-10 7-28.2 2-30 7-29 5-11 7-34 5-12 7-66 5-13 9-32(a)-9-32(k) 17-21-17-31 9-33(a) 17-51, 17-52 9-33(b), 9-33(c) 17-53, 17-54 9-33(d) 17-57 9-33(e) 17-59 9-33(f) 17-56 9-34, 9-35 17-1, 17-2 10-7, 10-8 8-1, 8-2 10-16 7-1 10-17 7-46 10-18 7-61 10-19 7-47 10-20 7-2 10-20.1 7-48 10-20.2, 10-20.3 7-21, 7-22 10-20.4(B) 7-23 10-20.4(C)(1) 7-49 10-20.4(C)(4) 7-24 10-20.4(D), 10-20.4(E) 7-25, 7-26 10-20.5(A)- 
10-20.5(E) 7-27-7-31 10-20.6(A) 7-62 10-20.6(B), (C) 7-64 10-20.6(D) 7-63 10-20.6(E), 10-20.6(F) 7-67, 7-68 10-20.6(G), 10-20.6(H) 7-65, 7-66 10-20.10-10-20.12 7-3-7-5 10-24(A) 7-50 10-24(C)(2), (3) 7-50 10-34.1 7-101, 7-102 11-52-11-69 10-31-10-48 12-1 11-2 12-2 11-1 12-3-12-10 11-3-11-10 12-10.1-12-10.3 22-1 12-26-12-30 11-31-11-35 12-31-12-36 11-51-11-56 12-66-12-74 11-91-11-99 12-86-12-89 11-116-11-119 12-106-12-117 11-141-11-152 12-125-12-128 11-171-11-174 13-1-13-14 12-1-12-14 13-15, 13-16 12-14, 12-15 13-17-13-26 12-15-12-24 13-27-13-38 13-51-13-62 14-1, 14-2 14-46 14-3, 14-4 14-47, 14-48 14-4.1-14-4.6 14-49-14-54 14-5, 14-6 14-71, 14-72 14-6.1-14-6.3 14-73-14-75 14-7 14-76 14-7.1-14-7.8 14-77-14-84 14-8 14-85 14-8.1-14-8.3 14-86-14-88 14-9-14-16 14-101-14-108 14A-1 27-31 14A-2 27-33 14A-2.1 27-34 14A-2.2 27-106 14A-3 27-35 14A-4 27-32 14A-5 27-51 14A-6 27-96 14A-7-14A-9 27-36-27-38 14A-10, 14A-11 27-81, 27-82 14A-12, 14A-13 27-84, 27-85 14A-14 27-83 14A-23 27-107 16-4 13-1 16-4.1 13-2 16-5 13-1 16-5.1 13-3 16-7, 16-8 13-26 16-9 13-34 16-10 13-31 16-11 13-33 16-12, 16-13 13-35, 13-36 16-16 13-32 16-31 13-76 16-34-16-38 13-77-13-81 18-1, 18-2 18-21, 18-22 18-29-18-35 18-36-18-42 20-1 19-1 20-3 19-2 19-56 20-4 19-2 20-6 19-3 20-14 19-4 20-17 19-201 20-18 19-204 20-26 19-21 20-40 19-203 20-41 19-202 20-47 19-27 20-48 19-22 20-55 19-23 20-58 19-24 20-61.10-20-61.19 19-36-19-45 20-63 19-25 20-70.02 19-26 20-71, 20-72 19-57, 19-58 20-72.1 19-59 20-73(c) 19-60 20-74 19-62 20-75 19-61 20-76-20-78 19-63 20-79-20-83 19-64-19-68 20-86, 20-87 19-69, 19-70 20-90 19-71 20-90.2 19-72 20-90.4(a) 19-87 20-90.4(b), (c) 19-86 20-90.4(d)-20-90.4(h) 19-88-19-92 20-90.4(i), (j) 19-93 20-90.4(k)- 
20-90.4(m) 19-94-19-96 20-90.4(n) 19-73 20-91-20-94 19-116-19-119 20-95 19-128 20-96-20-103 19-120-19-127 20-104 19-129 20-108.1(a)-(g) 19-146 20-108.1(h) 19-148 20-108.2 19-147 20-108.3, 20-108.4 19-150, 19-151 20-108.5 19-149 20-108.6 19-152 20-130 19-166 20-130.1-20-130.5 19-176-19-180 20-130.6 19-167 21-1 21-1 21-2, 21-3 21-41, 21-42 21-3.1 21-43 21-4 21-44 21-9 21-45 21-11-21-13 21-46-21-48 21-15, 21-16 21-49, 21-50 21-20 21-51 21-21(a)-21-21(f) 21-151-21-156 21-22(a) 21-111 21-23, 21-24 21-112, 21-113 21-26-21-35 21-114-21-123 21-36(a)-21-36(e) 21-71-21-75 21-37-21-39 21-124-21-126 21-40(a)-21-40(e) 21-91-21-95 21-41, 21-42 21-127, 21-128 21-43(a) 21-129 21-43(b), (c) 21-2 22-1, 22-2 20-36, 20-37 22-2.1 20-38 22-3(a), (b) 20-61 22-3(c) 20-62 22-3(d), (e) 20-63 22-3(f)-22-3(h) 20-64-20-66 22-3(i)-(l) 20-70 22-3(m)-22-3(o) 20-67-20-69 22-3(p)-22-3(t) 20-71-20-75 22-4(a)-(i) 20-77 22-4(j), 22-4(k) 20-76, 20-77 22-4(l) 20-77 22-5 20-78 22-6, 22-7 20-39, 20-40 22-8-22-10 20-79-20-81 22-11-22-13 20-41-20-43 22-37(a), 22-37(b) 20-182, 20-183 22-37(c) 20-191 22-37(d) 20-185 22-37(e) 20-192 22-37(f)-22-37(i) 20-186-20-189 22-37(j) 20-184 22-37(k) 20-190 22-38-22-40 20-193-20-195 22-71-22-73 20-216-20-218 22-74 20-231-20-238 22-81-22-87 20-256-20-262 22-93 20-181 22-98 20-180 22-111-22-118 20-101-20-108 23-3 31-2 23-4 31-4 23-4.1 31-5 23-5 31-3 23-5.1 31-6 23-8(a)-(c) 31-36 23-8(d) 31-37 31-39 23-9 31-38 23-10, 23-11 31-7, 31-8 23-27(a)-23-27(d) 31-76-31-79 23-28(A) 28-5 23-28(B) 28-1 23-28(C)(1) 28-107 23-28(C)(2) 28-112 23-28(C)(3) 28-111 23-28(D)(1)(a-f) 28-115 23-28(D)(1)(g) 28-113 23-28(D)(2) 28-117 23-28(E)(2) 28-116 23-28(E)(3)- 
23-28(E)(6) 28-118-28-121 23-28(F) 28-39 23-28(G) 28-122 23-28(H) 28-40 120.1 14-21  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1957 Code, as updated through February 6, 1991, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1957 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede February 6, 1991, but which were never included in the 1957 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since February 6, 1991, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 2152  3-17-82 2(23.AA-1) 31-1 3(A)(1), 3(A)(2) 28-107 3(A)(3) 28-39 3(B)(23.AA-2)-3(B)(23.AA-4) 31-96-31-98 3(B)(23.AA-5.I)-3(B)(23.AA-5.VI) 31-116-31-121 3(B)(23.AA-6.I)-3(B)(23.AA-6.VII) 31-136-31-142 3(B)(23.AA-7.I)-3(B)(23.AA-7.VII) 31-156-31-162 3(B)(23.AA-8.I)-3(B)(23.AA-8.VII) 31-176-31-182 3(B)(23.AA-9.I)-3(B)(23.AA-9.VII) 31-196-31-202 3(B)(23.AA-10.I)-3(B)(23.AA-10.VII) 31-221-31-227 3(B)(23.AA-11.I)-3(B)(23.AA-11.VII) 31-241-31-246 3(B)(23.AA-12.I)-3(B)(23.AA-12.VII) 31-261-31-266 3(B)(23.AA-13.I)-3(B)(23.AA-13.VII) 31-281-31-287 3(B)(23.AA-14.I)-3(B)(23.AA-14.VII) 31-301-31-306 3(B)(23.AA-15.I)-3(B)(23.AA-15.V) 31-321-31-325 3(B)(23.AA-15.VI, VII) 31-326 3(B)(23.AA-15.VIII) 31-327 3(B)(23.AA-16.I)-3(B)(23.AA-16.VII) 31-341-31-346 3(B)(23.AA-17.I)-3(B)(23.AA-17.V) 31-361-31-365 3(B)(23.AA-18.I)-3(B)(23.AA-18.VII) 31-381-31-387 3(B)(23.AA-19.I)-3(B)(23.AA-19.VI) 31-401-31-406 3(B)(23.AA-20.I)-3(B)(23.AA-20.VI) 31-421-31-426 3(B)(23.AA-21.I)-3(B)(23.AA-21.VI) 31-441-31-446 3(B)(23.AA-22.I)-3(B)(23.AA-22.VII) 31-461-31-467 3(B)(23.AA-23.I) 31-481, 31-482 3(B)(23.AA-23.II.A)-3(B)(23.AA-23.IV.A) 31-483-31-494 3(B)(23.AA-23.IV.B)-3(B)(23.AA-23.IV.F) 31-496-31-499 3(B)(23.AA-23.V)-3(B)(23.AA-23.VIII) 31-501-31-504 3(B)(23.AA-24) 31-541 3(B)(23.AA-24.I)-3(B)(23.AA-24.VII) 31-542-31-548 3(B)(23.AA-25) 31-566 3(B)(23.AA-25.I.A)-3(B)(23.AA-25.I.I) 31-567-31-575 3(B)(23.AA-25.II)-3(B)(23.AA-25.V) 31-576-31-579 3(B)(23.AA-26.I), 3(B)(23.AA-26.II) 31-597, 31-598 3(B)(23.AA-26.III) 31-596 3(B)(23.AA-26.IV) 31-600 3(B)(23.AA-26.V.A)-3(B)(23.AA-26.V.E) 31-602-31-606 3(B)(23.AA-26.VI) 31-599 3(B)(23.AA-26.VII) 31-601 3(B)(23.AA-27) 31-56 3(B)(23.AA-27.I.A)-3(B)(23.AA-27.I.C) 31-57-31-59 3(B)(23.AA-27.II.A, B) 3(B)(23.AA-27.II.C) 31-61 
31-62 2153  4- 7-82 1 23-82 2 23-81 3-9 23-83-23-89 2169  7-21-82 1 31-161 2 31-141 2179  2- 2-83 1 31-1 31-56-31-59 31-241-31-246 31-261-31-266 31-577 31-596 31-600 31-602, 31-603 2213  9-21-83 1 31-121 31-141 31-161 31-177 31-181, 31-182 31-198 31-222, 31-223 31-263 31-282 31-302 31-322, 31-323 31-362, 31-363 31-488 31-494 31-496 31-543 31-547 31-577 31-579 2214  9-21-83 1(I), 1(II) 26-2, 26-3 1(III) 26-1 1(IV)-1(X) 26-4-26-10 3 31-243, 31-244 31-264 31-323, 31-324 31-362-31-364 31-382-31-384 31-488 31-496 31-503 4 31-263 2255 11- 7-84 1(22-74) 20-234 1(22-75) 20-239 2271  4- 3-85 1 31-323 2 31-363 4 31-496 5 31-577 2285  7-17-85 1 26-5 26-8 31-56-31-59 31-241-31-246 31-261-31-263 31-265, 31-266 31-363 31-381, 31-382 2296 12-18-85 1-4 24-41-24-44 2313  8-20-86 1 31-322 2 31-342 3, 4 31-482, 31-483 5 31-490 6 31-497 31-499 7 31-503 2314  9- 3-86 1 31-1 2 31-96 3(I)-3(V) 31-521-31-525 2355 11-18-87 1, 2 14-46 3 14-47 4 14-49 5 14-51 6, 7 14-54 2366  4- 6-88 1 31-691, 31-692 2 31-61 2386  9- 7-88 1 31-197 2 31-222 3(B)(23.AA-14.II) 31-302 4 31-307 5 31-322 6 31-362 7 31-382 2400  1- 4-89 1 7-61 2 7-47(a), (b) 3 7-22(b) 4 7-62(1) 5 7-3(a) 6, 7       Added 7-5(c), (d) 2405  1- 4-89 1 31-568 2407  1- 4-89 1       Added 10-70-10-77 2459  9-20-89 1A.-F.       Added 31-36-31-41 2       Rpld 31-38 2478 12- 6-89 1 31-118 2 31-283 3 31-323 4 31-548 2480 12-20-89       Added 10-91-10-122 2520  1- 2-91 1 31-60 2529  3-20-91 1, 2 31-482, 31-483 3 31-498 4 31-500 5 31-495 6 31-96 
31-186-31-193 7 31-96 
31-348-31-353 2530  5- 1-91 1 31-96 31-354-31-359 2 31-711-31-718 2534  6-19-91 1 23-86 2539  9-18-91 1 13-76 2541 10- 2-91 1 25-1 2543 10-16-91 1 20-63, 20-64 20-66-20-68 20-70-20-74 2 20-76 3 20-183, 20-184 20-188, 20-189 2550  4- 1-92 2, 3 24-21, 24-22 4 24-22 2561  7-15-92 1 31-322 2 31-523 2571 11-18-92 1 3-6 2580  2-17-93 2 13-76 2586  7- 7-93 art. I 20-73 art. II 20-188 2589  9-15-93 14-47 2598  9-15-93 16.39-16.41 13-41-13-43 16.42(1) 13-45 16.42(2)(a)-(e) 13-45 16.42(2)(f) 13-44 2599  9-15-93 14-51 2601 10- 6-93 1 14-89 2602 10- 6-93 1 14-55 2603 10- 6-93 1 14-25 2604 11-17-93 1 2-231 2 2-234 3 2-233 4-6 2-235-2-237 7 2-232 8 2-240 9, 10 2-238, 2-239 2608 12- 1-93 1(6-1) 6-1 1(6-2)-1(6-7) 6-31-6-36 1(6-8) 6-7 1(6-9)-1(6-13) 6-2-6-6 2609 12- 1-93 1(17-51)-1(17-59) 17-51-17-59 2615 12- 1-93 2(20-95)-2(20-97) 20-141-20-143 2(20-98(a))-2(20-98(f)) 20-144-20-149 2(20-99)-2(20-105) 20-150-20-156 2616 12- 1-93 2(17-1)-2(17-3) 29-61-29-63 2(17-5) 29-91 2(17-6(1)) 29-92 2(17-6(2), (3)) 29-93 2(17-6(4)) 29-92 2(17-7) 29-94 2(17-8(1)-(3)) 29-95 2(17-8(4)) 29-96 2(17-8(5)) 29-64 2(17-8(6)) 29-97 2(17-10) 29-31 2620 12-15-93 2(17A-2), 2(17A-3) 30-2, 30-3 2(17A-4) 2(17A-5), 2(17A-6) 30-4 2(17A-7)-2(17A-10) 30-31-30-34 2(17A-11(1)-(3)) 30-61 2(17A-11(4))- 
2(17A-11(8)) 30-62-30-66 2(17A-11(9)) 30-70 2(17A-11(10))- 
2(17A-11(12)) 30-67-30-69 2(17A-11(13)) 30-71 2(17A-12)-2(17A-15) 30-35-30-38 2(17A-16)-2(17A-18) 30-5-30-7 2621 12-15-93 1(6-1)-1(6-3) 22-31-22-33 1(6-4) 22-2 1(6-5), 1(6-6) 22-34, 22-35 2622  2- 2-94 1 10-47 2623  2-16-94 1 31-522 2624  2-16-94 1 31-1 2 31-117 31-137 31-157 31-177 31-187 31-197 31-222 3 31-242 31-262 4 31-545 2625  4- 6-94 1 14-21 2       Added 14-23(a)(3) 2626  3- 2-94 1 20-73 2627  3-16-94 1 20-71 2628  3-16-94 1 20-73 2 20-188 2629  9-21-94 1 31-579 2630  4- 6-93 1 20-78(c) 2635  6-15-94 1       Added 11-143(8) 2 11-174(17)a. 2639  9-21-94 1 20-63-20-68, 20-70-20-74 2 20-76 3       Added 20-82, 20-196       Amd. 20-183, 20-184, 20-188, 20-189 2642 11- 2-94 Adopting Ordinance, p. ix 2643 12- 7-94 1 14-22(a)(2) 2645 12-21-94 1       Added 14-56-14-59 2648 12-21-94 1       Rpld 3-16-3-23       Added 2.5-1-2.5-13 2.5-20-2.5-32 2.5-40-2.5-44 2.5-50-2.5-63 2649 12-21-94 1 14-25(g) 2650 12-21-94 1 14-75(g)(1) 2       Added 14-90 3       Added 14-91 4       Added 14-92 2651  1-18-95 1       Added 14-93 2657  3-15-95 1 31-137, 31-157 
31-177, 31-322 2 31-187 3 31-197, 33-282 
31-302 4 31-543 2659  3-15-95 1(21-21(c)) 21-153 1(21-21(f)) 21-156 1(21-21(g))       Added 21-157 1(21-23) 21-112 1(21-27 21-115 1(21-46)       Added 21-113.1 1(21-47)       Added 21-115.1 1(21-48)       Added 21-115.2 1(21-49) 21-129 2660  3-15-95 1       Added 2-126-2-141 2661  4- 5-95       Added 13-82 2664  4-19-95 1(1.01)       Added 19-5 2671  5- 3-95 1 14-54 2656  8-16-95 1       Added 31-382(b)(6) 2678  7- 5-95 1 11-174(17)(a) 2681 10- 4-95 1       Added 10-1-10-16 2682  9-20-95 1       Added 10-131-10-153 2683 10- 4-95 1       Added 11-181-11-189 2685 10- 4-95 I, II 13-76(a)(2) 2686 10- 4-95 I, II 13-76(a)(1) 2687 10- 4-95 1       Added 2-43-2-46 2688 10- 4-95 1       Added 2-161 2689 10-18-95 1 31-321, 31-322 2       Added 31-282(a)(7) 2694 11- 1-95 1       Rpld 7-21(1) 2       Rnbd 7-21(2), (3) 
as 7-21(1), (2) 2697 12- 6-95 1       Added 2-151-2-158 2710  6-19-96 1 31-495(1)-(3) 2699  1-15-97 1       Added 17.5-1-17.5-59 2711 10- 2-96 1 10-150 2716  9-18-96 1 20-183(b), (d), 
20-184(b), (d) 2717  9-18-96 1 20-72, 20-74, 
20-75, 20-77(b), (d), 
20-78(a) 2718  9-18-96 1 20-63-20-68, 
20-73(a) 2722 11-20-96 1 22-31-22-33, 
22-35 2725 12- 4-96 1 14-27 2728  1-15-97 1 31-576(a)(1) 2733  3- 5-97 1 3-6(note) 2734  5- 5-97 2       Added 14-76(5) 2739  5-21-97 17-56 2742  6-18-97 1 31-4(c), (d) 2756  9-17-97 1 2-44, 2-46(a), (c) 2757  9-17-97 1       Added 19-72.1 2758  9-17-97 1 19-60 2759  9-17-97 1 19-72 2760 10-15-97 1 31-495(1)e., (2)e., (3)e. 2763 11- 5-97 1(art. 1.0)       Added 28.5-1 1(1.1), (1.2)       Added 28.5-2, 28.5-3 1(2.1-2.4)       Added 28.5-26-28.5-29 1(3.1-3.5)       Added 28.5-46-28.5-50 1(4.1-4.4)       Added 28.5-66-28.5-69 1(5.0)       Added 28.5-86 1(6.1-6.5)       Added 28.5-101-28.5-105 1(7.1-7.3)       Added 28.5-121-28.5-123 2768 12-12-97 1 2-8 2769  1-21-98 2 14-24(c)(1), (2) 2772  1-21-98 1 31-1 2 31-322(b)(8)       Added 31-322(c)(3) 3       Added 31-382(a)(11), (12) 4       Added 31-549 5       Added 31-550 2774  4- 1-98 1 31-242(c) 2 31-243(1)b. 3 31-246(4) 2781  8- 5-98 1       Rpld 2-7 2782  5-19-99 2 14-21 2785  9-16-98 1 2-136(a) 2786  9-16-98 1 2-138(b) 2798 12-16-98 1 2-138(g) 2800  1-20-99 1 31-577(1)(d) 2 31-494(4) 2803  2-17-99 1 31-243(5)d 2804  3- 3-99 1       Added 13-27 2810  4- 7-99 1 2-135(b) 2 2-136(a) 3 2-137 2812  4-21-99 1 10-119(tit.) 2814  4-21-99 1 31-1 2 31-382(b) 3 31-382(c) 2818  6- 2-99 1 14-75 2 14-85 2832  9- 1-99 1       Rpld 31-596-31-606       Added 31-596-31-605 2833  9-21-99 1       Added 31-551 2843 12-15-99 1 2-236(d) 2850  3- 1-00 1 2-331, 2-332       Added 2-333.1 2-334-2-338       Added 2-339 2852  4-19-00 1 14-85 2853  4-19-00 1 14-72(3) 2 14-73(b) 3 14-74 4 14-75 5 14-77(a) 6 14-79(c) 7 14-82 2857  5-17-00 31-382 1-12       Added 31-726-31-737 2860  6-21-00 1 14-75(g)(1)e. 2861  6-21-00 10A       Rpld 10-31-10-48       Added 10-31-10-64 2863  1- 3-01 1 31-1 2 31-322(b) 3       Added 31-552 2876 10- 4-00 1 22-31-22-34       Rpld 22-35 2877 10- 4-00 1 21-112 2879 10-18-00 1 13-76 2881 12-20-00 1 14-46-14-49 14-51 14-54 2882 12-20-00 1 31-41 2 31-692 2890  1- 3-01 1 31-568 2       Added 31-580 2892  4- 4-01 1-15       Added 20-286-450 2896  5-16-01 1       Added 19-47-19-54 2897  6- 6-01 1-17       Added 10-171-10-227 2899  6-20-01 1 31-243(5)(e) 2 31-263(5)(e) 2900  6-20-01 1       Added 18-62(a)-(c) 2901  6-20-01 1       Added 18-61(a), (b) 2890  7- 3-01 1 14-21 2895  7- 3-01 1       Added 12-51-12-56 2904  7- 3-01 1 14-72 2905  7- 3-01 1       Added 14-33 2911  1- 2-02 1       Rpld 6-7       Rpld 6-31-6-34 2       Added 6-31-6-34 2913  2-20-02 1       Rpld 2-29 2918  6- 5-02 1 12-8 2       Added 31-553 2922  9- 4-02 1       Added 31-526-31-533 2928  9-18-02 1 14-72 2929  9-18-02 1       Rpld 25-1-25-71 2       Added 25-1-25-127 2930 10- 2-02 1 14-53, 14-58 2931 11-20-02 1 20-36, 20-37 20-63, 20-64       Rpld 20-65 20-66-20-77       Rpld 20-82 2 20-183, 20-184 2 20-188, 20-189 2       Rpld 20-196 2933 11-20-02 1 3-10 2936  3- 5-03 1 19-72 19-72.1       Rpld 19-73 2938  3- 5-03 1 31-692 2941  4- 2-03 1 13-76 2942  6-18-03 1-12       Added 20-461-20-472 2944 11- 5-03 1 31-526-31-533 2945  7- 2-03 1 10-131 2 10-150 3       Added 10-154 2950 11- 5-03 1 11-181-11-190 2963  2-18-04 1 31-362(a)(1) 2967  6- 2-04 1 2-43 2 2-44 3       Rpld 2-45 3       Added 2-45 4       Rpld 2-46 4       Added 2-46 5       Added 2-47 6       Added 2-48 2969  6- 2-04 1 31-4 31-61 2971  6-16-04 1-5 22-31-22-35 6 28-38 7 28-40 8 29-31 9 31-38 2987  3- 2-05 1 14-72 2997 10- 5-05 1 14-21 3002  1-18-06 1       Added 29-65 3003  2- 1-06 1 31-527 3004  3-15-06 1 14-72 3009  6-21-06 1 12-81-12-84 3010  7- 9-06 1 26-1-26-11 3021 11-15-06 1 31-1 2 31-198 3 31-223 4 31-577 3022 12-20-06 1 14-24(e) 3026  8-15-07 1 11-181-11-190 3030  9-19-07 1       Added 14-48(c) 2 14-51 3 14-56 4       Added 14-60 3032 10- 3-07 2       Added 12-111-12-119 3034 12-19-07 1       Added 14-76(6) 3046  9- 3-08 1 11-181-11-190 3049  9-17-08 1 14-29(d) 3050  9-17-08 2 10-131-10-156 3053 10- 1-08 1 14-77(a) 3054 10- 1-08 1 14-21(2), (3) 3057  5- 6-09 1       Added 14-61 3058  5- 6-09 1 14-77(f) 3062  6-17-09 1       Rpld 31-692 2 31-691 3063  6-17-09 1 22-33 001UD  7-15-09 1 20-63 20-64 20-66 20-77 2       Rpld 20-180-20-182 20-183, 20-184       Rpld 20-185-20-195 3065  8- 5-09 1 14-26 3070 10- 7-09 2 31-1 3       Added 31-554 3071 10- 7-09 2 31-1 3 31-547 3072 10- 7-09 2 31-1 3 31-382 4       Added 31-555, 31-556 3076  4- 7-10 1       Added 31-557 3077  4- 7-10 1       Added 31-63 3078  4- 7-10 1(1-5)       Added 10-241-10-245 3059  5- 6-09 2       Added 10-260-10-270 3 10-12(c) 3083 10-20-10 2       Rpld 2-26-2-30 2       Added 2-26-2-30 3       Rpld 5-1-5-13       Added 5-1-5-17 4       Rpld 5-31-5-38 3084 10-20-10 1       Added 22-151-22-159 3085 11-17-10 1       Added 20-121-20-128 2       Added 22-36 3086  2- 2-11 1 14-26(2)a., (3)d.4. 3091  5-18-11 1 28-1 2       Added 28-122(d) 3092  5-18-11 1 31-1 2 31-544 3093  6- 2-11 2 14-21 3       Rpld 14-25(g) 4       Added 14-34 3094  6-15-11 2 14-72 3 14-89 4 14-90 5       Rpld 14-91 6       Rpld 14-92 3095  6-15-11 2 14-75(a), (g)(1) 3 14-77(b) 4 14-83 5 14-85 6 14-86 7 14-93 3097  7- 6-11 1       Added 31-558 3098  7-20-11 2       Added 12-141-12-143 4000  8- 3-11 1 14-76(6) 2 14-84 4001  9- 7-11 1 2-162-2-165 4010  1-18-12 2(101), 2(102) 16.5-1, 16.5-2 2(1-201) 16.5-11 2(1-301) 16.5-21 2(2-101)-2(2-104) 16.5-41-16.5-44 2(3-101)-2(3-108) 16.5-61-16.5-68 2(3-201)-2(3-204) 16.5-81-16.5-84 2(3-301)-2(3-311) 16.5-91-16.5-101 2(4-101)-2(4-105) 16.5-121-16.5-125 2(5-101) 16.5-141 2(5-201)-2(5-203) 16.5-151-16.5-153 2(5-301) 16.5-161 2(5-401) 16.5-171 2(6-101)-2(6-103) 16.5-191-16.5-193 2(7-101)-2(7-111) 16.5-211-16.5-221 2(8-101)-2(8-104) 16.5-241-16.5-244 2(9-101)-2(9-107) 16.5-261-16.5-267 2(10-101)-2(10-104) 16.5-281-16.5-284 2(10-201)-2(10-208) 16.5-291-16.5-298 2(10-301), 2(10-302) 16.5-311, 16.5-312 2-(10-401) 16.5-321 2(11-101)-2(11-108) 16.5-341-16.5-348 4011  3- 7-12 1 14-27 4013  5-16-12 1, 2 14-62 4014  6-20-12 1       Rpld 31-596-31-605       Added 31-596-31-621 4015  8-15-12 1 14-47(1) 4016  8-15-12 1 14-24 4017  9- 5-12 1 22-33 4018  9- 5-12 1 14-75(a) 4024  7-17-13 1       Added 11-201-11-213 4025  8- 7-13 1 13-76 4026  8- 7-13 1 10-150 4027  8- 7-13 2       Rpld 17-21-17-31       Added 17-21-17-28 4028  9- 4-13 1 31-61 2 31-1 4030  9- 4-13 1 14-47 4031  9- 4-13 1       Added 11-131-11-135 4036 11- 6-13 1       Rpld 2-231-2-240 4038 12-18-13 2(Exh. A) 31-1       Added 31-80 31-96       Rpld 31-521-31-525       Added 31-534-31-540 31-343 29-65       Added 29-66 4045  6- 4-14 2 12-141-12-143 4051 10-15-14 2-4 14-75(g)(1) 4052 10-15-14 2 14-72 3       Added 14-76(7) 4       Added 14-77(f)(8) 5 14-90(a) 6 14-90(c) 4053 12- 3-14 1 14-50 4054 12- 3-14 2, 3       Rpld 31-36-31-41       Added 31-36-31-47 4055 12-17-14       Added 12-25 4058  2- 4-15 1       Added 14-1-14-8 4059  2- 4-15 1 28-1 2 28-5 3 28-107 4       Added 28-125 4051 10-15-14 2-4 14-75(g) 4060  4-15-15 2 14-21 3       Added 14-23(a)(4) 4 14-24(d)(2) 5       Added 14-31(e) 6 14-34(a) 7 14-34(c) 8 14-34(d) 4061  5-20-15 2 31-243-31-245 3 31-262-31-265 4 31-528-31-531       Rpld 31-533 4062  5- 6-15 2 31-79 4063  6- 3-15 4 5-2(a) 5 5-4 4064  6-17-15 1 10-150 4066  8-19-15 1 14-1-14-8 4068  9- 3-15 1 2-176 4072  9-16-15 1       Added 11-201-11-213 4073 12-16-15 1 28-1 2 28-5(11) 3 28-125 4 31-551 4078  2-17-16 1 28-5(7) 2 28-107 4082  7- 6-16 2 28-126 4083  8- 3-16 2 31-546 4087  9-27-16 2       Rpld 10-171-10-173, 10-191-10-194, 10-211, 10-212, 10-221-10-229,       Added 10-171-10-173, 10-191-10-193, 10-211, 10-212, 10-221-10-233 4088 12-21-16 2       Rpld 25-1-25-4, 25-21, 25-36-25-43, 25-61, 25-62, 25-81, 25-101-25-105, 25-121-25-127       Added 25-1-25-8, 25-21, 25-31, Exh. A 4092  1-18-17 2 31-494 4095  5- 3-17 1       Added 12-26 4097 12- 6-17 1       Rpld 14-21-14-34       Added 14-21-14-31, 14-33, 14-34 4099  9-20-17 2 25-2(3), 25-8, 25-34 4103 10-18-17 2 10-260-10-270 4109  5- 2-18 2 31-1 3       Added 31-559 4110  5- 2-18 2 31-551 4112  6- 6-2018 2 27-16 4114  9- 5-2018 2 31-1 31-577  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Florida Statutes. 
F.S. 
Section Section  
this Code 1.090(d) 1-2 7.50 1-2 34.191 Ch. 12 ch. 49 11-189 60.05 Ch. 11 11-182 11-189 61.1301 14-26 14-61 14-77 ch. 97 et seq. Ch. 5 99.093(1) 5-2 100.342 5-6 5-16 100.3605(2) 5-3 101.161 5-16 ch. 112 2-161 ch. 112, pt. III Char. Art. II, § 13 112.19 14-83 112.51 Char. Art. I, § 5 112.60 et seq. Ch. 14 112.311 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 2-103 2-333 112.501 Ch. 2, Art. IV 2-41 112.1904 14-83 112.3173 14-26 14-61 14-77 ch. 119 16.5-21 119.01 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 119.07 5-2 ch. 120> 11-189(e) ch. 121 14-1 125.69 2.5-50 31-553 ch. 161 31-1 161.041 23-7 161.052 13-3 161.053 23-2 23-7 25-21 161.055 25-4 161.141 25-4 161.54 25-31 ch. 162 2-331, 2-332 6-32 12-84 162.03 2-332 162.03(2) 2-331 10-242 162.06(3) 10-16 162.08 17.5-23 162.21(c) 2-312 162.21(3)(a) 17.5-23 ch. 163 31-711 163.330 27-107 163.330 et seq. Ch. 24 24-21 163.357 24-21 163.361 24-44 163.3161 et seq. 27-106, 27-107 163.3164 31-713 163.3178 23-23 163.3220 31-60 31-713 163.3220 et seq. 31-714 165.19 1-11 ch. 166 Ch. 25 11-181 31-36 166.021 Char. Art. II, § 10 Char. Art. VI, § 1 166.031 5-16 166.031(3) Char. Art. I, § 1 166.031(5) 5-16 166.041 31-4 166.201 et seq. Ch. 18 166.231 Ch. 18, Art. III 18-36 18-40 166.232 Ch. 18, Art. III 166.251 2-4 167.05 1-11 ch. 170 Char. Art. VI, § 1 29-92 ch. 175 Ch. 14, Art. III 14-46, 14-47 14-58, 14-62 175.032(1) 14-47 175.101 Ch. 18, Art. II 18-21 175.131 14-62 175.191 14-49 ch. 176 31-2 177.27(15) 23-2 180.135 20-76, 20-78 ch. 185 Ch. 14, Art. IV 14-73-14-75 14-87 185.02(4) 14-72 185.06(3) 14-75 185.06(5) 14-72 185.06(5)(a) 14-75 185.08 Ch. 18, Art. II 18-22 185.18 14-79 185.18(4) 14-72 185.21 14-77 14-79 185.34 14-79 14-93 185.35(1)(b) 14-76 185.061 14-75 14-83 185.061(6) 14-83 185.162 14-76, 14-77 14-79 ch. 202 10-232 ch. 205 10-5 202.19(2)(a) 18-62 18-63 202.195 10-211 202.20(1)(a) 18-62 18-63 202.20(1)(b) 18-62 18-63 205.053(3) 10-134 205.0535(2) 10-150 205.063 10-151 205.064 10-151 205.065 10-151 205.162 10-151 205.171 10-151 205.193 10-151 213.053 10-142 252.38 16.5-66 ch. 286 11-187 286.01 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 286.012 Char. Art. II, § 3 ch. 287 16.5-171 287.017 16.5-171 287.055 16.5-171 288.703 16.5-311 ch. 316 11-148 12-143 Ch. 19 316.003 19-1 316.008(4)(a)(b) 19-60 316.195 Ch. 19, Art. III 316.1955 19-60 19-72.1 19-73 316.1956 19-60 19-72.1 19-73 ch. 320 11-172 320.01 25-21 320.08 21-48 320.823 23-48 322.27 8-35 ch. 327 Ch. 13, Art. III 31-557 327.02 13-51 328.15 13-61 328.17 13-61 337.29 10-172 337.401 1-172 337.401(3)(a)1 18-62 337.402 10-211 337.403 10-212 337.404 10-212 337.410 10-211 ch. 338 19-47 ch. 357 19-47 362.01 10-172 366.02 25-4 369.251 31-597 373.036 25-4 373.228 31-600, 31-602 373.62(7) 20-127 ch. 380 31-713 380.06 31-60 381.0065 25-4 381.031(1)(g)1 Ch. 4 381.986 31-1 ch. 386 Ch. 11 ch. 403 17.5-8 17.5-14 17.5-51 ch. 403, pt. IV 17.5-56 403.413 Ch. 8, Art. II 17.5-55 403.413(6)(1) 17.5-19 403.413(7) 17.5-19 403.415 11-172 403.703 8-35 403.706 17.5-2 17.5-7 17.5-9 403.706(3) 17.5-3 403.706(14) 17.5-4 456 12-26 458 12-26 459 12-26 ch. 470 17.5-5 471.003 10-211 10-225 ch. 481, pt. II 31-597 481.301 et seq. 31-598 ch. 489 7-23 ch. 490 12-26 ch. 491 459 ch. 499 12-51 526.111 28-125 526.121 28-125 553.73 2-313 25-4 25-7 553.79, 553.80 2-313 559.927 10-149 ch. 561 3-1 ch. 561 et seq. Ch. 3 561.01 3-1 561.01 et seq. Ch. 3, Art. I 561.20 3-5 561.342(3) Ch. 3, Art. I ch. 562 3-1 562.14 Ch. 3, Art. I 562.45 Ch. 3, Art. I ch. 563-ch. 565 3-1 565.02(4) 3-5 588.12 et seq. Ch. 4 604.50 25-4 628.901 10-224 ch. 633 Ch. 6 633.0215 6-31 633.025 6-31 633.052 6-6, 6-7 ch. 650 Ch. 14, Art. V 14-101 650.02 14-101 ch. 705 11-98 13-55 705.16 11-118 705.16(4)(a) 11-118 705.101(6) 12-56 705.102 13-61 705.103 11-98 705.103, 705.104 13-61 705.105 12-56 715.05 19-90 19-147 ch. 760 Ch. 9 760.20 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. II ch. 767 Ch. 4 768.28 10-224 775.082 6-7 8-35 Ch. 12 775.083 6-7 8-35 Ch. 12 775.084 6-7 8-35 790.07 16-82, 16-83 ch. 791 31-553 791.01 31-553 791.01(8) 31-553 791.02 31-553 791.04 31-553 791.07 31-553 ch. 794 2.5-6 796.07 11-183(3) 12-51 ch. 800 2.5-6 800.03 2.5-6 800.04 12-83 812.019 11-183(5) 817.563 11-184 817.564 11-184 ch. 823 Ch. 11 827.071 12-83 ch. 828 Ch. 4 828.122 Ch. 4 ch. 847 2.5-4 2.5-6 847.0145 12-83 865.09 2.5-21 2.5-27 876.05 Char. Art. II, § 8 ch. 893 11-184 12-6 12-51 893.02 12-13 893.138 11-181 901.15 31-553 ch. 932 12-52 932.703, 932.704 8-35 932.7055 12-52 933.20-933.30 6-33 943.10(5) 14-72 943.10(7) 14-72 943.14 14-72 943.085-943.255 2-311 943.1395 14-72 ch. 984 12-118 ch. 1277 30-34  
