CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ROCKLEDGE, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Addopted, April 15, 1981 
Effective, June 15, 1981 
____________ 
Republished, April, 1991 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF ROCKLEDGE, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
John J. Oates 
Mayor 
____________ 
Robert A. Anderson 
E. Georgia Phillips 
Larry L. Schultz 
Richard K. Blake 
Lee Wenner 
Joe Lee Smith 
City Council 
____________ 
James P. McKnight 
City Manager 
____________ 
Walter C. Shepard 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Dorathea S. Hamilton 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Rockledge of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1964 Rockledge Code as supplemented through August 3, 1977, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the governing body. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1964 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The Code was republished in 1991 pursuant to the enactment of Ordinance No. 984-90, adopted November 21, 1990, which revised the Code by separating it into two parts. Volume II, containing the Land Development Regulations of the city, has been published separately. The remaining codified ordinances of the city, not included in the Land Development Regulations, are included herein. As part of the republication, provisions transferred to the Land Development Regulations have been deleted, and the remaining chapters and sections renumbered consecutively. Sections of the Code repealed prior to the republication have been deleted without notation. The previous section numbers of those sections included in the 1991 republication may be found in the Code Comparative Table—1991 Code, located in the back of this volume. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations setting forth their location within the Code volume is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourth section of Chapter 9 is numbered 9-4. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 5-4 and 5-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 5-4.1, 5-4.2 and 5-4.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.1. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up to date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be property edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in section 6 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgements 
The publication of the Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and C. Julian Manson of the editorial staff, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to the City Attorney, Mr. Walter C. Shepard; the City Manager, Mr. John A. Hipp; and numerous other city officials for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 585-81 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of Rockledge, Florida; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code of Ordinances; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; and Providing When Such Code and this Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Rockledge: 
Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances compiled for the City of Rockledge, Florida, by Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida, consisting of Chapters 1 through 25, inclusive, be and the same is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Rockledge Code of Ordinances" and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance of the City of Rockledge which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances of the City passed and adopted by the City Council on or before September 3rd, 1980, except such ordinances or parts of ordinances as are by reference thereto expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for any purpose. Three copies of said Code of Ordinances have been on file in the office of the Rockledge City Clerk for more than 10 days next prior to the adoption of this Ordinance and shall remain there on file available for public use, inspection and examination. 
Section 2. By the adoption of said Code of Ordinances, there are hereby also adopted by reference the following uniform codes and standards, except for certain deletions, additions, amendments or changes thereto specified in the text of said Code of Ordinances: 
Standard Building Code, 1979 Edition, promulgated by the Southern Building Code Conference International, Inc. 
Standard Housing Code, 1979 Edition, promulgated by the said Southern Building Code Conference. 
Standard Plumbing Code, 1979 Edition, promulgated by the said Southern Building Code Conference. 
Standard Swimming Pool Code, 1979 Edition, promulgated by the said Southern Building Code Conference. 
Standard Gas Code, 1979 Edition, promulgated by the said Southern Building Code Conference. 
The National Electrical Code, 1978 Edition, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association. 
Standard Mechanical Code, 1979 Edition, promulgated by the said Southern Building Code Conference. 
Life Safety Code, 1973 Edition, also known as NFPA No. 101, 1973 Edition, or Volume 4 of the National Fire Codes, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association. 
Southern Standard Fire Prevention Code, 1974 Edition, promulgated by the Southern Building Code Congress. 
Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 1974 Edition, also known as NFPA No. 13, 1974 Edition, or Volume 6 of the National Fire Codes, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association. 
Standards for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems, 1974 Edition, also known as NFPA No. 14, 1974 Edition, or Volume 7 of the National Fire Codes, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association. 
Standards for the Installation of Portable Fire Extinguishers, 1974 Edition, also known as NFPA No. 10, 1974 Edition, or Volume 8 of the National Fire Codes, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association. 
Three copies of such codes and standards have been on file in the office of the Rockledge City Clerk for more than 10 days next preceding the adoption of this Ordinance and the same shall remain there on file available for public use, inspection and examination. Violations of such codes and standards shall be punished as provided in Section 10 of this Ordinance and Section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances adopted hereby. 
Section 3. By the adoption of said Code of Ordinances, there are hereby also adopted by reference the following statutory laws: 
Section 553.89, Florida Statutes, entitled the "Florida Lighting Efficiency Code." 
Part VII of Chapter 553, Florida Statutes, cited as the "Florida Thermal Efficiency Code," except paragraph (f) of subsection (1) of Section 553.902. 
Violations of such statutory laws shall be punished as provided in Section 10 of this Ordinance and Section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances adopted hereby. 
Section 4. That all provisions of such Code of Ordinances shall be in full force and effect from and after the 15th day of June, 1981, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Rockledge, enacted on final passage on or before September 3rd, 1980, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the 15th day of June, 1981, except as hereinafter provided. No resolution not specifically mentioned is hereby repealed. 
Section 5. The repeal provided for in Section 4 shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or imposed before the effective date of this Ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the City; nor shall such repeal affect the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the City Council, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code of Ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any right of franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the City Council to any person, firm or corporation; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or establishing grades of any street or public way in the City; nor shall such repeal affect the annual appropriation ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution relating to salaries of City employees; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance providing for local improvements and levying special assessments therefor; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance extending the boundaries of the City; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution establishing, re-establishing or modifying the boundaries of zoning districts, or changing the zoning classification of any lot or parcel of land. Each of the above-mentioned ordinances shall in no way be repealed by this Ordinance except as the same may be in conflict with the provisions of such Code of Ordinances. In addition to the foregoing, Chapters 24 and 32 of the Rockledge Code adopted by Ordinance No. 142-64 of the City of Rockledge, as said Chapters and the provisions thereof have been amended and exist at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, are hereby continued in full force and effect and are not repealed by this Ordinance. Any person violating any provision of said Chapters 24 or 32 shall be punished as provided therein if a penalty is provided for therein, and if no specific penalty is therein provided for, the violation of any provision of said Chapters 24 or 32 shall be punished as provided in Section 10 of this Ordinance. 
Section 6. That any and all additions or amendments to such Code of Ordinances, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code of Ordinances, so that reference to the "Rockledge Code of Ordinances" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 7. A copy of such Code of Ordinances shall be kept on file in the office of the City CLerk preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized by her, to insert in such copy in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of such Code of Ordinances when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code of Ordinances all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the City Council. This copy shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
Section 8. That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or alter, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code of Ordinances, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or alter or tamper with such Code of Ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this Section shall be punished as provided in Section 10 of this Ordinance. 
Section 9. That it is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of such Code of Ordinances are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of such Code of Ordinances shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of such Code of Ordinances. 
Section 10. That whenever in such Code of Ordinances an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code of Ordinances the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provision of such Code of Ordinances shall be punished as follows: 
1.	Where the particular act or default constituting a violation of such Code of Ordinances also constitutes a violation of any law of the State of Florida, such violation shall be punished in the same manner and within the same limits as are provided for such violation. 
2.	Where the act or default does not also constitute a violation of a state law, it shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; 
all as provided in Section 1-8 of such Code of Ordinances. 
Section 11. That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code of Ordinances for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 10 of this Ordinance and Section 1-8 of such Code of Ordinances shall apply to the section as amended; or, in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically declared inapplicable therein. 
Section 12. That in addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be by the City abated as provided by law, and each day such condition shall continue shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
Section 13. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 14. That this Ordinance and the Code of Ordinances adopted hereby shall become effective on the 15th day of June, 1981. 
ADOPTED at a regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Rockledge, Florida, this 15th day of April, 1981. 
/s/  Chairman, City Council of the City of 
Rockledge, Florida 
ATTEST: 
/s/  Dorathea S. Hamilton 
City Clerk 
APPROVED: 
/s/  John H. Oates 
Mayor 
1st READING APR. 1, 1981 
2nd READING APR. 15, 1981 
3rd READING N/A  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Rockledge, put forth to voters by Ordinance No. 1283-02, adopted August 28, 2002 and implemented by a referendum on November 5, 2002 incorporating all special acts and ordinances since the initial enactment of the Charter by the Laws of Fla. 1925, Ch. 11094, approved June 3, 1925. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. A uniform system of capitalization has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state stautes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Part I of this volume represents an attempt to present this special legislation in a clear and yet legally accurate manner, and for that purpose is divided into three subparts. 
Subpart B hereof contains the special acts relating to the city which are still effective or might be of historical interest, as well as the ordinances of the city which, while not amendatory to any specific special act, are of a charter nature and were subject to referendum. This subpart has been divided into articles and sections by the editors, and arbitrary section numbers have been provided to facilitate indexing. However, the source of each section is cited following the section. Where possible, an effort has been made to keep each act or ordinance in this subpart as a separate section and to retain the format of the act or an ordinance within the section. As was the case in Subpart A, bracketed material and boldface catchlines are unofficial. 
Lastly, Subpart C of this Part I contains a table showing special acts which related to or affected the city but which it is felt are of no continuing interest and therefore have not been set out herein. This table also gives in general terms the subject matter of the omitted act and the reason for its omission. 
 
Subpart A - CHARTER OF THE CITY OF ROCKLEDGE  
ARTICLE I. - POWERS OF THE CITY 
 
Section 1.01. - Powers of the city. 
The city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter.  
Section 1.02. - Construction. 
The powers of the city under this charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, and the specific mention of particular powers in the charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power granted in this article.  
Section 1.03. - Intergovernmental relations. 
The city may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any one or more states or any state civil division or agency, or the United States or any of its agencies.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 
 
Section 2.01. - General powers and duties. 
All powers of the city shall be vested in the city council, except as otherwise provided by law or the charter, and the city council shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the city by law.  
Section 2.02. - Composition, eligibility, election and terms. 
(a)	Composition. There shall be a city council composed of the mayor and six members; the city council members shall be elected by the voters of the city at large and the mayor shall be elected as provided in § 2.03. 
(b)	Eligibility. Only registered voters residing in the city shall be eligible to hold the office of city councilmember or mayor. 
(c)	Election and Terms. The annual election of officers for the City of Rockledge shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each and every year, at which time the following officers shall be elected: Two city councilmembers to fill the two city council seats open to election each year; a mayor in the years when that office is open to election; and such vacancies in the city council or the office of mayor as shall exist and be open to election under the provisions of this charter. Candidates shall run for office without party designation. Each city councilmember shall be elected for and hold office for a term of three years, except that the term of office of a city councilmember elected in a runoff election following a general city election shall expire on the date when such city councilmember's term of office would have expired in the event such city councilmember had been elected to office at the general election when the tie occurred. Two city councilmembers shall be elected each year and the mayor shall be elected every third year in accordance with the following schedule: 
2004 General City Election: 	City Council Seat No. 1 and City Council Seat No. 2 
2005 General City Election: 	City Council Seat No. 3, City Council Seat No. 4, and the Mayor 
2003 General City Election: 	City Council Seat No. 5 and City Council Seat No. 6 
 
Candidates for the office of city councilmember shall qualify and run for election to only one specifically identified city council seat. There shall be no primary election. Ballots shall be prepared for electors to vote for only one candidate for each city council seat open to election, and the votes for each city council seat shall be tabulated separately with the candidate receiving the greatest number of votes for a particular seat being duly elected to that office. In the event of a tie there shall be a runoff election between the tying candidates, which runoff election shall be held on the first Tuesday of the month next following the tie election, and in such event the term of office of the elected official holding the seat as to which the tie occurred shall be extended until the tie is resolved and the successor in office to such seat is duly elected and qualified. The officers so elected shall assume the duties of such office, and the term of such office shall commence, at the first regular meeting of the city council after such officer's election to office.  
Section 2.03. - Mayor. 
At a regular election a mayor shall be elected for a term of three years. The mayor shall be a voting member of the city council, represent the city in intergovernmental relationships, and perform other duties specified by the city council. The mayor shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law but shall have no administrative duties. The city council shall elect from among its members a deputy mayor who shall act with full authority as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor.  
Section 2.04. - Compensation. 
The city council may determine the annual salary of the mayor and city council members by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1354-04, § 1, 9-22-04)  
Section 2.05. - Prohibitions. 
(a)	Appointments and Removals. Neither the city council nor any of its members shall in any manner control or demand the appointment or removal of any city administrative officer or employee whom the city manager or any subordinate of the city manager is empowered to appoint, but the city council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the city manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(b)	Interference with Administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under § 2.09, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately.  
Section 2.06. - Vacancies; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)	Vacancies. The office of a city council member shall become vacant upon the member's death, resignation, removal from office or forfeiture of office in any manner authorized by law. 
(b)	Forfeiture of Office. A city council member shall forfeit that office if the city council member 
(1)	lacks at any time during the term of office for which elected any qualification for the office prescribed by this charter or by law, 
(2)	violates any express prohibition of this charter, 
(3)	is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, 
(4)	fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the city council without being excused by the city council, or 
(5)	commits malfeasance, misfeasance or non-feasance in office. 
(c)	Filling of Vacancies. Whenever a vacancy occurs in any elective office in the government of the City of Rockledge, the city council shall fill such vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term of such office unless the unexpired term of such office extends beyond ninety days after the next general city election, in which event the city council shall fill by appointment the portion of the unexpired term of such office extending from the date of such appointment until the next general city election, and the portion of the unexpired term of such office extending beyond such election shall be filled by the elective process at such election. Any person appointed by the city council shall be an elector of the city and possess the qualifications to hold such office in the city, and such appointee may be a candidate for election to the portion of the unexpired term of such office extending beyond the period of his appointment. In the event there is no candidate for election to fill an unexpired term and such term of office expires within fifteen months from the date of the last mentioned election, the city council shall fill such vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term of such office, but if the term of such office does not expire within fifteen months after the election last mentioned above, then the city council shall fill such vacancy by appointment until the next general city election at which time the unexpired term of such office shall be filled by the elective process unless no candidate qualifies for election to fill such unexpired term in which latter event the city council shall fill such vacancy by appointment until the expiration of such term of office. Any provision of the Rockledge Code to the contrary notwithstanding, an officer elected as aforesaid to fill the unexpired term of an office shall assume the duties of such office and the term of such office shall commence at the first regular meeting of the city council after the city council has canvassed the returns of the election and certified the results thereof, and continue until the expiration of such term of office.  
Section 2.07. - Judge of qualifications. 
The city council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of their office. The city council shall have the power to set additional standards of conduct for its members beyond those specified in the charter and may provide for such penalties as it deems appropriate, including forfeiture of office. In order to exercise these powers, the city council shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence. A member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of such hearing shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city at least one week in advance of the hearing. Decisions made by the city council under this section shall be subject to judicial review.  
Section 2.08. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint an officer of the city who shall have the title of city clerk. The city clerk shall give notice of city council meetings to its members and the public, keep the record of its proceedings and perform such other duties as are assigned by this charter or by the city council or by state law.  
Section 2.09. - Investigations. 
The city council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any city department, office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence.  
Section 2.10. - Independent audit. 
The city council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city accounts and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of such accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its officers. The city council may, without requiring competitive bids, designate such accountant or firm annually or for a contract period. If the state makes such an audit, the city council may accept it as satisfying the requirements of this section.  
Section 2.11. - Procedure. 
(a)	Meetings. The city council shall hold at least one regular meeting each month in such place as shall be designated by them at a fixed day and hour. Special meetings may be provided for by ordinance. 
(b)	Rules and Record. The city council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall provide for keeping a record of its proceedings. 
(c)	Voting. Voting shall be by ayes and nays, and shall be recorded in the records. Four (4) members of the city council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and subject to the penalties prescribed by the rules of the city council. No action of the city council, except as otherwise provided in the preceding sentence and in § 2.06, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of the majority of the city council members present. 
(d)	Organization. The city council shall organize by electing one of their number, including the mayor, as chair, who will also be deputy mayor, and another of their number as vice chair, both of whom shall serve for a term of one year. Should the mayor be elected chair, then the vice chair shall act as deputy mayor. The chair shall preside at the city council meetings, and in the absence or disqualification of the chair, the vice chair shall perform the duties of the chair, and in the absence or disqualification of both the chair and vice chair, a temporary chair shall be elected by a simple majority from the remaining city council members.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Section 3.01. - Appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council, by a majority vote of its total membership, shall appoint a city manager for a term to be determined by the city council, and shall fix the manager's compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. The manager need not be a resident of the city or state at the time of appointment. However, the city manager shall reside inside the city limits while in office unless the city council approves otherwise.  
Section 3.02. - Removal. 
The city manager may be suspended by a resolution approved by the majority of the total membership of the city council, which shall set forth the reasons for suspension and proposed removal. A copy of such resolution shall be served immediately upon the city manager. The city manager shall have fifteen days in which to reply thereto in writing, and upon request, shall be afforded a public hearing, which shall occur not earlier than ten days nor later than fifteen days after such hearing is requested. After the public hearing, if one be requested, and after full consideration, the city council by a majority vote of its total membership may adopt a final resolution of removal. The city manager shall continue to receive full compensation until the effective date of a final resolution of removal.  
Section 3.03. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate a city officer or employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the manager's temporary absence or disability. The city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager returns.  
Section 3.04. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city, responsible to the city council for the administration of all city operations placed in the manager's charge by or under this charter. The city manager shall: 
(a)	Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer subject to the manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency; 
(b)	Direct and supervise the administration of the city clerk, all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(c)	Attend city council meetings. The city manager shall have the right to take part in discussion but shall not vote; 
(d)	See that all laws, provisions of this charter and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(e)	Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the city council; 
(f)	Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(g)	Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(h)	Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city; 
(i)	Make recommendations to the city council concerning the general operations of the city; 
(j)	Provide staff support services for the mayor and city council members; and 
(k)	Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or may be required by the city council.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES AND AGENCIES 
 
Section 4.01. - General provisions. 
(a)	Creation of Departments. The city council may establish city departments, offices or agencies in addition to those created by this charter and may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices and agencies, except that no function assigned by the charter to a particular department, office or agency may be discontinued or, unless this charter specifically so provides, assigned to any other. 
(b)	Direction by City Manager. All departments, offices and agencies under the direction and supervision of the city manager shall be administered by an officer appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the manager. With the consent of the city council, the city manager may serve as the head of one or more such departments, offices or agencies, or may appoint one person as the head of two or more of them.  
Section 4.02. - Personnel system. 
(a)	Principle. All appointments and promotions of city officers and employees shall be made solely on qualifications, fitness for duty, merit, and other guidelines as adopted by the city council. 
(b)	System. Consistent with applicable federal and state laws, the city council shall provide for the establishment of personnel policies and procedures for all employees of the city.  
Section 4.03. - Legal officer. 
There shall be a legal officer of the city appointed by the city council. The legal officer shall serve as chief legal adviser to the city council, the city manager and all city departments, offices and agencies, shall represent the city in legal proceedings as directed by the city council, and shall perform any other duties prescribed by state law, by this charter or by ordinance.  
Section 4.04. - Planning. 
Consistent with all applicable federal and state laws with respect to land use, development and environmental protection, the city council shall: 
(a)	Designate an agency or agencies to carry out the planning function and such decision-making responsibilities as may be specified by ordinance; 
(b)	Adopt a comprehensive plan and determine to what extent zoning and other land use control ordinances must be consistent with the plan; and 
(c)	Adopt development regulations, to be specified by ordinance, to implement the plan.  
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 
 
Section 5.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and end the last day of September, or as prescribed by state law.  
Section 5.02. - Submission of budget and budget message. 
As prescribed by city council on an annual basis, the city manager shall submit to the city council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying budget message.  
Section 5.03. - Budget. 
The budget shall provide a financial plan of city funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or this charter, shall be in such form as the city manager deems desirable or the city council may require. The budget shall show in detail the estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and the proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year.  
Section 5.04. - Administration of the budget. 
The city council shall provide by ordinance the procedures for administering the budget.  
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS 
 
Section 6.01. - City elections. 
(a)	Registered Voter defined. All citizens legally registered under the constitution and laws of the State of Florida to vote in the city shall be registered voters of the city within the meaning of this charter. 
(b)	Conduct of Elections. The provisions of the general election laws of the State of Florida shall apply to elections held under this charter. All elections provided for by the charter shall be conducted by the election authorities established by law. For the conduct of city elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections and for the recount of ballots in cases of doubt or fraud, the city council shall adopt ordinances consistent with law and this charter, and the election authorities may adopt further regulations consistent with law and this charter and the ordinances of the city council. Such ordinances and regulations pertaining to elections shall be publicized in the manner of city ordinances generally.  
ARTICLE VII. - ETHICS 
 
Section 7.01. - Conflicts of interest. 
The standards and procedures involving violation thereof regarding ethics are established by state statute and shall be utilized to insure that within the city, public office is not used for private gain.  
Section 7.02. - Responsibilities. 
The city manager shall be responsible for implementing, administering and insuring all reporting requirements are satisfied as directed by state law or ordinance, except for those directed to be accomplished by other city officials by law.  
Section 7.03. - Power to enhance standards. 
More stringent ethical standards may be enacted by the city council via ordinance to enhance the state standards as from time to time may be deemed necessary.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CHARTER AMENDMENT 
 
Section 8.01. - Charter amendment process. 
Amendments to the charter shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Florida.  
ARTICLE IX. - TRANSITION/SEPARABILITY PROVISION 
 
Section 9.01. - Officers and employees. 
(a)	Rights and Privileges Preserved. Nothing in this charter except as otherwise specifically provided shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who are city officers or employees at the time of its adoption. 
(b)	Continuance of Office or Employment. Except as specifically provided by this charter, if at the time this charter takes full effect a city employee holds any office or position which is or can be abolished by or under this charter, he or she shall continue in such office or position until the taking effect of some specific provision under this charter directing that he or she vacate the office or position. 
(c)	Personnel System. An employee holding a city position at the time this charter takes full effect, who was serving in that same or a comparable position at the time of its adoption, shall not be subject to competitive tests as a condition of continuance in the same position but in all other respects shall be subject to the personnel system provided for in § 4.02.  
Section 9.02. - Departments, offices and agencies. 
(a)	Transfer of Powers. If a city department, office or agency is abolished by this charter, the powers and duties given it by law shall be transferred to the city department, office or agency designated in this charter or, if the charter makes no provision, designated by the city council. 
(b)	Property and Records. All property, records and equipment of any department, office or agency existing when this charter is adopted shall be transferred to the department, office or agency assuming its powers and duties, but, in the event that the powers or duties are to be discontinued or divided between units or in the event that any conflict arises regarding a transfer, such property, records or equipment shall be transferred to one or more departments, offices or agencies designated by the city council in accordance with the charter.  
Section 9.03. - Pending matters. 
All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal administrative proceedings shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this charter and in each case shall be maintained, carried on or dealt with by the city department, office or agency appropriate under this charter.  
Section 9.04. - State and municipal laws. 
All laws of the State of Florida relating to the operation of a municipality shall be fully effective, control and supersede all ordinances and resolutions in conflict therewith. Where state law allows such may be enhanced from time to time as deemed necessary by ordinance. All city ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations which are in force when this charter becomes fully effective are repealed to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the effective operation of this charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant thereto.  
Section 9.05. - Schedule. 
(a)	First Election. At the time of its adoption, this charter shall be in effect to the extent necessary in order that the first election of members of the city council may be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this charter. The first election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of 2003. The city clerk and city attorney shall prepare for adoption by the city council temporary regulations applicable only to the first election and designed to insure its proper conduct and to prevent fraud and provide for recount of ballots in cases of doubt or fraud. 
(b)	Time of Taking Full Effect. The charter shall be in full effect for all purposes on and after the date and time of the first meeting of the newly elected city council provided in § 9.05(c). 
(c)	First City council Meeting. On the first Wednesday of November following the first election of city council members under this charter, the newly elected members of the city council shall meet at 7:00 p.m. in the city council chamber at Rockledge City Hall: 
(1)	For the purpose of electing the chairman and vice chairman, appointing or considering the appointment of a city manager or acting city manager, and appoint or considering the appointment of a city clerk; and 
(2)	For the purpose of adopting ordinances and resolutions necessary to effect the transition of government under this charter and to maintain effective city government during that transition. 
(d)	Initial Salary of Mayor and City Council Members. All salaries shall continue as established before enactment of this charter until changed by the city council in accordance with the provisions of this charter.  
Section 9.06. - Separability. 
If any provision of this charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the application of the charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
ATTACHMENT 1 
CITY OF ROCKLEDGE—CITY LIMITS 
(March 10, 2011) 
BEGINNING at a point on the West line of Section 32, Township 24 South, Range 36 East, Brevard County, Florida, which is ¼ mile North of the Southeast corner of said Section 32, thence West, along the North line of the South ¼ of said Section 32, to a point ¼ mile North of the Southwest corner of said Section 32; thence South, along the West line of said Section 32, Township 24 South, Range 36 East, to the Southwest corner of said Section 32, said point being also the Northeast corner of Section 6, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence West, along the North line of said Section 6, to a point on the North/South centerline of said Section 6; thence South, along said North/South centerline, a distance of 50 feet to a point on the South right of way line of Pluckebaum Road, said point being the Northeast corner of those lands described in Official Records Book 4673, Page 2861; thence West, along said South right of way line, a distance of 481.22 feet to the Northwest corner of said lands described in Official Records Book 4673, Page 2861; thence S.03°02'16?E., along a West line of said lands, a distance of 404.96 feet to an angle point; thence S.89°44'30?E., along a South line of said lands, a distance of 303.41 feet to an angle point; thence S.08°27'51?E., along a West line of said lands, a distance of 265.76 feet; thence S.89°44'30?E., along the South line of said lands, a distance of 107.42 feet to a point on the aforesaid North/South centerline of Section 6; thence South, along said North/South centerline of Section 6, to the Southeast corner of lands described in Official Records Book 3122, Page 1044 of the public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence West, along the South line of said lands, to a point on the East line of lands described in Official Records Book 3234, Page 968 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence South, along the East line of said lands, to the Southeast corner thereof; thence West, along the South line of said lands and along the South line of lands described in Official Records Book 2761, Page 1524 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida, to the Southwest corner of said lands described in Official Records Book 2761, Page 1524; thence North, along the West line of said lands and along the West line of lands described in Official Records Book 3404, Page 1694 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida to a point on the South right of way line of Pluckebaum Road; thence West, along said South right of way line, 50 feet, to a point on the East line of the West ½ of the Northwest ¼ of the Northwest ¼ of said Section 6; thence South, along said East line, to the Southeast corner of said West ½ of the Northwest ¼ of the Northwest ¼; thence West, along the South line of said Northwest ¼ of the Northwest ¼, to a point on the West line of said Section 6; thence North, along said West line, to the Northeast corner of Section 1, Township 25 South, Range 35 East; thence West, along said North line of Section 1, to the North-South centerline of said Section 1; thence South, along said North-South centerline, to a point on the North line of the Southwest ¼ of said Section 1; thence West, along said North line, to a point on the Westerly right of way line of Interstate No. 95; thence Southeasterly, along said Westerly right of way line, to the Southeast corner of lands described in Official Records Book 3796, Page 1914 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence West, along the South line of said lands, to a point on the aforesaid North-South centerline of Section 1; thence South, along said North-South centerline to the Southwest corner of the Southeast ¼ of said Section 1; thence East, along the South line of said Southeast ¼, to a point on the Easterly right of way line of aforesaid Interstate No. 95; thence Southeasterly, along said Easterly right of way line, to a point on the centerline of Barton Avenue Extension as described and recorded in Official Records Book 1276, Page 947; thence Northwesterly, along said centerline of Barton Avenue Extension, to a point on the East line of Section 12, Township 25 South, Range 35 East; thence North, along said East line, to the Southeast corner of aforesaid Section 1, Township 25 South, Range 35 East; thence North, along the East line of said Section 1, to a point on the North line of the Southwest ¼ of the Southwest ¼ of Section 6, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence East, along said North line, to the Northeast corner of said Southwest ¼ of the Southwest ¼ of Section 6; thence South, along the East line of said Southwest ¼ of the Southwest ¼ of Section 6, to a point on the South line of said Section 6; thence East, along said South line, to a point on the North-South centerline of said Section 6, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence North, along said North-South centerline, to the Southwest corner of ROCKLEDGE ACRE ESTATES, recorded in Plat Book 26, Pages 50 and 51 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence East, along the South line of said ROCKLEDGE ACRE ESTATES, to the Northeast corner of the Southwest ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of said Section 6; thence South, along the East line of said Southwest ¼ of the Southeast ¼, to a point on the South line of said Section 6; thence South, 70 feet, more or less to a point on a line, which when projected Easterly on a bearing of N.89°54'33?E., would intersect the East line of Section 7, Township 25 South, Range 36 East, at a point 70 feet South of the Northeast corner of said Section 7; thence N.89°54'33?E., a distance of 1308.55 feet, more or less to a point on the East line of said Section 7, said point being 70 feet South of the Northeast corner of said Section 7; thence South along the East line of said Section 7, Township 25 South, Range 36 East, to the Southeast corner of WOOD LAKE ESTATES, recorded in Plat Book 31, Page 23 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence departing said East line of Section 7, run West, along the South line said subdivision, to the Southwest corner of said WOOD LAKE ESTATES; thence South, on the Southerly extension of the West line of said WOOD LAKE ESTATES, a distance of 573.00 feet; thence East, parallel with the South line of said WOOD LAKE ESTATES, to a point on the aforesaid East line of Section 7; thence South, along said East line of Section 7, to the Southwest corner of Section 8, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence East, along the South line of said Section 8, to a point on the West right of way line of Fiske Boulevard; thence South, along said West right of way line, to the Southeast corner of Lot 1, Block "B" of FISKE LAKE ESTATES, UNIT NO. 1, as recorded in Plat Book 21, Page 90 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence West, along the South line of said Block "B" of FISKE LAKE ESTATES, UNIT NO. 1, a distance of 340.75 feet to the Eastern termination of the North right of way line of Bel Avenue, as shown on the plat of SILVER PINES ESTATES - No. 3, recorded in Plat Book 15, Page 147 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence South, along the East line of said Bel Avenue and along the East line of Block "H" of said SILVER PINES ESTATES - No. 3, a distance of 285.0 feet; thence S.13°52'00?E., along said Block "H", a distance of 27.53 feet; thence S.45°00'00?E., along said Block "H", a distance of 110.00 feet; thence East, along said Block "H", a distance of 136.62 feet to a point on the East right of way line of Glenn Avenue; thence South, along said right of way line, a distance of 10.00 feet to the Northwest corner of Lot 5, Block "B" of said SILVER PINES ESTATES - No. 3; thence East, to a point on the centerline of Fiske Boulevard (said point being 100 feet West of the West line of the East ½ of the East ½ of Section 17, Township 25 South, Range 36 East); thence South, along said centerline (100 feet West of the West line of the East ½ of the East ½ of Section 17), to a point which is 7.90 feet South of the North line of the Southeast ¼ of said Section 17; thence S.89°58'30?W., on a line parallel to and 7.90 feet South of said North line of the Southeast ¼ of said Section 17, a distance of 1,244.18 feet; thence S.00°35'00?W., a distance of 533.51 feet; thence N.89°58'30?E., to the Northeast corner of Lot 1 in ORANGE WOODS, FIRST GROVE SECTION, recorded in Plat Book 27, Page 6 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida, said point being on the West right of way line of Fiske Boulevard; thence S.00°24'46?W., along said West right of way line of Fiske Boulevard, a distance of 333.00 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot 25 of said ORANGE WOODS, FIRST GROVE SECTION; thence S.89°52'09?W., along the South boundary of said ORANGE WOODS, FIRST GROVE SECTION, a distance of 1714.67 feet to the Southwest corner of said ORANGE WOODS, FIRST GROVE SECTION; thence N.00°28'39?E., along the West line of said ORANGE WOODS, FIRST GROVE SECTION, a distance of 866.51 feet to the Northwest corner of said ORANGE WOODS, FIRST GROVE SECTION; thence S.89°52'09?W., along the North line of WELLINGTON STATION, recorded in Plat Book 36, Pages 20 and 21 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida, a distance of 800.81 feet; thence N.01°22'58?E., along said North line, a distance of 50.00 feet; thence S.89°52'09?W., along said North line, a distance of 60.00 feet to the Northwest corner of said WELLINGTON STATION; thence S.01°22'58?W., along the West line of WELLINGTON STATION, a distance of 1393.01 feet to the Southwest corner of said WELLINGTON STATION; thence S.01°02'37?W., along the West line of PHILLIPS LANDING, recorded in Plat Book 50, Pages 35 thru 38 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida and along it's Southerly extension, a distance of 1331.28 feet to a point on the South line of aforesaid Section 17; thence N.89°22'01?E., along said South line of Section 17, a distance of 1275.74 feet; thence departing said South line, run S.00°37'59?E., a distance of 50.00 feet to a point on the South right of way line of Martin Road, said point being the Northeast corner of Tract "A" of TUCKAWAY LAKE ESTATES, recorded in Plat Book 39, Pages 41 thru 43 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence S.00°02'24?W., along an East line of said TUCKAWAY LAKE ESTATES, a distance of 1111.88 feet to a point on the North line of Tract "D" of said subdivision; thence N.88°56'53?E., along said North line, a distance of 1349.74 feet to a point on the West right of way line of Fiske Boulevard; thence N.00°10'56?W., along said West right of way line, a distance of 1135.78 feet to a point on the North right of way line of aforesaid Martin Road; thence N.00°00'30?E., along said West right of way line of Fiske Boulevard, a distance of 20.00 feet to a point on the aforesaid South line of Section 17; thence East, along the South line of said Section 17, a distance of 190.00 feet to a point on the East right of way line of Fiske Boulevard; thence South, along said East right of way line of Fiske Boulevard, a distance of 400.00 feet to Northwest corner of MAEMIR ESTATES, recorded in Plat Book 24, Page 77 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence N.89°07'43?E., along the North line of said MAEMIR ESTATES, a distance of 1100.10 feet to the Northeast corner of said subdivision; thence S.00°13'10?E., along the East line of said subdivision, a distance of 420.00 feet to the Southeast corner of said subdivision; thence S.89°07'43?W., along the South line of thereof, a distance of 1100.10 feet to the Southwest corner of said MAEMIR ESTATES; thence S.00°02'57?W., along the East right of way line of Fiske Boulevard, a distance of 945.02 feet to a point of right of way transition; thence S.89°57'03? E., along said right of way transition, a distance of 60.00 feet; thence departing said East right of way line, run S.89°52'10?E., a distance of 75.00 feet; thence S.00°02'57?W., a distance of 419.00 feet to a point on the North line of lands described in Official Records Book 4016, Page 2967 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence S.89°52'10?E., along said North line, a distance of 205.00 feet to the Northeast corner of said lands described in Official Records Book 4016, Page 2967; thence S.00°02'57?W., along the East line of said lands described in Official Records Book 4016, Page 2967, a distance of 200.00 feet to a point on the North right of way line of Barnes Boulevard; thence S.89°52'10?E., along said North right of way line, a distance of 470.14 feet to a point of right of way transition; thence S.00°07'50?W., a distance of 200.00 feet to a point on the South right of way line of Barnes Boulevard; thence N.89°52'10?W., a distance of 749.86 feet to a point on the aforesaid East right of way line of Fiske Boulevard; thence S.00°02'57?W., along said East right of way line, a distance of 921.92 feet to a point on the Northerly right of way line of Interstate No. 95; thence S.54°49'20? E., along said Northerly right of way line, a distance of 854.23 feet to the point of curvature of a 5879.65 foot radius curve to the right; thence Southeasterly, along the arc of said curve and along said Northeasterly right of way line of Interstate No. 95, an arc distance of 1619.78 feet to a point on the South line of said Section 21, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence continue Southeasterly, along the arc of said curve and along said Northeasterly right of way line of Interstate No. 95 thru a central angle of 24°22'22?, a distance of 2501.10 feet to a point of tangency; thence S.14°18'36?E., along said right of way line, a distance of 489.07 feet to an intersection with the South line of the North ½ of Section 28, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence N.89°33'30?E., along said South line of the North ½ of said Section 28 to a point on a West line of STRATFORD PLACE, PHASE 1, recorded in Plat Book 44, Page 50 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence S.29°42'14?E., along said West line to the point of curvature of a 200.00 foot radius curve to the right; thence Southeasterly, along said West line, thru a central angle of 22°32'34? a distance of 78.69 feet to a point of reverse curvature of a 305.96 foot radius curve to the right; thence Southeasterly, along said West line, thru a central angle of 06°30'54? a distance of 34.79 feet to a point of tangency; thence S.13°40'34?E., along said West line, a distance of 65.12 feet; thence S.06°50'23?E., along said West line, a distance of 53.26 feet; thence S.01°42'29?W., along said West line, a distance of 39.78 feet; thence S.10°52'13?E., along said West line, a distance of 61.84 feet to the Southwest corner of said STRATFORD PLACE, PHASE 1, said point being also the Northwest corner of STRATFORD PLACE, PHASE 2, RECORDED IN Plat Book 45, Page 63 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence S.10°52'13?E., along the West line of said STRATFORD PLACE, PHASE 2, a distance of 23.81 feet to the point of curvature of a 250.00 foot radius curve to the right; thence Southerly, along said West line, thru a central angle of 09°21'41? a distance of 40.85 feet to a point of tangency; thence S.01°30'31?E., along said West line, a distance of 79.97 feet to the point of curvature of a 150.00 foot radius curve to the left; thence Southwesterly, along a Southerly line of said subdivision, thru a central angle of 57°06'23? a distance of 149.50 feet to a point of tangency; thence S.58°36'54?E., along said Southerly line, a distance of 171.31 feet to the point of curvature of a 150.00 foot radius curve to the left; thence Southeasterly, along said Southerly line, thru a central angle of 14°09'05? a distance of 37.05 feet to a point of tangency; thence S.72°45'59?E., along said Southerly line, a distance of 163.21 feet to the point of curvature of a 200.00 foot radius curve to the right; thence Southeasterly, along said Southerly line, thru a central angle of 04°39'49? a distance of 16.28 feet to a point of tangency; thence S.68°06'10?E., along said Southerly line, a distance of 149.42 feet to the point of curvature of a 200.00 foot radius curve to the right; thence Southeasterly, along said Southerly line, thru a central angle of 07°21'05? a distance of 25.66 feet to a point of tangency; thence S.60°45'04?E., along said Southerly line, a distance of 99.56 feet to the point of curvature of a 50.00 foot radius curve to the left; thence Northeasterly, along said Southerly line, thru a central angle of 72°18'57? a distance of 63.11 feet to a point of tangency; thence N.46°55'59?E., along said Southerly line, a distance of 400.58 feet to the point of curvature of a 50.00 foot radius curve to the left; thence Northerly, along an Easterly line of said subdivision, thru a central angle of 65°10'20? a distance of 56.87 feet to a point of tangency; thence N.18°14'21?W., along said Easterly line, a distance of 634.87 feet to a point of curvature of a 335.00 foot radius curve to the left; thence Northwesterly, along said Easterly line, thru a central angle of 03°04'30? a distance of 17.98 feet to a point on the aforesaid South line of the North ½ of Section 28, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence N.89°33'30?E., along said South line, to an intersection with the South right of way line of Golf Vista Boulevard, said point being on a 407.17 foot radius curve to the left; thence Southeasterly, along said right of way line to a point of tangency; thence N.88°50'21?E., along said right of way line, a distance of 296.04 feet; thence N.01°09'40?W., to an intersection with the aforesaid South line of the North ½ of Section 28, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence N.89°33'30?E., along said South line of the North ½ of Section 28, to a point on a Northerly line of VIERA NORTH, PUD, TRACT CA-1 AND 2, PHASE 4, recorded in Plat Book 42, Page 37 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence N.61°33'06?E., along said Northerly line, a distance of 211.23 feet to a point on a 75.06 foot radius curve to the left; thence South and East along said Northerly line and along the arc of said curve, thru a central angle of 71°38'51? a distance of 93.86 feet to a point of tangency; thence N.79°54'15?E., along said Northerly line, a distance of 143.42 feet to the Northeast corner of said subdivision; thence S.01°14'17?E., along an East line of said subdivision, to a point on the aforesaid South line of the North ½ of Section 28; thence N.89°33'30?E., along said South line, to the East ¼ corner of said Section 28; thence N.00°40'28?W., along the East line of said Section 28, a distance of 2688.60 feet to the Southwest corner of Section 22, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence N.89°58'00?E., along the South line of said Section 22, a distance of 4534.06 feet to a point which is 799.97 feet West of the Southeast corner of said Section 22; thence N.00°03?17?W., a distance of 1979.06 feet to a point on the South right of way line of Barnes Boulevard; thence S.89°33'49?E., along said right of way line, to a point on the East line of said Section 22; thence South, along said East line of Section 22, a distance of 392.50 feet to the Southwest corner of Tract "B" of ROCKLEDGE III, recorded in Plat Book 37, Page 24 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence S.89°58'24?W., a distance of 213.79 feet; thence S.00°01'36?E., a distance of 407.50 feet; thence N.89°58'24?E., a distance of 213.79 feet to a point on the aforesaid East line of Section 22; thence S.00°01'36?E., along said East line and along the West line of ROCKLEDGE III, recorded in Plat Book 37, Page 24 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida, a distance of 1163.21 feet to the Southwest corner of said subdivision; thence N.89°54'36?E., along the South line of said subdivision, a distance of 333.95 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot 4 of said ROCKLEDGE III; thence N.00°05'24?W., along the East line of said Lot 4, a distance of 266.26 feet to a point on the right of way of Riomar Drive, said point being on a 70.00 foot radius curve to the right; thence West and North, along the arc of said curve and along the cul-de-sac right of way line of said Riomar Drive, thru a central angle of 141°46'39? a distance of 173.21 feet to a point of reverse curvature of a 25.00 foot radius curve to the left; thence Northerly, along the arc of said curve and along said right of way line, thru a central angle of 46°49'35? a distance of 20.43 feet to a point of tangency; thence N.00°05'24?W., along the West right of way line of said Riomar Drive, a distance of 137.51 feet to a point on the Westerly extension of the South line of Lot 1 of said ROCKLEDGE III; thence N.89°54'38?E., along said extension and along the South line of said Lot 1, a distance of 380.00 feet to the Southeast corner of said Lot 1; thence N.00°05'24?W., along the West line of said Lot 1, a distance of 145.21 feet to the Northeast corner of said Lot 1; thence S.89°54'36?w., along the North line of said Lot 1 and along it's Westerly extension, a distance of 380.00 feet to a point on the aforesaid West right of way line of Riomar Drive; thence N.00°05'24?W., along said West right of way line, a distance of 625.47 feet to the point of curvature of an 845.00 foot radius curve to the left; thence Northerly, along the arc of said curve and along said West right of way line, thru a central angle of 05°20'14? a distance of 78.71 feet to a point of tangency; thence N.05°25'38?W., along said West right of way line, a distance of 128.38 feet to the point of curvature of an 822.54 foot radius curve to the right; thence Northerly, along the arc of said curve and along said right of way line, thru a central angle of 05°53'28? a distance of 84.57 feet to a point on the North line of aforesaid ROCKLEDGE III; thence S.89°32'10?E., along said North line, a distance of 73.00 feet to a point on the East line of lands described in Official Records Book 3781, Pages 1946 and 1947 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence N.00°27'50?E., a distance of 357.49 feet to a point on the aforesaid South right of way line of Barnes Boulevard; thence continue N.00°27'50?E., across said Barnes Boulevard, a distance of 100.00 feet, to a point on the North right of way line of Barnes Boulevard; thence N.89°32'10?W., along said North right of way line to a point on the West line of Section 23, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence N.00°01'38?W., along said West line of Section 23, to the West ¼ corner of said Section 23; thence N.89°54'36?E., along the North line of the Southwest ¼ of Section 23, Township 25 South, Range 36 East, a distance of 378.29 feet; thence S.18°08'08?E., a distance of 641.65 feet to a point on the aforesaid North right of way line of Barnes Boulevard; thence continue S.18°08'08?E., across said Barnes Boulevard, to a point on the South right of way line of Barnes Boulevard; thence S.89°33'49?E., along said South right of way line of Barnes Boulevard, to the Northwest corner of lands described in Official Records Book 2452, Page 1866 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence S.00°05'24?E., along the West line of said lands, a distance of 365.00 feet; thence S.89°32'10?E., a distance of 145.28 feet to a point on the West right of way line of Harrell Road; thence N.00°09'08?W., along said West right of way line and parallel to and 25.00 feet distant West from the East line of the West ½ of the Southwest ¼ of aforesaid Section 23, a distance of 365.00 feet to a point on the aforesaid South right of way line of Barnes Boulevard; thence N.00°09'08?W., across said Barnes Boulevard, a distance of 100.00 feet to a point on the North right of way line of Barnes Boulevard; thence S.89°33'49?E., along said North right of way line, a distance of 25.00 feet to the East line of the West ½ of the Southwest ¼ of said Section 23, said line being also the West line of those lands described in that deed recorded in Official Records Book 2595, Page 1181 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence S.00°18'25?W., along said East line of the West ½ of the Southwest ¼ of said Section 23 and along the West line of said lands described in Official Records Book 2595, Page 1181, a distance of 16.09 feet to a point on the North edge of the pavement of Barnes Boulevard, said point being on an 1845.00 foot radius curve to the left; thence Northeasterly, along the arc of said curve and along said North edge of pavement, through a central angle of 05°36'34?, a distance of 180.63 feet to an intersection with the Westerly right of way line of the Florida East Coast Railway Company; thence N.14°47'04?W., along said Westerly right of way line, a distance of 585.02 feet to the point of curvature of a 10,367.49 foot radius curve to the left; thence Northwesterly, along the arc of said curve and along said right of way line, through a central angle of 09°06'42?, a distance of 1648.73 feet to a point on the North line of Lot 8 of MRS. S. McF. PORTER'S SUBDIVISION, as recorded in Plat Book 1, Page 32 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence continue Northeasterly, along the Westerly line of said right of way of the Florida East Coast Railway, an arc length of 511.32 feet with a tangent length of 628.24 feet to a point on the North line of the South 32.00 feet of Lot 1 of said MRS. S. McF. PORTER'S SUBDIVISION; thence West, along said North line of the South 32.00 feet of said MRS. S. McF. PORTER'S SUBDIVISION, to a point on the aforesaid East line of Section 22, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence North along the East line of Section 22, to a point which is 50.00 feet South of the North line of said Section 22; thence West, parallel to and 50.00 feet South of said North line of Section 22, to the Northwest corner of CHELSEA PARK, UNIT 4, recorded in Plat Book 45, Page 58 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence S.00°48'57?E., along the West line of said CHELSEA PARK, UNIT 4 and along it's Southerly extension, a distance of 2600.31 feet, to a point on the aforesaid North right of way line of Barnes Boulevard; thence Westerly, along said North right of way line of Barnes Boulevard to a point 301.00 feet distant East, from the West line of said Section 22, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence N.00°20'48?W., parallel with and 301.00 feet distant East from said West line of Section 22, a distance of 628 feet to the Northeast corner of lands described in Official Records Book 4425, Page 2560 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence S.89°44'52?W., along the North line of said lands, a distance of 251.00 feet to a point on the East right of way line of Murrell Road; thence N.00°20'48?W., along said East right of way line, a distance of 174.00 feet to the Southwest corner of lands described in O.R. 5338, Page 382; thence N.89°44'52?E., along the South line of said lands, a distance of 251.00 feet to the Southeast corner thereof; thence N.00°20'48?W., along the West line of said lands and along the West line of lands described in O.R. 5421, Page 3977, a distance of 348.00 feet to the Northeast corner of said lands described in O.R. 5421, Page 3977; thence S.89°44'52?W., along the North line of said lands, a distance of 251.00 feet to a point on the aforesaid East right of way line of Murrell Road; thence N.00°20'48?W., along said East right of way line, a distance of 348.00 feet to the Southwest corner of lands described in O.R. 2929, Page 560; thence N.89°44'52?E., along the South line of said lands, a distance of 251.00 feet to the Southeast corner thereof; thence N.00°20'48?W., along the East line of said lands, a distance of 174.00 feet to the Northeast corner thereof; thence S.89°44'52?W., along the North line of said lands, a distance of 251.00 feet to a point on the aforesaid East right of way line of Murrell Road; thence N.00°20'48?W., along said East right of way line, a distance of 522.00 feet to the Southwest corner of those lands described in Official Records Book 1512, Page 831 of said public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence N.89°44'52?E., along the South line of said lands, a distance of 275.00 feet to the Southeast corner thereof; thence N.00°20'48?W., along the East line of said lands, a distance of 400.00 feet to a point 50.00 feet South of the North line of Section 22, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence S.89°44'52?W., parallel with and 50.00 feet distant South of said North line, a distance of 275.00 feet to a point on the aforesaid West right of way line of Murrell Road; thence N.00°20'48?W., along said right of way line, a distance of 50.00 feet to a point on the North line of Section 22, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence East, along said North line of Section 22, to the Northwest corner of Section 23, Township 25 South, Range 36 East; thence continue East, along the North line of said Section 23, a distance of 520.55 feet to a point on the East right of way line of U.S. Highway No. 1; thence S.26°50'04?E., along said East right of way line, a distance of 268.96 feet; thence East, parallel to said North line of Section 23, a distance of 325.00 feet; thence N.26°50'04?W., parallel to said East right of way line of U.S. Highway No. 1, a distance of 268.96 feet to a point on said North line of said Section 23; thence East, along said North line of Section 23 to the waters of the Indian River, thence continue East, to the West line of the channel of the Indian River; thence Northwesterly, meandering said West line of the channel of the Indian River, to a point due East of the Point of Beginning; thence West, to the POINT OF BEGINNING; 
EXCEPTING AND OMITTING from the lands bounded as herein described, the following six (6) parcels of property, to-wit: 
PARCEL #1: 
The North 80 feet of the above described property lying between the Westerly right of way line of Hughlett Street on the West and the Western right of way line of Florida Avenue on the East. 
PARCEL #2: 
For a point of reference, commence at the Northeast corner of the Northeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of Section 8, Township 25 South, Range 36 East, Brevard County, Florida, and thence go Westerly, along the East/West centerline of said Section 8, a distance of 358.65 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING; thence continue Westerly, along the said East/West centerline of Section 8, to the Northwest corner of the Northeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of said Section 8; thence Southerly, along the West line of said Northwest ¼ of Southeast ¼ to the Southwest corner of said Northeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼; thence Easterly, along the South line of said Northeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼, to the Southeast corner of said Northeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼; thence Northerly, along the East line of said Northerly ¼ of the Southeast ¼, to a point on the North right of way line of Virginia Street, which point is S.01°16'00?W., a distance of 585.43 feet from the Northeast corner of said Northeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼; thence N.89°43'42?W., along said North right of way line of Virginia Street, a distance of 358.54 feet; thence N.01°15'31?E., a distance of 583.91 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
PARCEL #3: 
A parcel of land lying in Section 21, Township 25 South, Range 36 East, Brevard County, Florida, being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the Northeast corner of said Section 21, and run West, along the North line of said section, a distance of 50.00 feet to a point on the West right of way line of Murrell Road, the POINT OF BEGINNING; thence continue West, along said North line, a distance of 417.00 feet; thence S.00°16'40?E., parallel with the West right of way line of Murrell Road, a distance of 209.00 feet; thence East, parallel with the aforesaid North line of Section 21, a distance of 417.00 feet to a point on said West right of way line of Murrell Road; thence N.00°16'40?W., along said West right of way line, a distance of 209.00 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING. The above described lands being one and the same as those described in Official Records Book 1260, Page 380 of the public records of Brevard County, Florida. 
PARCEL #4: 
A parcel of land lying in Section 21, Township 25 South, Range 36 East, Brevard County, Florida, being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the Northeast corner of said Section 21, and run West, along the North line of said section, a distance of 50.00 feet to a point on the West right of way line of Murrell Road; thence S.00°16'40?E., along said West right of way line, a distance of 418.00 feet to the Southeast corner of lands described in Official Records Book 1804, Page 832 of the public records of Brevard County, Florida, the POINT OF BEGINNING; thence continue S.00°16'40?E., along said West right of way line, a distance of 232.19 feet to the northeast corner of lands described in O.R. 4683, Page 2013; thence west, along the North line of said lands, a distance of 469.03 feet to the Northwest corner of said lands; thence S.00°16'40?E., along the West line of said lands, a distance of 232.19 feet to a point on the North line of Rose Drive; thence East, along said North line of Rose Drive, a distance of 469.03 feet to a point on the aforesaid West right of way line of Murrell Road; thence S.00°16'40?E., a distance of 540.18 feet to the Northeast corner of THREE MEADOWS, PHASE III, recorded in Plat Book 38, Pages 88 and 89 of the public records of Brevard County, Florida; thence S.89°59'15?W., along a North line of said subdivision, a distance of 1485.13 feet to an angle point; thence N.00°16'40?W., along an East line of said subdivision and along an East line of THREE MEADOWS, PHASE IV, recorded in Plat Book 42, Pages 72 and 73 of the public records of Brevard County, Florida, a distance of 489.96 feet to an angle point; thence N.89°59'15?E., along an East line of said THREE MEADOWS, PHASE IV, a distance of 495.04 feet to an angle point; thence N.00°16'40?W., along said East line, a distance of 514.60 feet to the Southwest corner of the aforesaid lands described in Official Records Book 1804, Page 832; thence Easterly, along the South line of said lands described in Official Records Book 1804, Page 832, a distance of 990.09 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
PARCEL #5: (Tax Parcels #255 & #257) 
A parcel of land lying in Section 22, Township 25 South, Range 36 East, being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the Center of said Section 22, and run N.89°35'03?W., along the South line of the Northwest ¼, a distance of 845.55 feet to a point on the North right of way line of Barnes Boulevard, said point being on an 1131.05 foot radius curve to the left; thence Northwesterly, along the arc of said curve and along said right of way line, thru a central angle of 04°12'48? a distance of 8,976 feet to the Southeast corner of lands described in Official Records Book 1254, Page 394, the Point of Beginning; thence departing said right of way line, run N.00°13'36?E., along the East line of said lands, a distance of 589.07 feet; thence N.89°35'12?W., a distance of 208.06 feet; thence S.00°48'31?W., a distance of 13.18 feet; thence N.89°44'30?W., a distance of 177.85 feet; thence S.00°00'55?W., a distance of 571.63 feet to a point on the aforesaid North right of way line of Barnes Boulevard; thence Easterly, along said North right of way line, to the Point of Beginning. 
PARCEL #6: (Tax Parcel #254) 
A parcel of land lying in Section 22, Township 25 South, Range 36 East, being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the Center of said Section 22, and run N.89°35'03?W., along the South line of the Northwest ¼, a distance of 468.50 feet to the Point of Beginning; thence N.23°11'35?W., a distance of 270.75 feet; thence S.86°15'47?W., a distance of 89.23 feet; thence N.06°05'07?W., a distance of 230.89 feet; thence S.73°49'17?W., a distance of 202.19 feet; thence S.00°12'42?W., a distance of 407.39 feet to a point on the North right of way line of Barnes Boulevard, said point being on an 1131.05 foot radius curve to the right; thence Southeasterly, along the arc of said curve and along said right of way line, thru a central angle of 01°59'25? a distance of 39.29 feet to a point on the aforesaid South line of the Northwest ¼; thence S.89°35'03?E., along said South line, a distance of 377.05 feet to the Point of Beginning; 
BUT INCLUDING the following twelve (12) parcels lying in Section 8, Township 25 South, Range 36 East, briefly described in the public records of Brevard County, Florida, to wit: 
1)	Tax Parcel #772 (a/k/a #2208 South Fiske Boulevard) - lands described in O.R. 4976, Page 3097; 
2)	Tax Parcel #785 (a/k/a #2200 South Fiske Boulevard) - lands described in O.R. 3155, Page 3469; 
3)	Tax Parcel #754.1 (a/k/a #995 Eyster Boulevard) - lands described in O.R. 4304, Page 434; 
4)	Tax Parcel #754 (a/k/a #985 Eyster Boulevard) - lands described in O.R. 4071, Page 83; 
5)	Tax Parcel #758.1 (a/k/a #975 Eyster Boulevard) - lands described in O.R. 2866, Page 99; 
6)	Tax Parcel #759 (a/k/a #2309 Patton Lane) - lands described in O.R. 4245, Page 1137; 
7)	Tax Parcel #761 (a/k/a #2316 Patton Lane) - lands described in O.R. 4701, Page 1379; 
8)	Tax Parcel #775 (a/k/a #1423 Patton Lane) - lands described in O.R. 693, Page 937, less lands described in O.R. 111, Page 228; 
9)	Tax Parcel #762 (vacant lands) - lands described in O.R. 2599, Page 1438 
10)	Tax Parcel #773 (a/k/a #2220 South Fiske Boulevard) - lands described in O.R. 3678, Page 555; 
11)	Tax Parcel #774 (a/k/a #2230 South Fiske Boulevard) - lands described in O.R. 3498, Page 3838; 
12)	Tax Parcel #770 (vacant land) - lands described in O.R. 5633, Page 8729; 
(Ord. 1311-03, § 1, 8-6-03; Ord. No. 1339-04, § 3, 3-10-04; Ord. No. 1578-11, 4(Exh. B), 5-4-11)  
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— For contents and handling of this subpart, see the footnote on page 1. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
 
Sec. 101. - Recall of elected officials. 
Any elected official of the City of Rockledge may be removed from office by the electors of the City of Rockledge by the following procedure: 
(Ord. No. 394-75, § 1, 2-5-75) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 394-75, from which the above section was derived, was approved at referendum held in September 1975, as required by §§ 2 and 3 of said ordinance, which are not set out herein. 
Florida Statutes, § 100.361(1) provides that "Any member of the governing body of a municipality … may be removed from office by the following procedure: …." The procedure is then set out. However, subsection (10) of said statute provides that it "shall apply to cities and charter counties which have adopted recall procedures." Therefore, the editors have retained the first paragraph of said ordinance to evidence that the city has "adopted recall procedures," but have deleted the procedures themselves, since they are superseded by the statute.  
Sec. 102. - Term of office of mayor. 
The term of office of the mayor of the City of Rockledge is hereby fixed at three (3) years, effective with the person elected mayor at the general election to be held on the third Tuesday in September 1969. 
(Laws of Fla. 1955, Ch. 31213, § 1; Laws of Fla., Ch. 69-1528, § 1) 
Editor's note— While Laws of Fla., Ch. 69-1528, § 1, did not purport to amend Laws of Fla. 1955, Ch. 31213, § 1, it had the effect of completely superseding it and has been treated as an amendment to said section in toto. The 1955 provision limited the mayor's term to two years.  
Sec. 103. - Mayor may vote to break tie, not otherwise. 
In addition to the powers and authority conferred upon the Mayor of the City of Rockledge under and by virtue of Chapter 11094, Laws of Florida 1925 [the charter], the Mayor shall have the power to vote on any matter to break a tie when at any meeting at which all members of the City Council are present and voting and the resulting vote is a tie. At no other time shall the Mayor have power and authority to vote. 
(Laws of Fla. 1955, Ch. 31213, § 2)  
Sec. 104. - Appointment of administrative officers annually; holding multiple offices. 
Section 1. [Appointments.] From and after the passage of this Act [section] the City Council of the City of Rockledge, Florida, at its first regular meeting after the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in each and every year shall appoint to office for the term of one year, or until a successor be duly appointed and qualified, the following officers, that is to say: One Chief of Police; one City Collector of Taxes; one City Clerk; one City Treasurer; one City Assessor of Taxes; and one City Registration Officer. 
Section 2. [Holding multiple offices.] The City Council may by resolution provide that the same person may hold one or more of the following offices: Chief of Police; City Collector of Taxes; City Clerk; City Treasurer; City Assessor of Taxes; City Registration Officer. 
Section 3. [Interpretation.] This Act [section] shall be broadly construed by any court to whose attention it is brought, the intention of the Legislature in passing this Act [section] being to vest in the City Council of the City of Rockledge, Florida, power to appoint the several officers hereinabove specifically named. 
Section 4. [General repealer.] All laws or parts of laws in conflict with this Act [section] are hereby repealed insofar as they affect the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
Section 5. [Effective date.] This Act [section] shall go into effect immediately upon its passage and approval by the Governor, or upon its becoming a law without such approval. 
(Laws of Fla. 1931, Ch. 15460; Laws of Fla., Ch. 67-1970, § 1) 
Editor's note— Laws of Fla. 1931, Ch. 15460, from which the above section was derived, was approved by the governor June 4, 1931. The cited 1967 act amended sections 1 and 2 thereof. 
Subsequent to the enactment of the above section, the assessment and collection of ad valorem taxes was transferred to the county pursuant to F.S. § 193.16, and the use of the county voter registration rolls was mandated by F.S. § 98.091.  
Sec. 105. - Compensation of city personnel. 
The city council of the City of Rockledge is authorized to fix the amount and time of payment of salaries of all city officials and employees. 
(Laws of Fla. 1955, Ch. 31211, § 1; Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-2734, §§ 1, 2; Laws of Fla., Ch. 67-1968, § 2; Res. of 8-7-74, § 2) 
Editor's note— Laws of Fla., Ch. 67-1968, § 1, repealed Laws of Fla. 1955, Ch. 31211, § 1; and Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-2734; and in place of them, § 2, enacted the provisions appearing in section 105 above. The cited resolution amended said provisions to delete a one hundred dollar per month limitation on the compensation of councilmen and the mayor.  
Sec. 106. - Arrests in fresh pursuit. 
Section 1. [Authorized.] When a person violates a municipal ordinance of the City of Rockledge, Brevard County, or commits a misdemeanor within said municipality in the presence of a police officer, or when a police officer of the said city has reasonable grounds to believe that a person found within the municipality has committed or is committing a felony, such police officer may in fresh pursuit (also sometimes referred to as hot pursuit) whenever necessary to effect the arrest of such person, pursue such person outside of the city limits of said City of Rockledge to any point in Brevard County and there arrest him. 
Section 2. [Interpretation of "fresh pursuit."] For the purpose of this act [section], fresh pursuit (sometimes also referred to as hot pursuit) shall not necessarily imply instant pursuit, but shall mean pursuit without unnecessary delay. 
Section 3. [Referendum required.] This act [section] shall take effect only upon its approval by a majority of the voters voting at an election of the City of Rockledge. 
Section 4. [Effective date.] Subject to the referendum herein provided for this act [section] shall take effect immediately upon becoming a law. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 65-2154) 
Editor's note— Laws of Fla., Ch. 65-2154, from which the above section was derived, became a law without the governor's approval and was filed in the office of the secretary of state June 25, 1965. It was approved at referendum as required in section 3 above. 
State Law reference— Arrests in fresh pursuit, F.S. § 901.25.  
Sec. 107. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 107 of Subpart B, pertaining to temporary loans and time purchases, and derived from Ch. 65-2153, Laws of Fla. 1965, was repealed by Ord. No. 689-84, § 1, adopted May 16, 1984.  
ARTICLE 2. - LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal borrowing generally, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; municipal eminent domain, F.S. § 166.401 et seq.; additional and supplemental method of making local improvements and making assessments therefor, F.S. Ch. 170; municipal public works, F.S. Ch. 180; maximum interest rate for municipal obligations, F.S. § 215.685. 
 
Sec. 201. - Waterworks facilities. 
Section 1. [Defined.] As used in this Act [section], the term "WATERWORKS FACILITIES" shall mean and shall include water supply systems, water distribution systems, and any integral part thereof, and shall include but shall not be limited to reservoirs, wells, intakes, mains, laterals, aqueducts, pumping stations, standpipes, filter stations, purification plants, hydrants, meters, valves, and all necessary appurtenances and equipment, and all property, rights, easements, rights-of-way, and franchises relating thereto and deemed necessary or convenient for the operation thereof. 
Section 2. [Powers specified.] The City of Rockledge is hereby authorized and empowered: 
(a)	To acquire in the name of the city, either by purchase or the exercise of the right of eminent domain, or to construct, and to reconstruct, improve, extend, enlarge, equip, repair, maintain and operate waterworks facilities, either within or without, or partly within and partly without, the territorial limits of the city; 
(b)	To issue revenue bonds of the city, payable (1) from water rates, or (2) from such rates, and, to the extent necessary, ad valorem taxes, to pay all or a part of the cost of the waterworks facilities; 
(c)	To fix and collect rates and charges for water furnished by any waterworks facilities, and to fix and collect charges for making connections with any waterworks facilities; 
(d)	To acquire in the name of the city, either by purchase or eminent domain, such lands either within or without the city, and rights and interests therein, including lands under water and riparian rights, and to acquire such personal property as it may deem necessary in connection with the construction or operation of waterworks facilities, and to hold and dispose of all real and personal property under its control; 
(e)	To make and enter into all contracts and agreements necessary or incidental to the performance of its duties and the execution of its powers under this Act [section], including a trust agreement or trust agreements securing any bonds issued hereunder, and to employ such consulting and other engineers, superintendents, managers, construction and accounting experts and attorneys, and such employees and agents, as may, in the judgment of the city, be deemed necessary and to fix their compensation; provided, however, that all such expenses shall be payable solely from funds made available under the provisions of this Act [section]; 
(f)	To exercise jurisdiction, control and supervision over any waterworks facilities owned, operated or maintained by it and to make and enforce such rules and regulations for the maintenance and operation of any such facilities as may in its judgment be necessary or desirable for the efficient operation thereof and for accomplishing the purposes of this Act [section]; 
(g)	To enter on any lands, water or premises located within or without the city to make surveys; borings, soundings, or examinations for the purposes of this Act [section]; 
(h)	To construct and operate water mains, laterals, conduits, pipelines and all necessary appurtenances thereto in, along or under any streets, alleys, highways or other public places within or without the city; 
(i)	To restrain, enjoin or otherwise prevent any political subdivision or agency and any person or corporation, public or private, from discharging into the Indian River or any navigable or non-navigable waters within the limits of the city any sewage, industrial waters or other refuse which would contribute to the pollution of such waters; and to restrain, enjoin or otherwise prevent the violation of any provision of this Act [section] or of any resolution, rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the powers granted by this Act [section]; 
(j)	To exercise the right of eminent domain and to condemn, appropriate and acquire such property both real and personal, and any interest or estate therein, including lands under water and riparian rights either within or without the city which by resolution, the city shall determine to be necessary in connection with the construction or operation of waterworks facilities. Said determination shall be conclusive. Such condemnation proceedings shall be exercised in accordance with the manner provided in Chapters 73 and 74 of the Florida Statutes, and any acts that may be hereinafter enacted amendatory and supplementary thereof. 
(k)	To do all acts and things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly granted in this Act [section]. 
Section 3. [Provisions supplemental.] The provisions of this Act [section] are supplemental and cumulative to the provisions of Chapter 11094, Acts of 1925 [the charter], and any general law nor [now] or hereinafter enacted governing municipalities, and shall be in addition and not in limitation of any of the powers granted by said Chapter 11094 or any general law governing municipalities. 
Section 4. [Effective date.] This Act [section] shall take effect immediately upon becoming a law. 
(Laws of Fla. 1955, Ch. 31214) 
Editor's note— Laws of Fla. 1955, Ch. 31214, from which the above section was derived, became a law without the governor's approval, and was filed in the office of the secretary of state May 31, 1955. 
For general authority to provide for water supply, see Subpart A, Art. II, § 1(7).  
Sec. 202. - Streets, drainage and sewers. 
Section 1. Municipal improvements defined. As herein used the term "Municipal Improvement" shall be construed to mean the opening, widening, laying out, paving, grading, extending, digging, construction, alteration or discontinuation of any park, street, highway, alley or other way, ditch, drain or gutter, or, the laying, construction, repairing, changing, vacating, enlarging, diminishing or improving of any sewer within the City of Rockledge. 
Section 2. Contracts for construction of municipal improvements. The City of Rockledge is authorized to enter into and agree upon the terms of contracts with private parties for the installation, accomplishment or construction of municipal improvements as hereinabove defined. In such cases such private parties may do all of the work in accordance with specifications prescribed by the city, or in the alternative, may contract to do certain specified parts of the work to be done in conjunction with the city itself. 
Section 3. Financing municipal improvements. In consideration of the work to be done by such private parties the city may sell or agree to sell to such private contracting parties any or all of the municipal improvements liens assessed by the city against abutting property for benefits to such property resulting from the municipal improvements so constructed. Said liens shall be evidence[d] by special assessment lien certificates and shall be assigned by the city without recourse against the city in the event of failure of payment. Said liens may be enforced by the party to whom assigned or anyone holding under him as any other liens are enforced in equity, or the city may agree to enforce such liens for and in behalf of the holder thereof. 
Section 4. Severability. This Act [section] is severable in its provisions and the adjudicated invalidity of any part shall not affect the remainder. 
Section 5. Effective date. This Act [section] shall take effect immediately upon becoming a law with or without the Governor's approval. 
(Laws of Fla. 1955, Ch. 31212) 
Editor's note— Laws of Fla. 1955, Ch. 31212, from which the above section was derived, became a law without the governor's approval and was filed in the office of the secretary of state May 3, 1955.  
Sec. 203. - Alternative and supplemental procedure. 
Section 1. [Bonds and special assessments authorized.] That whenever the City of Rockledge shall deem it advisable or necessary to establish the grade of, to grade or regrade, to construct, reconstruct, repair, pave, re-pave, hardsurface, re-hardsurface, the streets, alleys, boulevards, parkways or sidewalks of said city; to establish a harbor line or lines, to secure or improve its waterfront; to acquire, to widen, to extend or to improve streets, boulevards, parks, or parkways; to establish, construct, or reconstruct a sea-wall or sea-walls or bulkheads along its waterfront or on its harbor lines; to fill in low or submerged lands and bring the same to grade, to extend the streets of said city over or across any submerged land, to establish new streets, boulevards, parkways or parks, to make fills or excavations corresponding to the established grade of existing streets, or of streets as extended, or to make other public improvements in connection therewith for the use of said city, the City of Rockledge is hereby authorized to issue negotiable bonds of said city under its corporate seal, bearing interest not exceeding seven per centum per annum, and to be sold for not less than ninety-five per cent of their par value, plus the interest accrued thereon, to pay all or any part of the cost of any such public improvements, and the City of Rockledge is hereby authorized and empowered to levy and collect a special tax or assessment on the abutting, adjoining, contiguous or other specially benefited property. 
Section 2. [Apportionment of special assessments.] Special assessments against property deemed to be benefited by public improvements as provided for in the preceding section shall be assessed upon the property specially benefited by the improvements in proportion to the benefits derived therefrom, said special benefits to be determined and prorated according to the front footage or according to the square footage basis of the respective propertiees [properties] sepcially [specially] benefited by said improvements, or by such other method as the governing body of the municipality may prescribe. 
Section 3. [Resolution required.] Whenever it shall be deemed advisable or necessary for the public good to make any of the public improvements specified in Section 1 hereof, the City Council of the City of Rockledge shall so declare by resolution, stating the need of the proposed improvement, designating the improvements to be so made, what part or portion of the cost thereof is to be paid by special assessment, the manner in which said special assessments are to be paid, the lands upon which the special assessment shall be levied, and in describing said lands, it shall be sufficient to describe the lots of [or] lands deemed to be specially benefited abutting upon and contiguous to the contemplated improvement, as "All lots and land adjoining and contiguous of bounding and abutting upon such improvement." Such resolution shall also state the total estimated cost of the improvement. 
Section 4. [Plans, specifications required.] At the time of the adoption of the resolution provided for in Section 3 of this Act, there shall be on file with the City Clerk or like officer, of the City of Rockledge, plans and specifications, with the estimated cost of the proposed improvements, which plans and specifications and estimate shall be open to the inspection of the public. 
Section 5. [Publication of resolution.] Upon the adoption of the resolution provided for in Section 3, of this Act, the City Council of said City of Rockledge shall cause said resolution to be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation published in the County of Brevard. 
Section 6. [Preparation, filing of assessment roll.] That upon the adoption of the resolution aforesaid, the City Council of said City of Rockledge shall cause to be made an assessment roll in accordance with the method of assessment provided for in said resolution, which assessment roll shall be completed and filed with the Clerk of said city as promptly as possible; said assessment roll shall show the lots and lands assessed, the amount of the assessment against each lot or parcel of land, and if said assessment is to be paid in installments, the number of annual installments in which the assessment is divided shall also be entered and shown upon said assessment roll. 
Section 7. [Publication, notice of assessment roll.] Upon the completion of said assessment roll the City Council of the City of Rockledge shall cause a copy thereof to be published two times successively, once each week in a newspaper of general circulation published in the County of Brevard, and in the publication of said assessment roll there shall be attached to the copy of the assessment roll published a notice directed to all property owners interested in said assessment, of the time and place where complaints will be heard with reference to said assessments, and when said assessment roll will be finally approved and confirmed by the City Council of said city sitting as an Equalization Board. 
Section 8. [Equalization of roll.] At the time and place mentioned in the notice provided for in the preceding section, the City Council of said City of Rockledge, shall meet as an Equalization Board to hear and consider any and all complaints as to such special assessments, and shall adjust and equalize said special assessments on a uniform basis in proportion to the benefits derived from said improvements, and when so equalized and adjusted, such assessments shall stand confirmed, and be and remain legal, valid and binding liens, upon the property against which such assessments are made, until paid in accordance with the provisions of this Act [section]; provided, however, that upon the completion of said improvements the said city shall rebate to the owner of any property which shall have been specially assessed for any of said improvements the difference in the assessment as originally made, approved and confirmed, and the proportionate part of the actual cost of said improvements to be paid by special assessments as finally determined upon the completion of said improvements. 
Section 9. [Lien declared; installment collection; interest.] Special assessments for any of the improvements mentioned in Section One of this Act [section] shall be and remain liens superior in dignity to all other liens except liens for taxes until paid from the date of the assessment of the respective lots or parcel of land assessed and shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding eight per cent per annum and may be made by the resolution aforesaid payable in ten equal yearly installments with accrued interest on all deferred payments paid within 30 days after said assessment shall stand approved and confirmed as provided in the preceding section. 
Section 10. [Foreclosure of lien.] In case the annual installments provided for in the preceding section shall not be paid upon the dates specified in said resolution together with the accrued interest thereon, the City Council of said City of Rockledge shall cause to be instituted the necessary legal proceedings by a bill in Chancery to enforce payment thereof with all accrued interest together with all legal cost incurred including a reasonable solicitor's fee, to be assessed as part of the cost. Upon default in the payment of any installment of said assessment or of any accrued interest on said assessment, the whole assessment with all interest thereon shall immediately become due and payable and subject to foreclosure. In the foreclosure of any special assessment, service of process against unknown or nonresident defendants may be had by publication, as now provided by law in other chancery suits. The foreclosure proceedings shall be prosecuted to a sale and conveyance of the property involved in said proceedings as now provided by law in suits to foreclose mortgages. 
Section 11. [Bonds.] After the Equalization, approval and confirmation of the levy of special assessments for any of the public improvements as hereinbefore provided by Section VIII of this Act [sic; section 7 above], and as soon as the contract for said improvements has been finally let the City Council of said City of Rockledge may by resolution issue bonds of said city pledging the full faith and credit of said city to an amount not exceeding seventy per cent of the proportionate part of the cost of said improvement to be paid by special assessment, and the estimated cost of said public improvements as stated in the resolution provided by Section III of this Act [sic; section 3 above] shall be used as a basis of calculation in determining seventy per cent of the proportionate part of the cost of said improvement to be paid by special assessment; such bonds shall be general obligations of the said City of Rockledge, and if said special assessment be not imposed upon the properties specially benefited as provided for herein, and the principal and interest due thereon is not paid for and discharged as they respectively become due, the City of Rockledge shall levy and collect upon all taxable property in said city a tax sufficient to pay such principal and interest as same respectively become due and payable, [and] all bonds issued under the provisions of this Section shall be excluded from any limitations of bonded indebtedness prescribed by the Charter of said city or by general law and said bonds shall be issued upon the adoption of a resolution by the City Council of said city providing for the issuance thereof, without submitting the question as to the issuance and sale of said bonds to a vote of the electors of said City of Rockledge. 
Editor's note— The power to issue bonds, including the requirement of a referendum thereon, is now governed by Fla. Const., Art. VII, § 12. 
Section 12. [Additional bonds.] After the levy of said assessments for any of the public improvements herein provided for stand confirmed and after the completion and acceptance of said improvements by the City Council of the said City of Rockledge, the City Council of said City may by resolution issue further bonds pledging the full faith and credit of the said City of Rockledge to an amount not exceeding the unpaid assessments for said improvements. Provided, however, if any bonds have been issued under the preceding section upon an estimate of the cost of the improvement the bonds issued under the preceding section and the bonds issued under this section shall not in the aggregate exceed the amount of the unpaid assessments. All special assessments levied and imposed in respect of the improvement under this and the proceeding [preceding] section, shall constitute a fund for the payment of the principal and interest of the bonds authorized by this and the preceding section, and in the event there be a failure to collect and receive the said special assessment in season to pay the principal and interest of said bonds, the said City of Rockledge shall levy and collect on all taxable property in said city a tax sufficient to pay such principal and interest as the same respectively becomes due and payable. 
All bonds issued under the provisions of this section shall be excluded from any limitation of bonded indebtedness prescribed by the charter of the said City of Rockledge, or by general law, and shall be issued in the same manner as provided for in the preceding section. 
No bonds issued under the preceding section shall be held in any way to impair or invalidate any special assessment made under the provisions of this Act [section]. 
Section 13. [Sale of bonds.] All bonds issued under the provisions of this Act [section] shall be advertised for sale on sealed bids once a week for three weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in the said County of Brevard, and if said bonds be not sold pursuant to such advertisement, they may be sold at private sale at any time after the date advertised for the reception of sealed bids. No bonds issued pursuant to this Act [section] shall sell for less than ninety-five per cent of the par value thereof with accrued interest. If any special assessment made under the provisions of this Act [section] to defray the whole or any part of the expense of any improvement herein provided for, shall be either in whole or in part annulled, vacated or set aside by the judgment of any court or if the City Council of said City of Rockledge shall be satisfied that any such assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the City Council of said City shall have omitted to make such assessment when it might have done so, the City Council of said City of Rockledge is hereby authorized and required to take all necessary steps to cause a new assessment to be made for the whole or any part of any improvement or against any property benefited by any improvement following as nearly as may be the provisions of this Act [section] and in case such second assessment shall be annulled the City Council of said City of Rockledge may obtain and make other assessments until a valid assessment shall be made. 
Section 14. [Payments from general revenue.] The City Council of said City of Rockledge shall have the power to pay out of its general funds or out of any special fund that may be provided for that purpose such portion of the cost of any improvements herein provided for as it may deem proper. Interest accruing while an improvement is under construction and for six months thereafter, all engineering and inspection costs, including a proper proportion of the compensation, salaries and expenses of the engineering staff of said city properly chargeable to any improvement, and all cost and estimated costs including attorney's fees in the issuance of the bonds provided for by this Act [section], shall be deemed and considered a part of the cost of the improvement. 
Section 15. [Informalities and irregularities.] Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any special assessment under the provisions of this Act [section] shall not affect the validity of the same where the assessment roll has been confirmed by the City Council of said City of Rockledge and the assessment roll as finally approved and confirmed shall be competent and sufficient evidence that the assessment was duly levied, that the assessment as [was] duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings preliminary to the adoption of the said assessment roll were duly had, taken and performed as required by this Act [section]; and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. 
Section 16. [Form, terms of bonds.] All bonds issued under this Act [section] shall be in the denomination of $1,000.00 or some multiple thereof and shall bear interest not exceeding seven per centum per annum, payable annually or semi-annually and both principal and interest shall be payable at such place or places as the City Council of said city may determine. The form of such bonds shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council and said bonds shall be signed by the Mayor or Chief Executive Officer of the municipality and the Clerk or other like officers thereof, under the seal of the municipality; the coupons, if any, shall be executed by the facsimile signature of said officers. The delivery of any bond and coupon so executed at any time thereafter shall be valid although before the date of delivery the person signing such bond or coupons shall cease to hold office. 
Section 17. [Interpretation of provisions.] This Act [section] shall without reference to any other Act of the Legislature of Florida be full authority for the issuance and sale of the bonds by this Act [section] authorized, and shall be construed as an additional and alternative method to said City of Rockledge for the financing of the improvements herein referred to. No ordinance, resolution, or proceeding in respect of the issuance of any bonds hereunder shall be necessary except such as is required by this Act [section], and no publication of any resolution, ordinance, notice or proceedings relating to the issuance of the bonds provided for by this Act [section], shall be required except such as required by this Act [section]. 
Section 18. [Bonds declared negotiable, incontestable.] Bonds issued hereunder shall have all the qualities of negotiable paper under the law merchant and shall not be invalid for any irregularity or defect in the proceedings for the issue and sale thereof and shall be incontestable in the hands of bona fide purchasers or holders thereof for value. 
Section 19. [Effect on other laws.] This Act [section] shall not repeal any other statute relating to the subject matter hereof but shall be deemed to provide a supplemental, additional and alternative method of procedure for the benefit of said City of Rockledge. 
Section 20. [Effective date.] This Act [section] shall go into effect immediately upon its passage and approval by the Governor or upon its becoming a law without his approval. 
(Laws of Fla. 1925, Ch. 11093) 
Editor's note— Laws of Fla. 1925, Ch. 11093, from which the above section was derived, was approved by the governor on June 3, 1925. 
State Law reference— Maximum interest on municipal obligations, F.S. § 215.685.  
ARTICLE 3. - ZONING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— By Ord. No. 412-76, and subsequently by Ord No. 984-90, the city adopted the provisions of F.S. Ch. 163, Pt. II, so that its present authority and the procedures to be followed in exercising that authority are as provided by that part rather than by the special acts included in this article. 
 
Sec. 301. - Power and jurisdiction generally.  
SECTION 1 
Section 1. [Enumerated.] The present Charter of the City of Rockledge, Brevard County, Florida, is hereby amended by adding to the jurisdiction and powers of said city and the jurisdiction and powers of officers of said city the following, to wit: 
(1)	That said city, through its duly qualified officers shall have power to divide said city into zones for the purpose of regulating the erection of buildings or other structures in said city, and to create zones in said city where only buildings or structures to be used for residential purposes shall be allowed to be erected. 
(2)	That said City of Rockledge shall have power through its duly qualified officers to create a zone or zones along the front of the Indian River of said city where no structure or building of any kind shall be allowed to be erected.  
SECTION 2 
Section 1. [Severability.] If any section or part of section of this Act [section] proves to be invalid or unconstitutional, the same shall not be held to invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section, or part of section, of the Act [section], unless it clearly appears that such other section or part of section is wholly or necessarily dependent for its operation upon the section or part of section so held to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Section 2. [Conflicting laws repealed.] All laws and parts of laws in conflict with the provisions of this Act [section] are hereby repealed in as far as they affect the City of Rockledge. 
Section 3. [Effective date.] This Act [section] shall go into effect immediately upon its passage and approval by the Governor, or upon its becoming a law without an approval. 
(Laws of Fla. 1925, Ch. 11712) 
Editor's note— Laws of Fla. 1925, from which this section was derived, was approved by the Governor on December 1, 1925. 
 
Sec. 302. - Plan and regulations. 
Section 1. [Authorized; factors to be considered.] The City of Rockledge, Florida, may in the interest of the public health, safety, order, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare, adopt by ordinance a plan or plans for the districting or zoning of the city for the purpose of regulating the location of trades, industries, apartment houses, dwellings or other uses of property, or for the purpose of regulating the height of buildings or other structures, or the area of [or] dimensions of lots or yards in connection with buildings or other structures, or for the purpose of regulating the alignments of buildings or other structures near street frontages. The zoning regulations may be based upon any one or more of the purposes above described. The city may be divided into such number of zones or districts and such districts may be of such shape and area as shall be best suited to accomplish the purposes of the zoning regulations. In the determination and establishment of districts and regulations, classifications may be based on the nature or character of the trade, industry, profession or other activity conducted or to be conducted upon the premises, the number of persons, families, or other group units to reside in or use buildings, the public, quasi-public or private nature of the use of the premises or upon any other basis or bases relevant to the promotion of the public health, safety, order, morals, convenience, prosperity or welfare. 
Section 2. [Ordinance adoption procedure.] Any ordinance adopting zoning regulations as above authorized shall be passed in the manner provided for in the City Charter of the City of Rockledge, Florida, as presently existing. 
Section 3. [Administration and enforcement; appeals.] The zoning regulations shall be enforced and administered by the City Council of the City of Rockledge or the building inspector of the City of Rockledge, Florida, acting under the rules and regulations of the City Council, and as to all decisions made by said building inspector of said City of Rockledge, Florida, the said City Council shall hear and decide appeals and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by said building inspector in the enforcement of said zoning regulations. 
Section 4. [Inconsistent laws repealed.] All laws or parts of laws in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Section 5. [Effective date.] This Act [section] shall go into effect immediately upon its passage and approval by the Governor, or upon its becoming a law without the approval of the Governor. 
(Laws of Fla. 1937, Ch. 18839) 
Editor's note— Laws of Fla. 1937, Ch. 18839, from which the above section was derived, was approved by the Governor on June 11, 1937.  
Subpart C - TABLE OF OMITTED SPECIAL ACTS[1] 
Year 	Chapter 
Number 	Subject Matter 	Reason for Omission 
1927 	13343 	Authorizing borrowing $85,-000.00 	Not prospective 
1927 	13344 	Provide supplemental procedure for collecting taxes 	Rendered obsolete by county assumption of tax collecting function per F.S. § 193.16(2) 
1927 	13345 	Validate 1922—1926 taxes 	Not prospective 
1927 	13346 	Validate 1925 annexation 	Repealed by Laws of Fla. 1953, Ch. 29481 
1929 	14335 	Validate 1924—1928 taxes 	Not prospective 
1929 	14336 	Declaring lien for taxes and procedure for enforcement thereof 	Now governed by general law 
1929 	14337 	Assessment of property omitted from prior rolls 	Now governed by general law 
1931 	15459 	Penalties for delinquent taxes 	Now governed by general law 
1931 	15461 	Validate prior paving liens 	Not prospective 
1933 	16650 	Assessment of property omitted from prior rolls 	Now governed by general law 
1933 	16651 	Validate 1924—1932 taxes, other prior actions 	Not prospective 
1937 	18840 	Validate 1924—1936 taxes, other prior actions 	Not prospective 
1941 	21519 	Validate 1937—1940 taxes, other prior actions 	Not prospective 
1945 	23514 	Authorize lease of golf course 	Course subsequently sold 
1947 	24854 	Authorize sale of golf course 	Course subsequently sold 
1957 	57-1774 	Abolish firemen's pension system 	Not prospective; firemen's pensions now governed by ordinance 
1959 	59-1779 	Create municipal court 	Court abolished by Fla. Const., Art. V, § 20 
1959 	59-1781 	Abolish policemen's pension system 	Not prospective; policemen's pensions now governed by ordinance 
1967 	67-1967 	Annexation procedures 	Repealed by Ch. 70-914 
1973 	73-606 	Mayor to preside at council meetings 	Failed at referendum 
1981 		Council reduced to five (5) members. Mayor elected by council 	Failed at referendum 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— For contents and handling of this subpart, see the footnote on page 1. 
 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of ordinances and resolutions amending the charter. 
			Disposition 
Ordinance Number 	   Date 	Section 	Subpart 	Article 	Section 
	 8- 7-74 (Res.) 	2 	A 	I 	5 
	 8- 7-74 (Res.) 	2 	B 	1 	105 
379-74 	 6- 5-74 	1 	A 	I 	11 
394-75 	 2- 5-75 	1 	B 	1 	101 
395-75 	 3- 5-75 	1 	A 	I 	6 
400-75 	 5- 7-75 	1 	A 	I 	6 
441-76 	 9- 1-76 	1 	A 	I 	6 
555-80 	 5-21-80 	1 	A 	I 	1 
689-84 	 5-16-84 	      Rpld 	A 	VI 	1—5 
		      Rpld 	B 	1 	107 
1020-91 	12- 4-91 	1 	A 	I 	1 
	11- 5-02(Ref.) 	      Rpld 	A 	I—IX 	
		      Added 	A 	I—IX 	
1311-03 	 8- 6-03 	1 	A 	Att. 1 	
1339-04 	 3-10-04 	3 	A 	Att. 1 	
1354-04 	 9-22-04 	1 			2.04 
1578-11 	 5- 4-11 	4(Exh. B) 	A 	Att. 1 	
  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Rockledge Code of Ordinances" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1964, § 1-1)  
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code the following rules shall be observed unless otherwise provided, or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the provisions: 
General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Rockledge, and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
City council. The words "city council" shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Rockledge. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
When a party has a right to or is required to do some act or take some proceeding within a prescribed period after the service of a notice or other paper upon him and the notice or paper is served upon him by mail, three (3) days shall be added to the prescribed period. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Fla. R. Civ. P. 1.090. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Brevard County, Florida. 
Gender. The masculine includes the feminine and vice versa. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(2). 
Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three (3) or more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the provision giving the authority. 
May. "May" is always directory and not mandatory. 
Number. The singular includes the plural and vice versa. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(1). 
Oath. The word "oath" includes affirmations. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(6). 
Officers, departments, agencies. Whenever reference is made to officers, boards, commissions, departments, or other agencies of the city by title only, they shall be deemed to refer to the officers, boards, commissions, departments and agencies of the City of Rockledge, and shall include their duly authorized subordinates and personnel. 
Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" includes individuals, children, firms, associations, joint adventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations, and all other groups or combinations. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 1.01(3). 
Personal property. Personal property shall extend and be applied to every species of property except real property. 
Provisions declared minimum; greater restriction applied. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be controlling. 
Shall. "Shall" is always mandatory and not directory. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Florida. 
Tense. The present tense includes the future when applicable. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days; but publication in a newspaper of any notice or other matter indicated to be for a stated number of weeks shall be construed to mean one insertion in each week, unless specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one day in each week. 
(Code 1964, §§ 1-2, 1-3)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines; references to chapters or sections. 
In addition to the rules of construction set out in section 1-2, the following rules shall be observed in the construction of this Code: 
(a)	Catchlines. The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	References to chapters or sections. All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1964, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision of this Code, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision of this Code, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
The repeal of an ordinance, clause or section of this Code, shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance, clause or section of this Code repealed. 
(Code 1964, § 1-5) 
State Law reference— Repealed statute not revived by implication, F.S. § 2.04.  
Sec. 1-5. - Severability. 
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, sections or subsections of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect any section or subsection, clause or paragraph of this Code shall be numbered consecutively, but may refer specifically to the section or subsection affected, and be printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, subsection, clause or paragraph, or any portion thereof, such repealed portions shall be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the provision of this Code in the following language: "That Section (subsection, clause or paragraph) of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
In the event a new provision not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Rockledge Code of Ordinances is hereby amended by adding a new section (subsection, clause or paragraph) to be numbered ____________ , which reads as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed may be specifically repealed in the following language: "That ;daterule; of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances is hereby repealed."  
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
No person in the city shall change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Rockledge to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1964, § 1-8)  
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; violations. 
(a)	Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code shall be punished as follows: 
(1)	Where the particular act or default constituting a violation of this Code also constitutes a violation of any law of the State of Florida, such violation shall be punished in the same manner and within the same limits as are provided for such state violation. 
(2)	Where the act or default does not also constitute a violation of a state law, it shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)	Each day a violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each act in violation of the provisions of this Code shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)	In addition to the penalties herein provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1964, § 1-9)  
Sec. 1-9. - Court costs for law enforcement education. 
(a)	For the purpose of creating and maintaining a fund for law enforcement education expenditures of city law enforcement officers, and pursuant to the authority granted by F.S. § 943.258(a), the city by and through its governing body, does hereby assess every person convicted of violating a Rockledge municipal ordinance or State of Florida penal, criminal or civil traffic infraction statute within the city, the sum of two dollars ($2.00) for criminal justice education and training, including basic training expenditures, for city law enforcement officers, parttime law enforcement officers, auxiliary law enforcement officers, correctional officers and support personnel; provided, that such education and training activities conform to the requirements of F.S. § 943.14. In addition, two dollars ($2.00) is hereby assessed with respect to every bond estreature or forfeited bail bond related to a Rockledge municipal ordinance or State of Florida penal, criminal or civil traffic infraction statute, violated within the municipal limits of the city. Provided, however, no such assessment shall be made against any person convicted for violation of any state statute or Rockledge municipal ordinance relating to the parking of vehicles. All courts exercising lawful jurisdiction with respect to violations within the city of city ordinances or state penal, criminal or civil traffic infraction statutes are hereby authorized to collect the assessments hereby made. All assessments received by the city under authority of this section shall be deposited in the general administrative fund of the city to the credit of the law enforcement education account. 
(b)	The city council shall from time to time authorize payment from such account of law enforcement education expenditures for the city law enforcement officers, as permitted by law. 
(Code 1964, § 2-45; Ord. No. 645-83, § 1, 3-16-83) 
State Law reference— Court costs for law enforcement education authorized, F.S. 943.25(5).  
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(a)	Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(b)	Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or providing for or amending the annual budget; 
(c)	Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or excluding territory as a part of the city; 
(d)	Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right; 
(e)	Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument; 
(f)	Any administrative ordinance not inconsistent with this Code; 
(g)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating or repairing any street or public way; 
(h)	Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, within the city, not inconsistent herewith; 
(i)	Any ordinance prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(j)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements or making assessments therefor; 
(k)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city, or any improvements therein; 
(l)	Any ordinance zoning or rezoning of specific property; 
(m)	Any ordinance providing for the compensation of officers and employees; 
(n)	Any temporary or special ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal organization and officers, Subpt. A, Art. III; administration, Subpt. B, Art. I. 
Cross reference— Nuisance abatement board, § 10-19; civil emergencies, § 13-3; impersonating officer, § 13-8; interfering with officers, § 13-9; reward for information regarding theft or destruction of city-owned property, § 13-12; disposition of lost or abandoned property, unclaimed evidence, § 13-16; citizen's advisory committee on planning, § 16-11 et seq. 
State Law reference— State Election Code, F.S. Chs. 97—106. 
 
ARTICLE I. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, Subpt. A, Art. I, §§ 6, 7. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-11. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Absent elector means any registered and qualified elector who is unable without another's assistance to attend the polls or who is an inspector, a poll worker, a deputy voting machine custodian, city policeman, supervisor of elections, or a deputy supervisor who is assigned to a different precinct than that in which he is registered to vote, or who on account of the tenets of his religion cannot attend the polls on the day of an election, or any qualified and registered elector wherever he may be, except persons confined in prison or jail, so long as he will not be in the city during the hours the polls are open for voting on the day of an election. 
Armed forces means and includes the Army of the United States, Navy, Air Force of the United States, Marine Corps, Coast Guard, Coast and Geodetic Survey, and Public Health Service, when on active duty. 
Ballot, when used in reference to: 
(a)	Voting machines (except when reference is made to irregular ballots) means that portion of the printed strips of cardboard, paper or other material within the ballot frames containing the names of candidates, or a statement of a question or proposition submitted to the electorate at any election. 
(b)	Paper ballot means that printed sheet of paper containing the names of candidates, or a statement of questions or propositions submitted to the electorate at any election, on which sheet of paper an elector casts his vote. 
(c)	Electronic or electromechanical device means a ballot which is voted by the process of punching or marking with a marking device for tabulation by automatic tabulating equipment or data processing equipment. 
Candidate means any person who has filed his qualification papers, and paid his qualifying fees as required by law. 
Dependent means any person who is in fact a dependent. 
Election board means the clerk and inspectors appointed to conduct an election. 
Elector is synonymous with the word "voter" or "qualified elector or voter." 
Freeholder means any person who has an immediately beneficial ownership interest, legal or equitable, in the title to a fee simple estate in land. For the purposes of this article, an owner of condominium property, as well as a tenant-stockholder of a cooperative apartment corporation is deemed to have an immediately beneficial ownership interest, legal or equitable, in the title to a fee simple estate in land. As used herein, a "cooperative apartment corporation" means a corporation organized for the purpose of owning, maintaining and operating an apartment building or apartment buildings to be occupied by its stockholders, which building or buildings are located on realty owned in fee simple by the corporation, and "tenant-stockholder" means any individual who is entitled, solely by reason of his ownership of stock in a cooperative apartment corporation, to occupy for dwelling purposes an apartment in a building owned by such corporation. As used herein, "condominium property" is that real property, whereby units of an improvement or improvements on such real property are subject to ownership as a fee simple or life estate by different owners, and there is appurtenant to each unit as part thereof an undivided share in the common elements. 
Irregular ballot means a vote cast for a person whose name does not appear on the ballot, commonly referred to as a "write-in" vote. 
Registration officer means the county supervisor of elections or such deputies as may be appointed by the supervisor. 
Voting booth or booth means that booth or enclosure wherein an elector casts his ballot, be it a paper ballot, a voting machine ballot, or a ballot cast for tabulation by an electronic or electromechanical device. 
(Code 1964, § 7-1) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions for purpose of state election law, F.S. § 97.021.  
Sec. 2-12. - Precincts and polling places. 
The boundaries of precincts in the city, and the location of polling places, shall be arranged and established as provided by state law. 
(Code 1964, § 7-2) 
State Law reference— Determination of precincts and polling places generally, F.S. § 98.031; arrangement of precincts to conform to municipal boundaries, F.S. § 98.091(1).  
Sec. 2-13. - Registration required. 
No person shall vote in any city election unless such person is an elector duly registered as a resident of the city on the county voter registration books under the permanent single voter registration system established by state law. 
(Code 1964, § 7-8) 
State Law reference— City residents registered by county entitled to vote, F.S. § 98.091(3).  
Sec. 2-14. - Registration procedure. 
The procedure for registration, time and place of registration, the time when registration will be permitted, the qualifications of registrants, the registration of members of the armed forces and their dependents, the eligibility and procedure for absentee registrations, the procedure for the change of name and change of residence of electors, the purging and removal of names from voter registration books, restoration of names of aggrieved persons and other rules and regulations pertaining to the registration of electors of the city shall all be as prescribed and provided for by the permanent single voter registration system established by state law. 
(Code 1964, § 7-9) 
State Law reference— Registration of voters generally, F.S. Chs. 97, 98.  
Sec. 2-15. - Call and notice of election. 
The city clerk shall publish a notice of election in a newspaper of general circulation in the city between the sixty-third day and sixty-sixth day prior to each election, stating the offices to be filled at said election and the date of said election and same shall be held to be the official call for such election. 
(Code 1964, § 7-27; Ord. No. 803-86, § 1, 9-3-86)  
Sec. 2-16. - Procedure for candidates to qualify. 
(a)	The city clerk or deputy city clerk shall receive a written statement from every person desiring to enter an election, announcing his or her candidacy, during the qualifying period which shall commence at noon on the seventy-seventh (77th) day immediately preceding the election and close at noon on the sixty-seventh (67th) day immediately preceding the election. Such written statement shall state that the candidate is a qualified elector of the city, that such candidate is qualified under the charter and ordinances of the city and of this Code for the office to which he desires to be elected, that such candidate has paid the assessment, if any, levied against him or her as a candidate for such office, and such candidate shall swear or affirm to the truth thereof. A copy of such sworn statement shall be filed with the city clerk. A copy of this election ordinance shall be furnished to each prospective candidate upon qualification by the city clerk or deputy city clerk. 
(b)	The form of the written statement provided in the above subsection shall be substantially as follows: 
I, ____________ , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am a candidate for the office of ____________ in the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
I do further swear (or affirm) that I am a qualified voter of the City of Rockledge, Florida, and that I am qualified under the Charter and Ordinances of said city to hold the office of ____________ in the City of Rockledge, Florida, and that I have paid the assessment of $ ____________ levied against me in accordance with the Ordinances of said City for said office. 
I acknowledge having received a copy of the Election Ordinance of the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
_____
Signature of Candidate 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
_____
Notary Public 
(Notarial Seal) 
_____
City Clerk 
(Deputy City Clerk) 
(c)	Should the procedures established in section 2-16(a) above become unreasonable to comply with, and ensure a ten-day qualifying period for candidates ie: changes in state or federal voting statutes; acts of God; county supervisor of elections submittal dates, etc.), then the city clerk in her capacity as the city supervisor of elections shall establish a ten-day qualifying period as close as practicable to that period which would be set by section 2-16(a). The city clerk shall bring any need for changes to the qualifying period to the city council at the first opportunity for its approval. The city clerk shall then publicize, in the established fashion, any qualifying period established by this section. If the necessity for changing the qualifying period is recurring due to any single change in circumstances, then this section may be utilized until such time as section 2-16(a) is amended as necessary to address the circumstances. 
(Code 1964, § 7-28; Ord. No. 703-84, § 3, 9-5-84; Ord. No. 798-86, § 1, 7-16-86; Ord. No. 1273-02, §§ 1, 2, 6-5-02; Ord. No. 1381-05, § 1, 6-15-05; Ord. No. 1411-06, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-06)  
Sec. 2-17. - Payment of fee prerequisite to qualifying. 
(a)	There shall be levied against every candidate qualifying in accordance with section 2-20 a qualifying fee in an amount equal to one-half of one month's pay for the office which the candidate seeks. 
(b)	The city clerk shall receive such fee and shall issue a receipt therefor to the candidate. 
(Code 1964, §§ 7-30, 7-31; Ord. No. 703-84, § 4, 9-5-84)  
Sec. 2-18. - Preparation, approval of ballots; candidates to be listed. 
The ballot for each election shall be prepared by the city clerk. Every person who shall have filed his or her sworn statement and paid his or her qualifying fee, if any, shall be entitled to have his name printed on the official ballot for the office for which such person has qualified. 
(Code 1964, § 7-35; Ord. No. 703-84, § 5, 9-5-84)  
Sec. 2-19. - Preparation of absentee ballots. 
Ballots for absent electors shall be prepared immediately after the last day for qualification of candidates on a form to be adopted by the city council to insure the secrecy of the ballot. 
(Code 1964, § 7-36)  
Sec. 2-20. - List of absentee voters required. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to deliver to the clerk at each polling place prior to the opening of the polls on election day a complete list of the names of the electors who have cast absentee ballots. 
(Code 1964, § 7-37)  
Sec. 2-21. - Casting of absentee ballots. 
An absentee elector's ballot shall be received in the office of the city clerk or in the office of the county supervisor of elections, in the event the election is being conducted by the county supervisor of elections, prior to 7:00 p.m. on the day of election. The city clerk or the county supervisor of elections, as the case may be, shall cause the time of receipt of each ballot received thereafter to be indelibly marked on the outside of the sealed envelope containing the ballot, and such ballots shall be delivered to the city council at the time of the canvass. Such ballots shall be null and void and shall be delivered separately to the city council from other absentee ballots. 
(Code 1964, § 7-38)  
Sec. 2-22. - Early voting. 
The City of Rockledge hereby exercises its right to exempt itself from the provisions of F.S. (2003) § 101.657, and may contract with the Brevard County Supervisor of Elections to conduct early voting for the City of Rockledge at the office of the supervisor of elections and any other early voting sites the supervisor may establish. 
(Ord. No. 1359-04, § 1, 10-20-04) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1359-2004, § 1, adopted October 20, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance was treated as adding a new § 2-22 at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 2-23—2-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 2-36. - Hours. 
Polling places shall be open for the casting of ballots by electors between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on the date of any general or special election in the city. Any elector who appears at the polling place before 7:00 p.m. shall be entitled to cast his vote. It shall be the duty of the clerk at each polling place to mark the time at 7:00 p.m. and announce or cause to be announced to the electors arriving thereafter that the polling place is closed. 
(Code 1964, § 7-44) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 100.011.  
Sec. 2-37. - Voting to be secret; facilities for write-ins required. 
All elections shall be conducted in a manner so that the voting is secret. Instructions and equipment shall be provided at the polling place for electors to cast write-in votes in such a manner as to maintain the secret ballot and further in such a manner so that it is not necessary for the elector to specifically request same from an election official. 
(Code 1964, § 7-45) 
State Law reference— Voting to be secret, F.S. § 101.041.  
Sec. 2-38. - Paper ballots. 
In the event the voting at the polling places in an election shall be by paper ballot the procedures set forth in F.S. Ch. 101 are hereby adopted and made applicable. 
(Code 1964, § 7-46)  
Sec. 2-39. - Maintenance of good order at polls; authorities; persons allowed in polling rooms; unlawful solicitation of voters. 
(a)	Each election board appointed by the county supervisor of elections shall possess full authority to maintain order at the polls and enforce obedience to its lawful commands during an election and the canvass of the votes. 
(b)	The sheriff of the county is hereby authorized to deputize a deputy sheriff for each precinct who shall be present during the time the polls are open and until the election is completed, who shall be subject to all lawful commands of the elections clerk or inspectors appointed by the county supervisor of elections, and who shall maintain good order. The deputy may summon assistance from among bystanders to aid him when necessary to maintain peace and order at the polls. 
(c)	(1) 
No person may enter any polling room or polling place where the polling place is also a polling room during voting hours except the following: 
a.	Official poll watchers; 
b.	Inspectors; 
c.	Elections clerks; 
d.	The county supervisor of elections or his deputy; 
e.	Persons there to vote, persons in the care of a voter; or 
f.	Law enforcement officers or emergency service personnel there with permission of the clerk or a majority of the inspectors. 
(2)	The restriction in this subsection does not apply where the polling room is in an area commonly traversed by the public in order to gain access to businesses or homes or in an area traditionally utilized as a public area for discussion. 
(3)	No person, political committee, committee of continuous existence, or other group or organization may solicit voters within fifty (50) feet of the entrance to any polling place, or polling room where the polling place is also a polling room on the date of any election. 
a.	Solicitation shall not be restricted if: 
1.	Conducted from a separately marked area within the fifty-foot zone so as not to disturb, hinder, impede, obstruct or interfere with voter access to the polling place or polling room entrance; and 
2.	The solicitation activities and subject matter are clearly and easily identifiable by the voters as an activity in which they may voluntarily participate; or 
3.	Conducted on property within the fifty-foot zone which is a residence, established business, private property, sidewalk, park or property traditionally utilized as a public area for discussion. 
b.	Solicitation shall not be permitted within the fifty-foot zone on a public sidewalk or other similar means of access to the polling room if it is clearly identifiable to the pollworkers that the solicitation is impeding, obstructing or interfering with voter access to the polling room or polling place. 
(4)	For the purpose of this subsection, the term "solicit" shall include, but not be limited to, seeking or attempting to seek any vote, fact, opinion or contribution; distributing or attempting to distribute any political or campaign material, leaflet or handout; conducting a poll; seeking or attempting to seek a signature on any petition; and selling or attempting to sell any item. 
(5)	Pursuant to Florida Statutes, the county supervisor of elections shall inform the elections clerk of each precinct of the area within which soliciting is unlawful, based on the particular characteristics of that polling place. The supervisor or the clerk may take any reasonable action necessary to ensure order at the polling places which shall include: 
a.	Designating a specific area for soliciting pursuant to subparagraph (3) of this subsection; or 
b.	Having disruptive and unruly persons removed by law enforcement officers from the polling room or place or from the fifty-foot zone surrounding the polling place. 
(d)	Any person willfully violating any provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1964, § 7-48; Ord. No. 952-90, § 1, 3-21-90)  
Sec. 2-40. - Poll watchers. 
Each duly qualified candidate shall be entitled to designate five (5) poll watchers for each polling place. Only one of such watchers may be within such polling place at any one time. Lists of poll watchers shall be submitted to the city clerk or to the county supervisor of elections, if the election is being conducted by the county supervisor of elections, not less than seven (7) days before the election, in a form to be signed by the candidate. It shall be the duty of the election clerk and inspectors to announce the name of an elector so that the poll watcher may hear same, or provide a list of those electors who have voted. Poll watchers shall conduct themselves at the polling place so as not to interfere with the orderly conduct of the election. 
(Code 1964, § 7-49; Ord. No. 703-84, § 6, 9-5-84) 
State Law reference— Poll watchers generally, F.S. § 101.131.  
Sec. 2-41. - Counting ballots and tabulating results. 
At the close of any election, the inspectors and clerks thereof shall count the votes cast for each candidate or issue, shall record same on the forms provided by the city clerk and shall certify the results and swear to same, shall announce said results to the public outside the polling place immediately thereafter, and shall deliver to the city clerk their certification of said count and their oaths thereto, together with the voting list and the ballots cast and/or machine records, sealed in an envelope, which shall be provided by the city clerk. The city clerk shall deliver the certificates of count and oaths and machine records in their sealed envelopes to the chairman of the city council as soon as possible. 
(Code 1964, § 7-50)  
Sec. 2-42. - Canvassing and certification of results. 
The city council shall meet at 8:00 p.m. on the day following the election day and shall canvass the returns of such election and shall count absentee ballots and shall promptly certify the results of such election. 
(Code 1964, § 7-51)  
Secs. 2-43—2-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY COUNCIL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Rules of procedure for council, Subpt. A, Art. I, § 9; removal of councilmembers, Subpt. A, Art. I, § 13; officers of council, Subpt. A, Art. II, § 2; ordinances, Subpt. A, Art. V; voting by mayor, Subpt. B, § 103. 
 
Sec. 2-53. - Regular meetings. 
(a)	Date and time. Prior to December 31 of each calendar year the Rockledge City Council shall establish its meeting schedule for regular meetings for the next calendar year by resolution, passed by a majority of the members present and voting. The resolution shall establish the date and time for the meetings and shall comply with city Charter provisions regarding city council regular meetings. Amendments of any resolution setting the regular meeting schedule, in full or in part, may be accomplished by subsequent resolution passed with like dignity. 
(b)	Place. Regular meetings of the city council shall be held in such place as shall be designated by them, pursuant to city Charter provisions. 
(c)	Length. Unless extended by vote of a majority of members present, regular council meetings shall adjourn no later than 11:00 p.m. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.1; Ord. No. 1267-02, § 1, 2-6-02; Ord. No. 1608-2012, §§ 1, 2, 11-21-12 )  
Sec. 2-54. - Special meetings. 
The mayor, chairman or acting chairman of the city council, city manager or the city clerk may call a special meeting of the council whenever in the opinion of such official the public business may require it, or at the express written request of any four (4) members of the council. Whenever a special meeting shall be called, a summons or a notice of such meeting shall be given each member of the council, stating the date and hour of the meeting and the purpose for which such meeting is called, and any business which may properly come before any regular meeting of the city council, or any business whatever which the council could properly act upon, shall be proper business at any special meeting. Such notice shall be given not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting unless due to the emergency nature of the situation such notice cannot be given. Should any member of the city council absent himself from the limits of the city, such action shall render it unnecessary that he be served with notice of a special meeting. In such case any action taken by a majority of the members shall not be subject to question by the absent member. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.2)  
Sec. 2-55. - Quorum; compelling attendance. 
A majority of all the members elected to the council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the council. In the absence of a quorum, the presiding officer may, at the instance of any three (3) members present, compel the attendance of absent members. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.7) 
State Law reference— Majority to constitute quorum, F.S. § 166.041(4).  
Sec. 2-56. - Meetings to be public. 
All meetings of the council shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.8) 
State Law reference— State sunshine law, F.S. § 286.011.  
Sec. 2-57. - Agenda. 
All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents or other matters to be submitted to the council shall be delivered to the city clerk no later than the Thursday immediately preceding the regular council meeting, whereupon the city manager shall immediately arrange a list of such matters according to the order of business and furnish each member of the council, the mayor and the city attorney with a copy of same prior to the council meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit. None of the foregoing matters shall be presented to the council by administrative officials except those of an urgent nature, and the same, when so presented, shall have the written approval of the chairman of the council before presentation. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section the council may allot time at council meetings for the presentation to the council of business or matters not scheduled on the agenda. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.3)  
Sec. 2-58. - Election, duties of presiding officer. 
The presiding officer of the council shall be the chairman of the council, or in his absence the vice-chairman of the council, or in the absence of both chairman and vice-chairman, the senior member of the council as provided in the city charter. The chairman and vice-chairman shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting of the city council after the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each year by the members from their membership. The chairman shall assume the chair of presiding officer immediately after his election. The presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the council. He shall state every question coming before the council, announce the decision of the council on all subjects and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the council, in which event a majority vote of the council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. The chairman may follow Robert's Rules of Order on questions of parliamentary procedure. He shall vote on all questions, his name being called last. He shall sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the council during his presence. In the event of the absence of the chairman of the council, the presiding officer shall sign ordinances or resolutions as then adopted. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.4)  
Sec. 2-59. - Call to order; relinquishment of chair by temporary chairman. 
The presiding officer shall take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for the meeting and shall immediately call the council to order. If the meeting is being chaired by an officer other than the highest ranking presiding officer of the council, then upon the arrival of a higher ranking presiding officer, the temporary chairman shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the council. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.5)  
Sec. 2-60. - Commencement of meeting; order of business. 
Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the members of the council, the mayor, city manager, city clerk and city attorney shall take their regular stations in the council chambers, and the business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: 
(1)	Roll call. 
(2)	Invocation. 
(3)	Salute to flag. 
(4)	Approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
(5)	Approval of collector's report (on second meeting of month) or approval of the bills (on first meeting of month). 
(6)	Introduction and adoption of resolutions and ordinances. 
(7)	Report of officers, boards and committees. 
(8)	Unfinished business. 
(9)	New business. 
(10)	Petitions, remonstrances and communications. 
(11)	Miscellaneous. 
(12)	Appropriations. 
(13)	Adjournment. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.8)  
Sec. 2-61. - Roll call and record of attendance. 
Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk shall record and enter in the minutes the names of the members present and the names of the members absent. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.6)  
Sec. 2-62. - Reading of minutes. 
Unless a reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a member of the council, such minutes may be approved without reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a synopsis thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.9)  
Sec. 2-63. - Rules of debate. 
(a)	Participation by presiding officer. The chairman of the council, or such other member of the council as may be presiding, may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by this article imposed on all members, and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a councilman by reason of his acting as the presiding officer. 
(b)	Getting the floor; improper references to be avoided. Every member desiring to speak shall address the chair and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. Upon completion of his address a councilman shall announce to the chairman that he has yielded the floor. 
(c)	Interruptions. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is to call him to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he shall cease speaking until the question of order has been determined and, if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed. 
(d)	Privilege of closing debate. The councilman moving the adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of speaking last to the motion under debate. 
(e)	Motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the council may be made only during the meeting at which such action was taken or during the next succeeding meeting of the council. Such motion must be made by one of the prevailing side, but may be seconded by any member, and may be made at any time and have precedence over all other motions or while a member has the floor, it shall be debatable. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any member of the council from making or remaking the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the council. 
(f)	Entry of remarks in minutes. A councilman may request, through the presiding officer, the privilege of having an abstract of his statement on any subject under consideration by the council entered in the minutes. If the council consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes. 
(g)	When synopsis of debate entered in minutes. The city clerk may be directed by the presiding officer, with consent of the council, to enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any question coming regularly before the council. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.10)  
Sec. 2-64. - Addressing council authorized. 
Any person desiring to address the council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer to do so; provided, that during the agenda time allotted to petitions, remonstrances and communications, any qualified person may address the council without securing such prior permission, unless the presiding officer rules otherwise, as follows: 
(a)	Written communications. Interested parties or their authorized representatives may address the council by written communications in regard to matters then under discussion. 
(b)	Oral communications. Taxpayers or residents of the city, or their authorized legal representatives, may address the council by oral communications on any matter concerning the city's business, or any matter over which the council has control; provided, that preference shall be given to those persons who may have notified the city manager in advance of their desire to speak in order that the same may appear on the agenda of the council. 
(c)	Reading of protests, etc. Interested persons or their authorized representatives may address the council by reading of protests, petitions or communications relating to zoning, sewer and street proceedings, hearings on protests, appeals and petitions or similar matters, in regard to matters then under consideration. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.11)  
Sec. 2-65. - Addressing council after motion made. 
After a motion is made by the council, no person shall address the council without first securing the permission of the presiding officer to do so. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.12)  
Sec. 2-66. - Manner of addressing council; time limit. 
Each person addressing the council shall step up to the podium to the microphone, shall give his name, address, the subject matter of his interest and the party or interests he represents, in an audible tone of voice for the records, and unless further time is granted by the council, shall limit his address to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a body and not to any member thereof. No person other than the council and the person having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the council, without the permission of the presiding officer. No question shall be asked a councilman except through the presiding officer. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.13)  
Sec. 2-67. - Decorum required. 
(a)	By councilmembers. While the council is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the council or its presiding officer, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(b)	By public. Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the council shall be forthwith, by the presiding officer, ordered to cease and desist from addressing the council further, unless permission to continue is granted by a majority vote of the council. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.15)  
Sec. 2-68. - Enforcement of decorum. 
The chief of police or such member or members of the police department as he may designate shall be sergeant-at-arms at council meetings. He, or they, shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the council meeting. Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms or any of them present to place any person who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest and cause him to be prosecuted under the provisions of this Code or applicable statute, the complaint to be signed by the presiding officer. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.16)  
Sec. 2-69. - Persons authorized beyond podium. 
No person, except city officials, their representatives and newspaper reporters, shall be permitted beyond the podium in front of the council platform without the express consent of the council while the council is in session. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.17)  
Sec. 2-70. - Appointment of special committees. 
All special committees shall be appointed by the presiding officer, unless otherwise directed by the council. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.18)  
Sec. 2-71. - Members may file protests against council action. 
Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for his dissent from, or protest against, any action of the council entered on the minutes. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.19)  
Sec. 2-72. - Silence constitutes affirmative vote. 
Unless a member of the council states that he is not voting, his silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.14)  
Sec. 2-73. - Preparation of ordinances. 
All ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney or under his direction and control. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council or requested by the city manager or prepared by the city attorney on his own initiative. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.20)  
Sec. 2-74. - Approval of documents before presentation to council. 
All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney or his authorized representative and shall have been examined and approved for administration by the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.20)  
Sec. 2-75. - Introduction of matters for council approval. 
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council; except, that the mayor, city manager or city attorney may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the council and any councilman may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.20)  
Sec. 2-76. - Procedure for resolutions making appropriations. 
Any resolution providing for the appropriation of money shall designate the particular fund from which the appropriation is to be made and shall not be granted immediate consideration unless the votes of the number of members required for the affirmance of such resolution shall be cast in favor of immediate consideration. An objection voiced by one member shall require a roll call upon the motion for immediate consideration. If no objection is voiced, the clerk shall record a unanimous consent to the motion for immediate consideration and the presiding officer shall proceed to state the principal question. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.20)  
Sec. 2-77. - Reports, resolutions to be filed and recorded. 
All reports and resolutions shall be filed with the clerk and entered on the minutes. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.21)  
Sec. 2-78. - Public hearing on annual budget. 
There shall be a public hearing on the proposed administrative budget for each year, which public hearing shall be held during the first regular city council meeting of September of each year. The city clerk shall cause one advertisement of such public hearing to be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in the city between the seventh and fourteenth day preceding such public hearing. 
(Code 1964, § 2-16)  
Sec. 2-79. - Authorization and procedure for ordinance adoption. 
(a)	Authorization. The city council shall have the right to adopt such ordinances authorized by the powers granted under the charter, the constitution and statutes of the state as are deemed necessary or advisable for the government of the city. 
(b)	To be written; title; amendments. Each ordinance shall be introduced in writing and shall embrace but one subject and matters properly connected therewith. The subject shall be clearly stated in the title. No ordinance shall be revised or amended by reference to its title only. Ordinances to revise or amend shall set out in full the revised or amended act, section, subsection or paragraph of a section or subsection. 
(c)	Reading; notice; procedure. 
(1)	Except as provided in subsection (3) of this paragraph, a proposed ordinance may be read by title, or in full, on at least two (2) separate days and shall, at least ten (10) days prior to adoption, be noticed once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice of proposed enactment shall state the date, time and place of the meeting, the title or titles of proposed ordinances and the place or places within the municipality where such proposed ordinances may be inspected by the public. Such notice shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard with respect to the proposed ordinance. See F.S. § 166.041(3)(a). 
(2)	The city council may, by a two-thirds vote, enact an emergency ordinance without complying with the requirements of paragraph (1) of this subsection, and such emergency ordinance shall not be subject to mayoral veto. However, no emergency ordinance shall be enacted which enacts or amends a land use plan or which rezones private real property. See F.S. § 166.041(3)(b). 
(3)	Ordinances initiated by the governing body of the city or its designee which rezone specific parcels of private real property or which substantially change permitted use categories in zoning districts shall be enacted in accordance with the procedure prescribed by F.S. § 166.041(3)(c), as same may be amended from time to time. The process for adoption of a comprehensive plan or amendment thereto, shall be as prescribed by F.S. §§ 163.3184 and 163.3187 as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(d)	Passage at special meetings. Ordinances and resolutions may be adopted at special meetings of the city council, provided such adoption is in compliance with the procedural requirements established by state law and this Code. 
(e)	Quorum; vote. The majority of the members of the city council shall constitute a quorum, and except as is otherwise provided by state law or this Code, the affirmative vote of the majority of a quorum present shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution; provided, that two-thirds of the membership of the council is required to enact an emergency ordinance. On final passage, the vote of each member of the city council voting shall be entered on the official records of the meeting. 
(f)	Signing or veto; overriding veto. All ordinances passed by the city council, other than emergency ordinances, shall be promptly submitted to the mayor for his approval; if approved he shall sign the same and return them to the city clerk. If the mayor disapproves such ordinances he shall return the same to the city council with his objections thereto in writing; and the city council shall cause the same to be entered in full upon the minutes and shall proceed to consider the mayor's objections, and to act upon the same, and if the city council shall pass it by a two-thirds vote, which vote shall be entered upon the minutes, the ordinance shall then become a law the mayor's veto to the contrary notwithstanding, and if the mayor fails or refuses to return any ordinance to the city clerk within ten (10) days after he receives the same, such ordinance shall become a law without his approval. 
(g)	When ordinances effective. Emergency ordinances shall become effective ten (10) days after passage, or as otherwise provided therein. All other ordinances, if approved by the mayor, shall become effective ten (10) days after passage by the city council, or as otherwise provided therein. If the mayor fails or refuses to signify to the city clerk in writing his approval or disapproval of any ordinance within ten (10) days after its passage by the city council, such ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days after passage by the city council, or as otherwise provided therein. If the mayor shall veto an ordinance, other than an emergency ordinance, and the city council shall after consideration of the mayor's objections to the ordinance override the veto of the mayor by a two-thirds vote, the ordinance shall become a law, the mayor's veto to the contrary notwithstanding, and shall become effective ten (10) days after its final passage overriding the mayor's veto, or as otherwise provided therein. 
(h)	Recordation. Every ordinance shall, upon its final passage, be recorded in a book kept for that purpose, and shall be signed by the presiding officer and the clerk of the governing body. 
(Code 1964, § 2-17; Ord. No. 471-78, § 2, 3-15-78; Ord. No. 1034-92, § 1, 3-18-92) 
Editor's note— F.S. § 166.041 provides the procedures for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, but subsection (6) thereof authorizes additional requirements by future ordinance or charter amendment. The above section was derived from ordinances enacted in 1974, 1976, 1977 and 1978, all of which were subsequent to the enactment of said § 166.041. 
Charter reference— Ordinances, Subpt. A, Art. V.  
Sec. 2-80. - Motions to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11.22)  
Secs. 2-81—2-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Position established. 
There is hereby established the position of city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 2-21)  
Sec. 2-92. - Appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
(a)	The city council shall appoint a city manager, who is a United States citizen, solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, and his compensation shall be fixed by mutual agreement of the city council and the city manager, and shall be paid pursuant to the terms of such agreement. The city manager may be removed by a majority vote of the city council if the entire city council is present, or, if the entire city council is not present, then by the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the city council. Upon removal of the city manager, the city council shall appoint an acting city manager. 
(b)	Within ninety (90) days of a vacancy, the city council shall appoint a city manager. The term of appointment shall be for one year, and the city manager reappointed on an annual basis at the pleasure of the city council. Provided, however, if the city manager has a valid employment contract with the city council, then the employment contract will take precedence over the requirement in the code for appointments and reappointments. 
(Code 1964, § 2-22; Ord. No. 791-86, § 2, 6-18-86; Ord. No. 1111-95, § 1, 9-20-95)  
Sec. 2-93. - Residency. 
The city manager need not be a resident of the city, but shall become a resident within thirty (30) days after taking the oath of office. 
(Code 1964, § 2-22; Ord. No. 791-86, § 2, 6-18-86)  
Sec. 2-94. - Acting city manager. 
By letter to the city council, the city manager shall appoint a qualified administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the city manager during the city manager's temporary absence or disability. If desired, the city council may revoke such appointment at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or the disability shall cease. 
(Code 1964, § 2-23; Ord. No. 688-84, § 1, 5-16-84; Ord. No. 791-86, § 2, 6-18-86)  
Sec. 2-95. - Powers; duties; responsibilities. 
The city manager shall be designated as the chief administrative officer of the city, and head of the administrative branch of the city government. The city manager shall report directly to the city council concerning proper administration of the city, and subject to provisions of the charter, have the following powers: 
(a)	Appoint and remove department heads and employees: 
(1)	Except as provided in the city charter, appoint and remove department heads as necessary. The city manager shall exercise authority over all department heads and employees of the city. Supervision and direction of all departments shall be the responsibility of the city manager; however, the city manager may appoint persons to be department heads. 
(2)	Supervise and manage city personnel and exercise the prerogative of final approval as to the employment, suspension and termination of city employees all pursuant to the city personnel manual, and applicable collective bargaining agreements. 
(3)	Neither the city council nor any of its members shall direct or request any personnel action by the city manager or any of his subordinates, nor interfere in any manner with the internal administrative service, except solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give directions to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. This section shall not preclude the city council from making known to the city manager its views concerning personnel actions and the internal administration of city government. 
(4)	Fix the compensation of city officers and employees within pay schedules established by the city council, except those persons appointed by the city council. 
(b)	Administrative code. The city manager shall develop and keep current the Rockledge Code of Ordinances and other legislative actions of the city council for the purpose of implementing the laws of the city. 
(c)	Meetings. The city manager shall attend all regular and special called city council meetings, unless excused by the city council; in the case of his absence, the city manager shall be responsible to have a designated replacement. The city manager shall also be responsible for attending any other meetings necessary to conduct city business. 
(d)	Municipal budget. The city manager shall prepare the budget of expenditures and revenues annually and submit the program to the city council for adoption; upon adoption of the budget, it shall be the responsibility of the city manager to implement and monitor the budget. 
(e)	Control of expenditures from city treasury. The city manager shall not draw money, nor permit money to be drawn from the city treasury except in pursuance of appropriation made by law. The city manager is hereby granted the power to authorize and make expenditures of public funds of the city, not exceeding the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in any single incident or occasion, without prior specific approval of such expenditures by the city council; provided, however, that any such expenditure by the city manager shall be only for a valid municipal purpose for which funds have been appropriated by law in the then current fiscal budget of the city, and the amount of any such expenditure does not overspend the amount budgeted for such purpose. The twenty-five thousand dollar ($25,000.00) maximum limitation per expenditure imposed in the preceding sentence is subject to the exception for emergency situations as hereinafter provided, and the specific exceptions described in section 2-172 of this code. In an emergency situation the city manager or his designee may make or authorize without prior city council approval the expenditure of public funds of the city in an amount not exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in any single instance provided that any such expenditure shall be only for a valid municipal purpose as an emergency measure, and shall be made only from funds previously appropriated by law to a contingency, emergency, or discretionary fund budget classification, or from funds appropriated generally or specifically for the purpose for which the funds are expended. Any such expenditure authorized by the city manager or his designee in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in an emergency situation shall be reported to the city council at the next regular meeting of the council with the city manager's request for ratification and approval of such expenditure by the city council. 
(f)	Annual financial and administrative activity report. The city manager shall be responsible for directing an audit of the financial condition of the city and submit a report to the city council. 
(g)	Implementation of policy. The city manager shall ensure that city council policy is implemented, and that all laws, council acts and directives, and charter provisions are implemented in a timely fashion. 
(h)	Capital program. The city manager shall prepare a capital improvement program for the city council, and, upon adoption, shall implement said program. 
(i)	Provision of information. The city manager shall keep the city council informed through weekly and/or monthly reports, as necessary, and is to provide all necessary information regarding the finances and operations of the city. 
(j)	Contracts. The city manager shall execute contracts on behalf of the city pursuant to ordinances or resolutions and oversee their implementation. 
(k)	Travel expenses. Within budgetary limitations, and subject to applicable statutory provisions, the city manager shall have authority to approve or disapprove travel and travel expenses, including mileage, food and lodging away from home, for travel by all city personnel, including department heads, if such travel is in connection with city work. Approval of travel and payment or reimbursement of travel expenses of city personnel must be obtained in advance in all cases. Non-overnight travel by the city manager within the state shall not require council approval. Overnight travel expenses of the city manager will require prior authorization by the city council except in emergency or extraordinary situations in which case the city manager may expend public funds for his own reasonable and necessary overnight travel expenses without council approval provided the city manager shall first notify and obtain the concurrence of the mayor or chairman of the city council as to the necessity for such travel and payment of travel expenses. 
(l)	Other. Perform such other duties as are specified by the charter, ordinances, and resolutions of the city, or as requested by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 791-86, § 2, 6-18-86; Ord. No. 974-90, § 2, 8-15-90; Ord. No. 1007-91, § 3, 8-20-91; Ord. No. 1057-93, § 1, 7-7-93; Ord. No. 1668-2015 , § 1, 3-18-15)  
Secs. 2-96—2-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 2-106. - Position established. 
There is hereby established the position of city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 791-86, § 2, 6-18-86)  
Sec. 2-107. - Appointment; qualifications. 
(a)	The city council shall appoint a city attorney who is a member of the Florida Bar and a citizen of the United States. The city attorney shall be appointed, and may be removed, by a majority vote of the city council if the entire city council is present, or if the entire city council is not present, then by the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the city council. Upon removal of the city attorney, the city council shall appoint an acting city attorney. 
(b)	Within ninety (90) days of a vacancy in the office of city attorney, the city council shall appoint a city attorney. As provided by Subpart A, Article I, section 5 of the codified city charter, the term of appointment of the city attorney shall be for one year, and the city attorney reappointed on an annual basis at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 792-86, § 2, 6-18-86) 
Charter reference— Appointment of officers, Subpt. A, Art. I, § 5.  
Sec. 2-108. - Compensation. 
The compensation of the city attorney shall be fixed by mutual agreement of the city council and the city attorney, and shall be paid pursuant to the terms of such agreement. 
(Ord. No. 792-86, § 2, 6-18-86)  
Sec. 2-109. - Acting city attorney. 
By letter to the city council the city attorney may appoint a qualified assistant city attorney to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the city attorney during the city attorney's temporary absence or disability. If desired, the city council may revoke such appointment at any time and appoint another attorney to serve until the city attorney shall return or the disability shall cease. 
(Ord. No. 792-86, § 2, 6-18-86)  
Sec. 2-110. - Powers; duties; responsibilities. 
(a)	The city attorney shall be the corporation counsel and legal advisor of the governing body of the city. He shall prepare all ordinances of the city, represent the city in litigation involving the city, prepare such contracts, documents and legal instruments as the city council may direct and in general be the legal officer and head of the legal department of the city. In matters wherein the city attorney has a conflict of interest, or in litigations wherein the city attorney feels that specialized representation will be in the best interests of the city, the city attorney may recommend employment of an assistant city attorney, or the association of one or more attorneys specializing in a particular area of practice to handle that particular matter of business or litigation, or to assist the city attorney therein. 
(b)	Meetings. The city attorney shall attend all regular and special meetings of the city council unless excused by the chairman of the council, and shall attend such meetings of committees of the city council and city staff as he is specifically instructed to do by the city council. 
(c)	Budget. No later than June 1 of each year the city attorney shall submit to the city manager his recommendations for cost and expense items of the city attorney's office for inclusion in the general administrative budget of the city for the next ensuing fiscal year, and such recommendation shall be considered by the finance committee and city council prior to adoption of the budget for the next succeeding fiscal year. 
(d)	Other duties. The city attorney shall perform such other legal duties as are specified by the charter, the Code or as requested by the city council. 
(e)	Annual engagement letter. On or before September 30th of each year, if the then serving Rockledge City Attorney desires to continue to serve in that capacity during the city's next ensuing fiscal year said attorney shall prepare and furnish the Rockledge City Council duplicate originals of a professional engagement letter describing the scope of legal services proposed to be performed by said city attorney during the city's next ensuing fiscal year, the manner in which said attorney will perform those services, the amount said attorney will charge the city for such services, and other relevant information pertaining to the proposed attorney-client relationship between the City of Rockledge and said attorney, including but not in way of limitation, assurances that said attorney will comply with the provisions of section 2-111 of this Code pertaining to said attorney's representation of other clients and the avoidance of representation in matters constituting, or appearing to constitute, a conflict of interest. Said engagement letter shall be signed by the attorney submitting same and be in form and content satisfactory and acceptable to the Rockledge City Council which shall signify its acceptance of same by authorizing the mayor or chairman of said council to sign and return a duplicate original of said council to sign and return a duplicate original of said engagement letter to the attorney submitting the same. If the terms of the submitted engagement letter are unacceptable to the city council, the attorney and council may negotiate such terms toward a mutually acceptable engagement, provided however, that the term of office of the Rockledge City Attorney shall always be terminable at will by the city council or the attorney unless otherwise expressly provided in a written instrument signed by the attorney and approved by action of the city council. An engagement letter as described above shall be submitted and approved as aforesaid before any city attorney is appointed by the Rockledge City Council to render legal services for the city after September 30th, 1993. 
(Ord. No. 792-86, § 2, 6-18-86; Ord. No. 1056-93, § 1, 7-7-93)  
Sec. 2-111. - Other clients. 
The city attorney shall be at liberty to render legal services to, and accept employment by, clients other than the city; provided, that the city attorney shall not accept employment by any person or party in any matter conflicting with the interests of the city, nor shall the city attorney represent clients other than the city in matters appearing before the city council or any board, committee, or agency of the city. 
(Ord. No. 792-86, § 2, 6-18-86)  
Secs. 2-112—2-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Insurance premium taxes for police and fire department retirement, § 19-11 et seq.; retirement trust and retirement plan for city employees, App. A. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-121—2-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SOCIAL SECURITY FOR CITY EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective April 1, 1953, to the employees and officials of the city not excluded by law, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of old age and survivor's insurance as authorized by the federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734, of the 81st Congress, and by F.S. Ch. 650; and to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment as defined by F.S. § 650.02(2), performed in the employ of the city by employees thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 19-1)  
Sec. 2-132. - Federal act adopted. 
The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of Title II of the Social Security Act as amended by Public Law No. 734, 81st Congress, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees of the city, and of its departments and agencies, save and except any of such officers and employees now covered or authorized to be covered by any retirement system provided by law, and further excepting any official or employee who occupies any position, office or employment not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1964, § 19-7)  
Sec. 2-133. - Agreement with state agency authorized. 
The mayor, or other chief executive officer of the city, is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the Florida Industrial Commission, or its successors, for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by the system of old age and survivor's insurance to the employees and officials of the city, as provided by section 2-131. The agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan by the city as are found by the state agency to be necessary for the proper and efficient administration thereof, and shall be effective with respect to services in employment covered by such agreement performed after April 1, 1953. 
(Code 1964, § 19-3) 
Editor's note— The agreement to extend social security coverage to the employees of the city, entered into between the city and the Florida Industrial Commission, received federal approval on June 22, 1953. 
The successor to the Florida Industrial Commission as the state agency is now the division of retirement of the department of administration under F.S. § 650.02(4).  
Sec. 2-134. - Withholdings authorized. 
Withholdings from salaries, wages or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose of the employees' contributions to the social security plan provided by this article, are hereby authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency designated by such laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1964, § 19-4)  
Sec. 2-135. - Appropriations required. 
There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from the administration fund, such amounts and at such times as may be required to pay promptly the contributions required of the city, as employer, by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, which funds shall be paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 1964, § 19-5)  
Sec. 2-136. - Records; reports; adherence to regulations. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall adhere to the rules and regulations of the state agency for the enforcement of such laws and regulations. 
(Code 1964, § 19-6)  
Sec. 2-137. - Custodian; withholding and reporting agent. 
The city clerk is hereby designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees, and of the appropriate funds of the contributions of the city, and the clerk is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 19-8)  
Secs. 2-138—2-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1163-98, § 1, adopted Aug. 19, 1998, repealed art. VII, which pertained to the beautification board. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 2-151—2-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FINANCES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Revenue and taxation, Subpt. A, Art. VII. 
Cross reference— Taxation, Ch. 19. 
 
Sec. 2-171. - Trust account. 
The treasurer of the city shall establish and maintain an account to be designated as the "City of Rockledge Trust Account," which account shall be accounted for separately from all other bank accounts of the city. All cash bonds and cash security deposits to be held by the city, and all trust funds and funds to be held by the city as escrowee, or as agent of or for one or more other parties, all of which bonds, deposits and funds are herein referred to as "trust funds," shall be promptly deposited into and kept on deposit in said trust account pending fulfillment and satisfaction of the condition or conditions under which the same come into the possession of the city. Proper accountings shall be maintained of all funds deposited in said trust account, and any income therefrom, in accordance with recognized and acceptable accounting methods. Funds in said trust account may be invested in certificates of deposit, or other forms of investment permitted by law unless the investment of such funds is expressly prohibited by the provisions of the bond or other trust agreement; provided, however, that no investment shall be made which will render the city unable to timely meet its obligation to return or disburse all trust funds in accordance with the terms of the applicable bond or other trust agreement. Unless otherwise expressly provided in the bond, deposit, trust, escrow, agency, or other agreement, any income derived from the investment of any trust funds shall belong to the city, and may be withdrawn from the trust account from time to time upon authorization by the city council. Trust funds from different bonds, deposits, trust, escrow or agency agreements may be commingled in said trust account, and such trust funds held by the city may be commingled with any other funds of the city. Trust funds shall be disbursed from said trust account to the proper party or parties entitled thereto upon fulfillment and satisfaction of the condition or conditions pertaining to the particular bond or other trust agreement involved upon authorization by the city manager; and, in the event of forfeiture or default on the part of the obligor under any bond, deposit, trust, escrow or agency agreement, the city council may authorize the withdrawal of funds from said trust account for disbursement to the city for the appropriate purpose. The terms and conditions of every bond, security deposit, trust, escrow or agency agreement accepted or entered into by the city shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by all parties to be bound thereby. 
(Ord. No. 604-81, § 1, 1-6-82; Ord. No. 1106-95, § 1, 7-5-95)  
Sec. 2-172. - Purchases and competitive bidding policy and procedures. 
(a)	General policy. In an effort to insure that the city conducts its financial affairs in the best interest of its citizens, the following shall serve as the policy for the purchase of materials, equipment, and services by the city. However, consideration shall be given to the availability of service, ability of the provider to deliver the product being purchased, and how well bid specifications have been satisfied. In no event shall a low bid be the sole and only factor considered in determining the award of a contract: 
(1)	Purchases of less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) are to be approved by the individual department head of the department making such expenditure. 
(2)	Purchases from three hundred dollars ($300.00) to nine hundred and ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($999.99) shall require the submission of a purchase order requisition to the city manager for approval. 
(3)	Purchases from one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) are to be done through individual departments by obtaining a minimum of two (2) written quotes. A purchase order requisition is to be submitted to the city manager for approval with the supporting documentation and the recommendation as to the purchase. 
(4)	Purchases above five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) are to be done through individual departments by obtaining a minimum of three (3) written quotes based on listed specifications and will require the signature of the city manager prior to the issuance of a purchase order. 
(5)	Purchases above twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) will require a formal advertisement of an invitation for competitive bids and/or the approval of the city council prior to the issuance of a purchase order. 
(6)	All public works and construction project contracts which are required by Florida Statutes to be let only on the basis of competitive bids shall be handled in accordance with the requirement of the applicable statute. 
(7)	Certain contracts for services of public accountants and auditors are required by Florida Statutes to be negotiated on the basis of competitive bids and contracts for such accounting or auditing services will be negotiated and handled in accordance with the requirements of the applicable statute. 
(8)	Certain contracts for group health insurance for employees of governmental entities are required to be negotiated and let on the basis of competitive bids, and contracts for such group health insurance will be negotiated and handled in accordance with provisions of the Consultants' Competitive Negotiation Act and such contracts will be negotiated and handled in accordance with the requirements of said act. 
(b)	Exceptions. When it is in the best interests of the city as determined by the city manager that a particular purchase be made from any one of the parties described below, or by any of the means or methods described below, it shall be unnecessary for the city manager to obtain approval of the city council, or advertise invitation for bids with specifications, or obtain multiple proposals or quotes, regardless of the amount of the purchase except as specifically restricted below, provided that no such purchase in excess of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be made without a written purchase order and prior approval of the city manager or his designee, nor will any such purchase cause the amount of any budget line item to be exceeded. 
(1)	Purchase made from the state bid list/contracts. 
(2)	Purchases made from the county bid list/contracts. 
(3)	Purchases made by attaching another bid from another Florida local government. 
(4)	Used or demonstrator equipment, and/or materials needed for maintenance of existing equipment or vehicles when the purchase price is under twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(5)	Purchases from sole source providers of equipment or materials when the purchase price is under twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(6)	Purchases from operations franchised by the city. 
(7)	Purchases from other local government entities. 
(c)	Emergencies. In the event an emergency occurs, as determined by the city manager or his designee, which requires immediate action on the part of the city manager and staff, the policies and procedures adopted by this section may be waived by the city manager or his designee within the limitations and provisions of subsection 2-95(e) of this code applicable to emergency situations. 
(d)	Waiver by council. The city council may in any instance waive the policies, procedures and requirements of this section when in the opinion of said council such waiver will be in the best interests of the city and will not violate the provisions of any applicable state statute. 
(Ord. No. 986-91, § 1, 1-9-91; Ord. No. 1007-91, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-91; Ord. No. 1335-04, § 1, 1-7-04; Ord. No. 1668-2015 , § 2, 3-18-15)  
Sec. 2-173. - Redevelopment trust fund created. 
(a)	There is hereby established and created, in accordance with the provisions of the Act, a community redevelopment trust fund (the "fund") for the community redevelopment area, which fund shall be utilized and expended for the purposes of and in accordance with the plan, including any amendments or modifications thereto approved by the city council including any "community redevelopment", as that term is defined in F.S. § 163.340(9), under the plan. 
(b)	The monies to be allocated to and deposited into the fund shall be used to finance "community redevelopment" within the community redevelopment area according to tax increment revenues attributed to the community redevelopment area, which shall be appropriated by the agency. The agency shall utilize the funds and revenues paid into and earned by the fund for community redevelopment purposes as provided in the plan and as permitted by law. The fund shall exist for the duration of the "community redevelopment" undertaken by the agency pursuant to the plan to the extent permitted by the Act. (Monies shall be held in the fund by the city for and on behalf of the agency, and disbursed from the fund as provided by the agency.) 
(c)	There shall be paid into the funds each year by each of the "taxing authorities," as that term is defined in F.S. § 163.340(2), levying ad valorem taxes within the community redevelopment area, a sum equal to ninety-five (95) percent of the incremental increase in ad valorem taxes levied each year by that taxing authority, as calculated in accordance with Section 6.5-80(5) hereof and the Act, based on the base tax year established in Section 6.5-80(4) hereof (such annual sum being hereinafter referred to as the "tax increment"). 
(d)	The most recent assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of property prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be the preliminary assessment roll of taxable real property in Brevard County, prepared by the property appraiser of Brevard County, and filed with the department of revenue pursuant to F.S. (1997) § 193.1142, reflecting valuation of real property for purposes of ad valorem taxation as of January 1, 1998 (the "base year value"), and all deposits into the fund shall be in the amount of tax increment calculated as provided in Section 6.5-80(5) hereof based upon increases in valuation of taxable real property from the base year value. 
(e)	The tax increment shall be determined and appropriated annually by each taxing authority, and shall be an amount equal to ninety-five (95) percent of the difference between: 
(1)	That amount of ad valorem taxes levied each year by all taxing authorities on taxable real property located within the geographic boundaries of the community redevelopment area; and 
(2)	That amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year by or for all taxing authorities, upon the total of the assessed value of the taxable real property in the community redevelopment area as shown upon the assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by all taxing authorities, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(f)	All taxing authorities shall annually appropriate to and cause to be deposited in the fund the tax increment determined pursuant to the Act and Section 6.5-80(5) hereof at the beginning of each fiscal year thereof as provided in the Act. The obligation of each taxing authority to annually appropriate the tax increment for deposit in the fund shall commence immediately upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives and continue to the extent permitted by the Act so long as any indebtedness pledging "increment revenue" has been paid. 
(g)	The funds shall be established and maintained as a separate trust fund by the agency so that the fund may be promptly and effectively administered and utilized by the agency expeditiously and without undue delay for its statutory purpose pursuant to the plan. 
(h)	The governing body of the agency shall be the trustees of the fund and shall be responsible for the receipt, custody, disbursement, accountability, management, investments and proper application of all monies paid into the fund. 
(Ord. No. 1303-03, § 1, 2-19-03)  
Secs. 2-174—2-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - TRAVEL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 2-181. - Purpose; application. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to establish rules, regulations and procedures for the allowance of advancement or reimbursement of certain travel expenses incurred by the mayor, city council, members of boards and commissions, city officials, city employees and authorized representatives of the city in connection with their official duties and services for and in behalf of the city, and shall apply only to those persons and not to any member of the family, relative or guest of such person. 
(Ord. No. 868-88, § 1, 4-6-88)  
Sec. 2-182. - General provisions. 
(a)	Although travel costs have been included in the city budget, permission must be obtained to perform the travel, attend the meeting, etc., prior to making any commitment, to payment of registration fee, to purchasing a transportation ticket or incurring any other cost. 
(b)	The city will reimburse travelers for actual and reasonable expenses incurred at its direction, provided such expenses are appropriate in relation to the purpose of the trip. 
(c)	"Reasonable expenses" is defined as those expenditures which are necessary to accomplish the purpose of the travel and consistent with prudent controllable monetary management on the part of the traveler. 
(Ord. No. 868-88, § 1, 4-6-88)  
Sec. 2-183. - Authorized expenses. 
(a)	Traveler dependents. Charges and expenses for employees' and other city officials' dependents are not authorized. 
(b)	Transportation. Travelers are expected to use the mode of travel that is most advantageous to the city. This would include consideration of bus or limousine service to and from terminals, as well as cost of extended parking at terminals versus use of a common carrier. 
(1)	City vehicle. Should be utilized whenever possible. Reimbursement, if any, will be limited to actual cost. Receipts must be submitted. When authorization is granted to use a city vehicle, a city gasoline credit card may be obtained should it be necessary. 
(2)	Personal auto. The use of a privately owned vehicle for official city travel in lieu of publicly owned vehicles or common carrier may be authorized by the city manager. Whenever travel by a privately owned vehicle is authorized, the traveler shall be entitled to a mileage reimbursement allowance from the city at the same rate per mile then allowed by the state for travel reimbursement of state officials. Where two (2) or more authorized persons travel in one private vehicle, only the person supplying the vehicle shall receive the transportation reimbursement allowance. When a traveler on official city business deviates from the most direct route, such traveler will have to bear the extra cost and will not be reimbursed by the city for the unnecessary mileage. 
(3)	Air travel. Travel by coach class may be used for long distance. An exception may be made when coach class is not available in order to maintain a convenient travel schedule. Prior approval should be obtained. 
(4)	Rental automobile. Shall be used only when specifically authorized by the city manager. Use of car rentals will be restricted to those conditions where other transportation is not available or when the total costs of the car rental is less than that of other transportation. Automobiles rented for city business shall be limited to the compact or medium-size category. 
(5)	Taxi. Charges are reimbursable where other means of transportation are not available or practical. Normally limousines should be used in traveling to and from airports. Receipts should be included for reimbursement. 
(6)	Tolls. Reimbursement will be made for the actual cost of tolls, parking, etc., and receipts will be required for these expenses. 
(c)	Lodging. 
(1)	Reimbursement for room expenses will be actual and reasonable. Excessive charges will be questioned and must be explained fully in a written memorandum by the traveler. Employees will be reimbursed at a single occupancy rate. Motel receipts must be attached to expense report for reimbursement. 
(2)	Whenever feasible, travelers are encouraged to use the state general services directory listing of government discount hotel-motel rates for reservations for travel within the state. 
(d)	Meals. Meals may be reimbursed when traveling on official city business. 
(1)	Same-day travel. 
a.	The day will be broken into three (3) time periods for meal allowance and shall require receipts. 
Breakfast: Travel begins before 6:00 a.m. and extends beyond 8:00 a.m. 
Lunch: Travel begins before 12:00 p.m. and extends beyond 2:00 p.m. 
Dinner: Travel begins before 6:00 p.m. and extends beyond 8:00 p.m. 
b.	The amounts allowed for meals, including gratuities, shall be reimbursed at the same rate then allowed by the state for reimbursement to state officials. 
(2)	Overnight travel. 
a.	The amounts allowed for meals on trips involving overnight stay, such amounts to include gratuities, shall be reimbursed at the same rate then allowed by the state for reimbursement to state officials. However, meals provided at a seminar, conference, or similar event shall be deducted from the reimbursement total. 
b.	Receipts shall not be required for meals on authorized overnight travel. 
(3)	Travelers attending a municipal or job related meeting or function with prior approval as required shall be allowed the full cost of any meal or meals served at and in connection with such meeting or function if the cost of the meal or meals is established by the organization sponsoring the meeting or function, even though such cost may exceed the meal allowance otherwise provided by this Code. 
(e)	Entertainment. Charges and expenses for items or activities falling under the category of entertainment are not authorized expenditures. 
(f)	Miscellaneous. Telephone calls and telegrams made on official business and paid for by the traveler may be claimed on the expense form. In the case of tolls against the hotel bill, the points and parties between which the calls were made or the wires were sent must be stated on the expense form and the reason they were made. No personal calls are reimbursable. 
(Ord. No. 868-88, § 1, 4-6-88; Ord. No. 987-91, § 1, 1-9-91; Ord. No. 1057-93, §§ 2, 3, 7-7-93; Ord. No. 1670-2015 , § 1, 5-6-15)  
Sec. 2-184. - Procedure. 
(a)	Authorization to perform official travel will be processed as follows: 
(1)	Mayor, city council, or city attorney. Obtain authority in form of a motion from the council. 
(2)	Members of boards. Contact the city manager's office and request the city manager to obtain authorization in the form of a motion from the council. 
(3)	City manager and city employees. The city manager and city employees shall obtain authorization to perform travel as provided in section 2-95(k). 
(4)	Emergency travel. In cases of emergency travel, the city manager may authorize city employees and city officials immediate provisions for travel, with written notice to the council upon return of the traveler. 
(b)(1)	Overnight travel requests and travel advances must be requested at least two (2) weeks in advance of the departure. An explanation as to the reason for travel, the amount of money and correct account to be charged must be indicated on the request. 
(2)	In instances where a trip should arise for a member of the city council that does not provide ample notice to the council at a public meeting, then, with a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours' notice, the traveler shall request the city manager to send a memo to the mayor, each councilmember, city attorney and city clerk advising them of the trip, departure date, justification and return date. 
(3)	At the first regular city council meeting after return from an official trip, the councilmember shall make a verbal report to the council on the text of the trip. 
(c)(1)	Any person other than the city manager who is entitled to receive reimbursement from the city for meals, lodging, or other qualifying travel expenses shall within fifteen (15) calendar days of the traveler's return furnish the city manager a written travel expense report clearly describing the purpose, identity of payee, amount and date paid, of all of said traveler's expenditures qualifying for reimbursement, together with receipts or other form of evidence substantiating the claimed expenditures. No reimbursement of travel expenses claimed by any such person shall be paid by the city unless and until a written travel expense report as herein described has been examined and approved for payment in writing by the city manager. Failure to file a written travel expense report within fifteen (15) calendar days of the traveler's return may result in non-reimbursement of expenses. The criteria and standards for approval of travel expense shall be as set forth in applicable provisions of this Code and Florida Statutes. Any discrepancies, inconsistencies, lack of documentation or incompleteness of a travel expense report shall necessitate that the city manager return said report and accompanying documentation to the traveler with written notice of the reason for his rejection thereof and the action required for approval of the report. 
(2)	On occasions wherein the city manager is entitled to receive reimbursement from the city for meals, lodging, or other qualifying travel expenses, the city manager shall within ten (10) calendar days of his return from such travel furnish the mayor or chairman of the city council a written travel expense report clearly describing the purpose, identity of payee, amount and date paid of all of said city manager's expenditures qualifying for reimbursement, together with receipts or other form of evidence substantiating the claimed expenditures. No reimbursement of travel expenses claimed by the city manager shall be paid by the city unless and until a written travel expense report has been examined and approved for payment by the mayor or chairman of the city council. The criteria and standards for approval of travel expenses shall be as set forth in applicable provisions of this Code and Florida Statutes. Any discrepancies, inconsistencies, lack of documentation or incompleteness of the travel report form shall necessitate that the report and accompanying documentation be returned to the city manager, with written notice of the reason for its rejection, and the action required for approval of the report. 
(3)	Any unused portion of money advanced to a traveler shall be repaid immediately upon the return of the traveler. Any unused advance money not repaid within fifteen (15) calendar days after return of the traveler shall accrue interest at the average rate currently received on city investments. Any city employee not repaying any unused portion of a travel expense advance within thirty (30) days after his return will have his or her salary withheld by the city until repayment is made. 
(d)	Receipts or paid bills supporting each expenditure must be filed with the expense form except for meals for overnight travel. 
(Ord. No. 868-88, § 1, 4-6-88; Ord. No. 974-90, § 1, 8-15-90; Ord. No. 1057-93, § 4, 7-7-93; Ord. No. 1106-95, § 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1670-2015 , § 2, 5-6-15)  
Chapter 3 - ADULT BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; health and sanitation, Ch. 10; licenses, Ch. 11. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted under the home rule power of the city, in the interest of the public health, peace, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the city and under the authority of the city to regulate the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages under the Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-1), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-2. - Scope. 
This chapter shall be effective throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-2), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-3. - Findings of fact. 
Based on evidence and testimony presented at public hearings before the city planning commission and the city council, and on the findings incorporated in the Jacksonville Municipal Code, Chapter 410, Ordinance 77-257-256, section 1, the Los Angeles Municipal Code, section 12.70, Ordinance 156509 (1982); the Detroit Zoning Ordinance, 66,0000, Ordinance 742-G, section 1, adopted on October 24, 1972, and "A Summary of a National Survey of Real Estate Appraisers Regarding the Effect of Adult Bookstores on Property Values," conducted by the Division of Planning, Department of Metropolitan Development, Indianapolis, January, 1984, the city council hereby finds: 
(1)	The possession, display, exhibition, distribution and sale of books, magazines, motion pictures, prints, photographs, periodicals, records, novelties and devices which depict, illustrate, describe or relate to specified sexual activities are businesses that exist or may exist within the city. 
(2)	The operating and maintaining of places: 
a.	Where dancers, entertainers, performers or other individuals, who, for any form of commercial gain, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas; or 
b.	Where straddle dancing occurs; 
are businesses that exist or may exist within the city. 
(3)	When the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) are present in an area of the city, other activities which are illegal, immoral or unhealthful tend to accompany them. Such activities include, but are not limited to, prostitution, pandering, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, exposing minors to harmful materials, possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled substances and violent crimes against persons and property. These illegal, immoral or unhealthful activities tend to concentrate around and be aggravated by the presence of the activities detailed in subsections (1) and (2). 
(4)	There is a higher incidence of certain types of criminal behavior among employees at establishments engaged in adult entertainment than among employees at other commercial establishments. 
(5)	The concentration within limited areas of the city of business operations and activities described in subsections (1) and (2) tends to attract an undesirable number of transients, blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring business, lower property values, promote an increase in crime, particularly of the kinds detailed in subsection (3), and ultimately results in residents and businesses moving to other locations. 
(6)	The buildings and establishments in which the activities and business operations described in subsections (1) and (2) take place: 
a.	Are conducive to and are often used for the commission of immoral, lewd, indecent or illegal acts; or 
b.	Are constructed, in part or in whole, of substandard materials and are maintained in a manner reflecting disregard for the health and safety of patrons and customers. 
(7)	The business operations and activities detailed in subsections (1) and (2) frequently occur in commercial establishments either selling or allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises concurrent with the display of specified anatomical areas or straddle dancing. 
(8)	There is a direct relationship between the concurrent consumption of alcoholic beverages and the activities described in subsections (1) and (2), and an increase in criminal activities, moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and good order of the community. 
(9)	The concurrence of the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages with the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) is hazardous to the health and safety of those persons in attendance, and tends to depreciate the value of adjoining property, harm the economic welfare of the community as a whole and adversely affect the public's interest in the quality of life, tone of commerce, and total community environment in the city. 
(10)	In order to preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the community and the citizens thereof, it is necessary and advisable to regulate and restrict the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in commercial establishments where the business operations and activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur. 
(11)	Physical contact within commercial establishments between persons exhibiting specified anatomical areas and patrons or spectators poses a threat to the individual health of both and promotes the spread of communicable and social diseases. 
(12)	Personal advertising within close proximity to public thoroughfares disrupts traffic and poses a traffic hazard and a threat to the safety of citizens using those thoroughfares. 
(13)	There is a higher incidence of criminal activity among the employees of commercial establishments that permit the concurrence of the consumption of alcoholic beverages and straddle dancing than among the employees of other commercial establishments. 
(14)	In order to preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the community and the citizens thereof, it is necessary and advisable to regulate and restrict the conduct of owners, operators, agents, employees, entertainers, performers, patrons and persons on the premises of commercial establishments where the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) take place. 
(15)	The business operations and activities described in subsections (1) and (2) are commercial ventures, operated for the purpose of making a profit, and as such are proper subjects for regulation by the city in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(16)	"Straddle dancing," as regulated under this Code, does not contain any element of communication and is expressly found by the city council to be conduct rather than expression. 
(17)	Owners or managers of adult bookstores have stocked publications and/or merchandise primarily for the purpose of avoiding the regulations of this Code. 
(18)	The potential dangers to the health, safety and welfare of citizens of the city posed by permitting an adult dancing establishment or a massage establishment to operate without first meeting the requirements of this Code are so great as to require the inspection of said establishments prior to permitting them to initiate operations. 
(19)	Straddle dancing in commercial establishments poses a threat to the individual health of participants and promotes the spread of communicable and social diseases. 
(20)	Requiring employees of adult entertainment establishments to obtain an adult entertainment permit will help reduce incidents of criminal activities by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects, will provide a means of preventing minors from working in adult entertainment establishments, and will make it easier for health officials to control the spread of contagious diseases in such establishments. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-4), 2-6-85; Ord. No. 921-89, § 1, 7-19-89)  
Sec. 3-4. - Definitions. 
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Adult arcade means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic or electronic reproductions which are characterized by emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. For the purposes of this chapter, "adult arcade" is included within the definition of "adult motion picture theater." 
Adult bookstore means a place which has more than fifty (50) percent of its stock-in-trade and sells or offers for sale, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: 
(1)	Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual representations or recordings, novelties and devices that have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)	Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
An adult bookstore includes a place with only a portion or section of its area set aside for the display or sale to adults of materials listed in subsections (1) and (2) above, except that any place, otherwise included within this definition, that derives not more than ten (10) percent of its gross income from the sale of materials listed in subsections (1) and (2) above shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter so long as such material is kept in a location where it is not visible to the customers of such place. 
Adult dancing establishment means a commercial establishment that permits, suffers, or allows dancers to display or expose specified anatomical areas. Any establishment on whose premises an employee, who need not be the same employee, displays or exposes specified anatomical areas on more than one day in a thirty-day period shall be deemed an adult dancing establishment and shall be required to obtain a license under this chapter. 
Adult establishment means an adult motion picture theater, an adult bookstore, an adult dancing establishment, or adult hotel or motel. 
Adult hotel or motel means a place where adult motion pictures are shown in rooms designed primarily for lodging. 
Adult motion pictures means motion pictures, films, videocassettes, slides or other photographic or electronic reproductions that have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture booth means an enclosed area designed or used for the viewing by one or two (2) persons of motion pictures, films, videocassettes, slides or other photographic or electronic reproductions that have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. For the purposes of this chapter, an "adult motion picture booth" is included within the definition of an "adult motion picture theater." 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building, or a portion or part of an enclosed building, or an open air theater designed to permit viewing by patrons seated in automobiles, used to present on a regular basis, for any form of consideration, film material that has as its primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified sexual activities for observation by adult patrons thereof, and includes any hotel or motel, boardinghouse, roominghouse or other lodging for transient customers that advertises the presentation of such film material. For the purposes of this chapter, an "adult motion picture theater" includes both an "adult arcade" and an "adult motion picture booth" and the buildings or places containing adult arcades and/or adult motion picture booths and the buildings or places containing adult arcades and/or adult motion picture booths. 
Alcoholic beverage means all beverages containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight. 
City clerk means the city clerk of the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
City council means the city council of the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
City manager means the city manager for the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
Commercial means operated for pecuniary gain, which shall be presumed for any establishment which has received an occupational license. For purposes of this chapter, operation for pecuniary gain shall not depend on actual profit or loss. 
Commercial establishment means any business location, place or business conducting or allowing to be conducted on its premises any commercial activity. 
Employee means a person who works or performs in a commercial establishment, irrespective of whether said person is paid a salary or wage by the owner or manager of the premises, and for purposes of this chapter shall include agents and subcontractors of the owner. 
Establishment means a physical plant or location or the commercial activities or operations being conducted, or both together, as the context of this chapter may require. 
Fire chief means the fire chief of the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
Inspector means an employee of the building department, zoning department, or fire department who inspects premises licensed or to be licensed under this chapter and who takes or requires the actions authorized by this chapter in case of violations being found on licensed premises, and requires corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on said premises. 
Licensed premises means not only rooms and areas where adult material is sold, offered, presented, or stored or where any form of adult entertainment is presented, but also all other rooms in any building or structure within five hundred (500) feet over which the licensee has some dominion and control and to which customers or patrons may freely pass, and shall include all of the floor or land areas embraced within the plan appearing on or attached to the application for the license involved and designated as such on said plan. 
Person means any individual, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, and any other group or combination. 
Personal advertising means any communication on the part of an employee of an adult entertainment establishment that is designed to encourage a prospective patron to enter said establishment and is performed by repeatedly speaking in a raised tone of voice, by making prominent physical gestures, such as waving or repeatedly pointing, or by holding signs or other written statements. Personal advertising shall not include oral or physical references to an adult entertainment establishment by patrons or spectators. 
Police chief means the chief of police for the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
Principal stockholder means any individual, partnership or corporation that owns or controls, legally or beneficially, ten (10) percent or more of a corporation's capital stock, and includes the officers, directors and principal stockholders of a corporation that is a principal stockholder under this chapter; provided, that if no stockholder of a corporation owns or controls, legally or beneficially, at least ten (10) percent of the capital stock, all stockholders shall be considered principal stockholders; and further provided, that if a corporation is registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or pursuant to F.S. Ch. 517, and its stock is for sale to the general public, it shall not be considered to have any principal stockholders. 
Religious institution means a building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities and which has been granted exemption from state and county ad valorem taxation by the county property appraiser pursuant to the constitution and statutes of the state. 
School means an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by F.S. Ch. 233, or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the state department of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college or university. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered; 
a.	Human genitals or pubic region; 
b.	Human buttocks, anus, anal cleft or cleavage; 
c.	Human female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, including that portion of the breast below the areola; and 
(2)	Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal act means a violation of this chapter; an offense under F.S. Ch. 800; an offense under F.S. § 806.01, 806.111 or 806.13(2)(c); an offense under F.S. Ch. 796; or an offense under F.S. § 849.09(2), 849.10 or 849.25(3). 
Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)	Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; 
(2)	Acts of human adamitism, analingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellatio, flagellation, frottage, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sapphism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, urolagnia, or zooerasty; 
(3)	Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, anal cleft, anal cleavage, or female breast; and 
(4)	Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) above. 
Straddle dance means the placing, for any form of consideration, of the buttocks, pubic or genital area of an owner or employee, whether clothed or not, in contact with the pubic or genital area of a patron or spectator, whether clothed or not, or within one foot of the face of a patron or spectator. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-5), 2-6-85; Ord. No. 921-89, §§ 2, 3, 7-19-89)  
Sec. 3-5. - Scope of chapter. 
This chapter shall be the sole chapter regulating adult entertainment and service activities, except such applicable provisions as are contained in the zoning code. All other chapters regulating or purporting to regulate adult entertainment and service activities, as herein defined and regulated, are made inapplicable to adult entertainment and service activities. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-6), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-6. - Construction. 
This chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of licensing and regulating adult entertainment and service activities. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-7), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-7. - Obscenity. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to allow or permit the possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials or to authorize the exposure of persons under eighteen (18) years of age to harmful motion pictures, exhibitions, shows, representations and presentations. These matters are preempted to the state and are subject to state regulation, and it is not the intent of the city council to legislate with respect to preempted matters. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-8), 2-6-85)  
Secs. 3-8—3-18. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 3-19. - Presumptions. 
The following presumptions shall apply in actions brought for violations of this chapter: 
(a)	Any person who owns, operates, maintains or enters a commercial establishment which advertises within one hundred (100) feet of the premises of the commercial establishment to the general public that said establishment provides, allows or permits the exhibition or display of specified anatomical areas is presumed to be aware that the exhibition or display of specified anatomical areas is taking place in the establishment. 
(b)	Any establishment which has received an occupational license to operate commercially is presumed to be a commercial establishment. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-45), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-20. - Proof. 
(a)	In all actions, civil or criminal, for violation of this chapter, testimonial evidence that the beverage was an alcoholic beverage, beer or wine may be offered by any person who, by experience in the past in handling or using alcoholic beverages, beer or wine or who by taste, smell or drinking of such liquids, has knowledge of the presence of the alcoholic content thereof or the intoxicating effect thereof. 
(b)	The presence of alcoholic content of any beverage, beer or wine may be shown by hydrometer or gravity test made in or away from the presence of the factfinder by any person who has knowledge of the use of said instrument, but the production of such evidence is optional. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-46), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-21. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense against the city and shall be prosecuted and upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to the punishment hereinabove authorized, or as an alternate thereto, the provisions of this chapter may be enforced through the powers and authority of the city code enforcement board as authorized by Florida Statutes and city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-47), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-22. - Powers of city council. 
In addition or as an alternative to any other procedure authorized for the enforcement of this chapter the city council may, in the name of the city, institute suit in the circuit court of the county to enjoin, restrain, or otherwise prevent the violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-48), 2-6-85)  
Secs. 3-23—3-32. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, Ch. 11. 
 
Sec. 3-33. - Enforcement responsibility. 
Ultimate responsibility for the administration of this chapter is vested in the city manager. The city clerk is responsible for issuing all licenses. The police chief is responsible for verifying all information contained on any application. The building department is responsible for the inspection of licensed premises and premises applying for a license in order to pass upon the construction and physical configuration of the premises involved. The fire chief is responsible for the inspection of licensed premises and premises applying for a license to determine compliance with all fire prevention codes, statutes or ordinances in effect in the city. The zoning department is responsible for ascertaining compliance with all locational requirements of this chapter and all other applicable land use laws. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-9), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-34. - Power of administrative agencies. 
When a provision of this chapter gives the police chief, the city clerk, the building department, the fire chief, or the zoning department the authority or duty to act, the authority or duty vests in the police chief, the city clerk, the head of the building department, the fire chief, or the head of the zoning department or in any inspector or employee who is given the authority or duty to act in accordance with the administrative procedures of the agency or office concerned. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-10), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-35. - License required. 
(a)	Requirement. No adult bookstore, adult massage establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult dancing establishment, or adult hotel or motel shall be permitted to do business without having first obtained a license under this chapter. 
(b)	Classification. Licenses referred to in this chapter shall be classified as follows: 
(1)	Adult bookstore; 
(2)	Adult motion picture theater; 
(3)	Adult dancing establishment; and 
(4)	Adult hotel or motel. 
Each application for a license shall state the classification and location for which it is to be issued. A license may be issued in only one classification and for only one location, but this shall not prohibit an applicant from filing separate applications for licenses in two (2) or more classifications at the same location. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-11), 2-6-85; Ord. No. 921-89, § 4, 7-19-89)  
Sec. 3-36. - Disqualification. 
(a)	Noncompliance of premises. No license shall be issued if the city clerk, as a result of investigations by the building department, the zoning department, and the fire chief, determines that the proposed licensed premises does not meet each and every one of the general and special requirements for the type of license applied for as established in Article III of this chapter or if the proposed licensed premises fails to satisfy all applicable building, zoning, health and fire codes, ordinances, statutes or regulations, whether federal, state or local, nor shall any license be issued on false information given in the application for license. 
(b)	Issuance of license where prior license has been revoked or suspended. No license shall be issued to: 
(1)	Any person whose license under this chapter is suspended; 
(2)	Any partnership or joint venture, a partner or joint adventurer of which has a license presently suspended under this chapter; 
(3)	Any corporation, an officer, director or principal stockholder of which presently has its license under this chapter suspended; 
(4)	Any person who is or was at the time of suspension a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation, whose license under this chapter is presently suspended; or 
(5)	Any estate, trust, business trust or related fiduciary relationship, where any fiduciary therein has a license presently suspended under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-12), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-37. - License application; application fee. 
(a)	Required information and documents. Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult dancing establishment or adult hotel or motel shall file with the city clerk a sworn application on forms supplied by the city clerk. The application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)	If the applicant is: 
a.	An individual, the legal name of the individual and all aliases used by the individual; 
b.	A partnership or joint venture, the full name of the partnership or joint venture, and the names of all the partners or joint adventurers whether general or limited, accompanied by, if in existence, a copy of the written partnership or joint venture agreement, together with the residence address of all such persons; 
c.	A corporation, the exact corporate name, the date of incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing and, if a foreign corporation, [authorized] to do business in the state; the names and capacity of all of the officers, directors and principal stockholders, together with the residence address of all such persons; and 
d.	An estate, trust, business trust or other fiduciary, the full name of the estate, trust, business trust or other fiduciary organization, the names of all fiduciaries and beneficiaries, together with the residence address of all such persons and the residence of the estate, trust, business trust or other fiduciary organization. 
(2)	Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(3)	If the business is to be conducted under a name other than that of the applicant, proof of the business names and the county of registration under F.S. § 865.09; 
(4)	Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subparagraph (1) have, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been arrested or convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the particular criminal act involved and the place and date of arrest or conviction; 
(5)	Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subparagraph (1) above have had their license under this chapter previously suspended or revoked or have been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose license under this chapter has previously been suspended or revoked, including the date of the suspension or revocation; 
(6)	The classification of the license for which the application is being filed; 
(7)	Whether the applicant holds any other licenses in the classification for which the application is being filed and, if so, the number and locations of such licensed premises; 
(8)	The proposed location and name of the business; 
(9)	The names of the employees, if known, or, if presently unknown or if there will be no employee, a statement to that effect; and 
(10)	A plan drawn to a minimum scale of one-fourth inch equals one foot of the proposed licensed premises indicating the areas to be covered by the license, all windows, doors, entrances and exits and the fixed structural features of the proposed licensed premises. The term "fixed structural features" shall include walls, stages, immovable partitions, projection booths, admission booths, concession booths or stands, immovable counters and similar structures that are intended to be permanent. 
(b)	Application fee. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) payable at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-13), 2-6-85; Ord. No. 921-89, § 5, 7-19-89)  
Sec. 3-38. - Investigation. 
Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city clerk and upon payment of the application fee, the police department shall verify the information required by section 3-37(a)(1)—(4) of this chapter. The building department, zoning department and fire department shall also investigate the proposed licensed premises for compliance with the chapter and other applicable laws and regulations relating to construction, safety, fire protection, zoning and public health. At the conclusion of its investigation, each of the departments shall endorse on the application the results and findings thereof, recommending either approval or disapproval of the application. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-14), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-39. - Issuance; denial; revocation. 
(a)	Approval and issuance. Upon completion of the investigation of an application by the police department, the building department, the zoning department, and the fire department, the city clerk shall approve or disapprove the application. If approved, the city clerk shall issue the license upon the payment of the appropriate license fee provided in sections 3-42 and 3-47. 
(b)	Disapproval and denial. If the police department, the building department, the zoning department or the fire department recommends disapproval, it shall indicate the reason therefor upon the application, or in a separate writing, and the city clerk shall deny the application. If the application is disapproved, the city clerk shall notify the applicant of the disapproval and the reasons therefor. Notification shall be by personal delivery to the applicant or by certified mail sent to the address on the license application, which shall be considered the correct address. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, the city clerk shall deny any application for a license if the applicant has supplied false or untrue information. 
The city clerk shall approve or disapprove all applications within thirty (30) days from the date a completed application has been submitted by the applicant. 
(c)	Revocation. Should a license be issued as a result of false information, misrepresentation of fact, or mistake of fact, it shall be revoked. If the application is revoked, the city clerk shall notify the licensee of the revocation and the reasons therefor. Notification shall be by personal delivery to the licensee or by certified mail sent to the address on the license application, which shall be considered the correct address. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-15), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-40. - Limitation on licenses and licensed premises. 
There shall be no limitation on the number of licenses issued, but licensed premises shall observe the locational restrictions contained in Article V of this chapter. A licensed premises may be owned by the licensee or the premises may be leased by the licensee from a person not a licensee under this chapter; provided, that a licensee who is a tenant or lessee may not surrender the tenancy or lease to the owner or lessor if by so doing the owner or lessor will take possession, control and operation of the licensed premises and the business licensed under this chapter, unless the license is transferred as provided in section 3-43 below. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-16), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-41. - Display of license; counterfeiting and mutilation prohibited; fraudulent use prohibited. 
(a)	All licensees licensed under this chapter shall display their licenses in conspicuous places on their licensed premises in a clear, transparent cover or frame. The license shall be available for inspection at all times by the public. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to, or cause to, counterfeit, mutilate, change, deface, alter, cover, obstruct or remove a licensed so displayed. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently make use of, in any manner to such person's or another person's benefit, a license that has not been fully issued to such person in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-17), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-42. - Term of license; renewals. 
(a)	Term. All licenses issued under this chapter, except new licenses, shall be annual licenses which shall be paid for on or before October 1 and shall expire on September 30 of the following year. A licensee beginning business after October 1 and before April 1 may obtain a new license upon application therefor and the payment of the appropriate license fee and such license shall expire on the following September 30. A licensee beginning business after March 31 and before October 1 may obtain a new license upon application therefor and the payment of one-half of the appropriate license fee required herein for the annual license and such license shall expire on September 30 of the same year. The provisions of this subsection shall not affect the provisions of section 3-43. 
(b)	Renewals. A licensee under this chapter shall be entitled to renewal of the annual license from year to year, as a matter of course, on or before October 1, by presenting the license for the previous year or satisfactory evidence of its loss or destruction to the city clerk and by paying the appropriate license fee. Such renewal application shall contain the information required herein for an original license to the extent that such information is not duplicative. A license that is not renewed by October 1 of each year shall be considered delinquent and, in addition to the regular license fee, subject to delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the license fee for the month of October and an additional penalty of five (5) percent of the license fee for each additional month, or fraction thereof, of delinquency until paid; provided, that the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the license fee. All licenses not renewed within one hundred twenty (120) days of September 30 will be revoked by the city clerk, unless such license is involved in litigation and revocation would result in the violation of a court order. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-18), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-43. - Transfer of license. 
When a licensee shall have made a bona fide sale of the business which it is licensed under this chapter to conduct, the license issued under this chapter may be transferred to the purchaser of said business, but only if, before the transfer, the application of the purchaser shall be approved by the city clerk in accordance with the same procedure outlined for the issuance of new licenses. Before the issuance of any transfer of license, the transferee shall pay a transfer fee of ten (10) percent of the appropriate annual license fee. Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable in any other way than provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-19), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-44. - Licensee moving to new location. 
A licensee may move a licensed premises to a new location and operate at the new location upon approval by the police department, the zoning department, the building department, and the fire department of the licensee's application for a change of location. The licensee shall submit to the city clerk an application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) at the time the application is filed. The application will contain, or have attached to it, a plan drawn to a minimum scale of one-fourth inch equals one foot of the licensed premises at the new location indicating the area to be included in the new licensed premises, all windows, doors, entrances and exits, and the fixed structural features of the new licensed premises. The term "fixed structural features" shall have the same meaning as in section 3-37(a)(10). If more than one license has been issued to the licensed premises at the old location, the licensee shall state in his application for a change of location which of said licenses are being moved to the proposed new location. Upon approval of the application, there shall be issued to the licensee a license for the new location without the payment of any further fee. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-20), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-45. - Changing name of business. 
No licensee may change the name of the business located at his licensed premises without first giving the city clerk thirty (30) days' notice in writing of such change and without first making payment to the city clerk of a three dollar ($3.00) change of name fee. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-21), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-46. - Suspension of license. 
(a)	Violations of health, building, zoning or fire provisions. In the event a licensed premises is found in violation of health, building, zoning, or fire provisions of this chapter, the appropriate department shall notify the licensee of said violation according to the standard procedures of the department, shall follow its normal department procedures for correcting said violations and shall grant the licensee the right to exhaust applicable administrative remedies. If the licensee fails either to correct the violation or to obtain an administrative review of the agency finding, the appropriate department shall notify the city clerk, who shall forthwith suspend or revoke the license without further proceedings, and the licensee shall have no right of administrative appeal. 
(b)	Other violations. In the event a jury or other trier of fact in a court of law finds that a licensee has violated any section of this chapter, whether or not an adjudication of guilt has been entered, the city clerk shall forthwith suspend or revoke the license without further proceedings and the licensee shall have no right of appeal. 
(c)	Suspension of license. 
(1)	Procedure. Upon receiving notice that a licensee has violated a provision of this chapter, as provided in subsections (a) and (b) above, the city clerk shall suspend the license and shall notify the licensee of his action. Notification shall be by certified mail or personal service and shall be sent to the address on the license application, which shall be considered the correct address. 
(2)	Periods of suspension. A single violation of any provision of this chapter shall result in suspension of the adult establishment license for thirty (30) days. Upon a second violation of any provision of this chapter within a period of two (2) years from the date of a prior violation, but not including any time during which the license was suspended, the license shall be suspended for ninety (90) days. Upon a third violation of any provision of this chapter within a period of two (2) years from the first of two (2) violations, but not including any time during which the license was suspended, the license shall be suspended for one hundred eighty (180) days. All periods of suspension shall begin on the fifteenth day from the date the city clerk mails or delivers a notice of suspension to the licensee or on the date the licensee delivers his license to the city clerk, whichever comes first. 
(3)	Surrender of license required. If a licensee, after having been mailed or delivered notice of the suspension of a license in the manner herein provided, fails to surrender the license to the city clerk within fifteen (15) days or fails otherwise to account for the license to the satisfaction of the city clerk, the period of suspension of the license shall be extended until and shall not expire until a period has elapsed after the date of surrender of the license, or after the date of expiration of the license, whichever comes first, which is identical in length with the original period of suspension. 
(4)	Reissuance. When a license is suspended for a violation of health, building, zoning, or fire provisions of this chapter, as described in subsection (a) above, the license shall not be reissued until said violation is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1 (2.1-22), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-47. - License fee. 
(a)	Levy of fees. There are hereby levied the following annual license fees under this chapter: 
(1)	Adult bookstore: One hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)	Adult motion picture theaters, as follows: 
a.	Having only adult motion picture booths: Twenty dollars ($20.00) for each booth; 
b.	Having only a hall or auditorium: Fifty cents ($0.50) for each seat or place; 
c.	Designed to permit viewing by patrons seated in automobiles: Fifty cents ($0.50) for each speaker or parking space, whichever is greater; or 
d.	Having a combination of any of the foregoing: The license fee applicable to each under subparagraphs a, b and c. 
(3)	Adult dancing establishment: One hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(4)	Adult hotel and motel—Twenty dollars ($20.00) per room; one hundred dollar ($100.00) minimum. 
(b)	License fees as regulatory fees. The license fees collected under this chapter are fees paid for the purpose of examination and inspection of licensed premises under this chapter and are declared to be regulatory fees in addition to and not in lieu of the occupational license taxes imposed by other sections of this Code. The payment of a license fee under this chapter shall not relieve any licensee or other person of liability for and the responsibility of paying an occupational license tax where the same is required by other sections of this Code, and for doing such acts and providing such information as may be required by said sections. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-23), 2-6-85; Ord. No. 921-89, § 6, 7-19-89) 
Cross reference— License tax schedule, § 11-12.  
Sec. 3-48. - Records and reports; consent by licensee. 
Each licensee shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the city clerk, the police department, the building department, the zoning department and the fire department to implement this chapter and carry out its purpose. By applying for a license under this chapter each shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise by the city clerk and other interested departments of the powers given them herein. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-24), 2-6-85)  
Secs. 3-49—3-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSED PREMISES 
 
Sec. 3-59. - General requirements. 
In addition to the special requirements contained in sections 3-62 through 3-65, each licensed premises shall: 
(a)	Conform to all applicable building statutes, codes or ordinances, whether federal, state or local; 
(b)	Conform to all applicable fire statutes, codes or ordinances, whether federal, state or local; 
(c)	Conform to all applicable health statutes, codes or ordinances, whether federal, state or local; 
(d)	Have each and every glass area that faces a public thoroughfare or through which casual passersby can see the materials or activity inside the licensed premises covered over by black paint or other opaque covering; provided that this requirement shall not apply if the uncovered glass area exposes to public view only a lobby or anteroom containing no material or activity other than a reception counter or desk and chairs or couches for customers to use while waiting; 
(e)	Conform to the requirements of F.S. Ch. 381, and the rules and regulations of the state department of health and rehabilitation services made pursuant thereto. Each licensed premises shall be deemed to be a "place serving the public" for the purpose of sanitary facilities; provided, that when more than one license is issued for a single location, they shall collectively be considered as one licensed premises if customers may circulate freely throughout the entire area of the licensed premises; 
(f)	Sanitary facilities requirements: 
(1)	Water supply. The water supply must be adequate, of safe, sanitary quality and from an approved source in accordance with provisions of Chapter 17-22 of the Florida Administrative Code. 
(2)	Plumbing. Plumbing shall be sized, installed and maintained in accordance with provisions of Chapter 10D-9 of the Florida Administrative Code and any requirements of Part V of the land development regulations. 
(3)	Restrooms. All toilet facilities must be of readily cleanable design and be kept clean, in good repair, and free from objectionable odors. Restrooms must be vented to the outside of any building, be equipped with mechanical exhaust systems and be well lighted. Floors shall be of impervious, easily cleanable materials. Walls shall be smooth, nonabsorbent and easily cleanable. 
(g)	All facilities must be in accordance with the requirements of the state division of hotels and restaurants, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-25), 2-6-85) 
Editor's note— The land development regulations of the city are published separately from this volume.  
Sec. 3-60. - Advertising. 
No adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult dancing establishment, or adult hotel or motel shall: 
(a)	Display a sign advertising the presentation of any activity prohibited by Florida Statutes or ordinance of the city; 
(b)	Display a sign capable of leading a reasonable person to believe that the establishment engages in an activity prohibited by Florida Statutes or an ordinance of the city; 
(c)	Erect, install, maintain, alter or operate any sign in violation of section 86.00 of the land development regulations; 
(d)	Engage in, encourage or permit any form of personal advertising for the commercial benefit of the establishment or for the commercial benefit of any individual who displays or exhibits specified anatomical areas within the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-26), 2-6-85; Ord. No. 921-89, § 7, 7-19-89) 
Editor's note— The land development regulations of the city are published separately from this volume.  
Sec. 3-61. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)	No owners or employees, as defined in this chapter, shall engage in specified sexual activities on the licensed premises in the presence of any person or for any form of consideration. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any person or employee of a commercial establishment, or adult entertainment establishment, to expose specified anatomical areas in connection with the use of approved sanitary facilities commonly known as restrooms. However, specified anatomical areas shall be exposed or displayed only in connection with excretory functions. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any employee, customer or patron of a licensed premises to participate in a straddle dance on the licensed premises. 
(c)	No employee, while on the licensed premises or within the scope of his employment, shall contract or agree to perform, for any form of consideration, a straddle dance within five hundred (500) feet of the licensed premises. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for customers or patrons of a licensed premises to touch with the hands specified anatomical areas of an owner or employee, whether said owner or employee is clothed or not. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for an owner or employee to touch with the hands specified anatomical areas of a customer or patron, whether said owner or employee or patron is clothed or not. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-27), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-62. - Adult bookstore. 
In addition to the general requirements contained in sections 3-59 through 3-61, an adult bookstore shall observe the following special requirements: 
(a)	All materials, devices and novelties shall be displayed so that they cannot be seen by anyone other than customers who have entered the licensed premises. 
(b)	If recordings are offered for sale and customers may listen to them while on the licensed premises, soundproof booths or rooms shall be available for use by customers who desire to listen and each such booth or room shall have: 
(1)	One clear window facing the major portion of the licensed premises covering not less than one-fourth of the wall area into which the window is set, which window shall not be covered or obscured in any manner while the booth or room is in use; 
(2)	Sufficient chairs or couches to accommodate the expected number of persons who will occupy the booth or room at one time; 
(3)	The number of persons who may occupy the booth or room at one time clearly stated on or near the door to the booth or room, and only that number of persons shall be permitted inside the booth or room at one time; 
(4)	The door or doors opening into the booth or room incapable of being locked or otherwise fastened so that it or they will freely open from either side; and 
(5)	All areas where a patron or customer is to be positioned visible from a continuous main aisle and not obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-28), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-63. - Adult motion picture theaters. 
In addition to the general requirements contained in sections 3-59 through 3-61, an adult motion picture theater shall observe the following special requirements: 
(a)	Each adult motion picture booth shall be open or have a rectangular-shaped entranceway not less than two (2) feet wide nor less than six (6) feet high. 
(b)	Each adult motion picture booth shall have sufficient seats or couches to accommodate the maximum number of persons expected to use the booth. The maximum number of persons who may occupy a booth shall be stated on or near the entranceway, and only that number shall be permitted to be in a booth at one time. 
(c)	All areas where a patron or customer is to be positioned must be visible from a continuous main aisle and must not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. 
(d)	Adult motion picture booths, if there are more than one in an adult motion picture theater, shall open onto a common corridor, passageway or area that has an exitway or exit doorway, as defined in the Standard Building Code, separate from the other required exits of the licensed premises. This exitway or exit doorway need not be in use during the normal course of business, but an exit doorway opening directly to the exterior, whether it is the only exit doorway or the last exit doorway in an exitway, shall be equipped with approved panic hardware as provided in the Standard Building Code. 
(e)	Adult motion picture booths shall be lighted, whenever film material is not being shown, such that the light intensity at every point thirty (30) inches above the floor is not less than one-half footcandle, but may be in complete darkness when film material is being shown. Common corridors, passageways or areas shall be constantly lighted when in use such that the light intensity at every point thirty (30) inches from the floor is not less than five hundredths (0.05) of a footcandle. 
(f)	Partitions between adult motion picture booths shall be considered nonloadbearing partitions but they shall be so constructed as to have a fire-resistance rating of not less than one hour, unless the area wherein the booths are located is sprinklered. 
(g)	An adult motion picture theater having only a hall or auditorium for the showing of film material shall be considered a place of assembly within the meaning of the building code and shall conform to the requirements therefor. 
(h)	An adult motion picture theater having both adult motion picture booths and a hall or auditorium shall conform to the special requirements for both facilities; provided, that where the special requirements allow for common elements to be utilized or constructed, this may be done with the approval of the building and zoning departments. 
(i)	In addition to the sanitary facilities required by section 3-59, there shall be provided within or adjacent to the common corridor, passageway or area in adult motion picture theaters having adult motion picture booths, adequate lavatories equipped with running water, hand-cleansing soap or detergent and sanitary towels or hand-drying devices; common towels are prohibited. 
(j)	An adult motion picture theater designed to permit viewing by patrons seated in automobiles shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the licensed premises so screened, that the projected film material may not be seen from any public right-of-way or residential property. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-29), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-64. - Adult dancing establishment. 
In addition to the general requirements contained in sections 3-59 through 3-61, an adult dancing establishment shall observe the following requirements: 
(a)	Persons engaged in displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas are prohibited from dancing or simulating any specified sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee or other person on the premises of an adult dancing establishment. 
(b)	No person in an adult dancing establishment shall engage in the display or exposition of specified anatomical areas except while the person is positioned in an entertainment area consisting of a platform or other structure raised eighteen (18) inches above the immediately surrounding area, encompassing an area of at least one hundred (100) square feet, and the person is positioned at least three (3) feet from a patron or spectator. 
(c)	No spectator or patron shall be present in the entertainment area, as defined in subsection (b), during the course of any performance involving the display or exposition of specified anatomical areas. 
(d)	No person maintaining, owning or operating an adult dancing establishment shall suffer or permit the construction, maintenance or use of areas partitioned or screened from public view that are designed to be occupied or are commonly occupied alone or together by any person or persons on the premises of such establishment for private performances involving the display or exhibition of specified anatomical areas. 
(e)	No person on the premises of an adult dancing establishment shall be permitted to use or to be present in areas partitioned or screened from public view that are designed to be occupied together or alone by any person or persons on the premises of such establishment for the display or exhibition of specified anatomical areas. 
(f)	Nothing in this chapter pertaining to adult dancing establishments shall be construed to permit or authorize any acts or activities therein that are prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-30), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-65. - Massage practice. 
A "massage establishment," "massage school," "masseur," "apprentice," or other person or entity licensed and certified by the state department of professional regulation in accordance with rules adopted by the state board of massage shall not be deemed an "adult business establishment" within the purview of this chapter. No massage establishment, massage school, masseur, apprentice, or other person or entity not duly licensed by the state department of professional regulation in accordance with rules adopted by the state board of massage shall engage in any massage or massage practice within the city. Any massage establishment, massage school, masseur, apprentice, or other person or entity applying to the city for an occupational license to engage in massage practice in the city shall submit with such application satisfactory documentation and proof of certification and licensure by the state department of professional regulation to engage in such practice and activity. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-31), 2-6-85; Ord. No. 921-89, § 8, 7-19-89)  
Secs. 3-66—3-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 3-76. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license therefor under this chapter, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-32), 2-6-85; Ord. No. 921-89, § 9, 7-19-89)  
Sec. 3-77. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)	The sale or dispensing or permitting of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises of an adult entertainment establishment is prohibited. 
(b)	No person shall consume, possess or have custody of alcoholic beverages while on the licensed premises of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-33), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-78. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, or to offer to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or adult dancing establishment. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-34), 2-6-85; Ord. No. 921-89, § 10, 7-19-89)  
Sec. 3-79. - Permitting illegal acts. 
No licensee, owner or employee shall permit violations of this chapter or illegal acts to take place on the licensed premises, if the licensee or employee knows or has reason to know that such violations or illegal acts are taking place, and the licensee or employee has the ability to curtail the violations of this chapter or the illegal acts. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-35), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-80. - Permits for employees in licensed premises. 
(a)	Adult entertainment permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain employment in an establishment licensed under this chapter, for any form of consideration, or to exhibit or display specified anatomical areas in an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, or adult dancing establishment unless and until such person shall have first obtained an adult entertainment permit from the city clerk. 
(b)	Qualifications. Employees of a licensee on a licensed premises shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age and shall be eligible for work only if they comply with all federal, state and local laws. 
(c)	Application for and issuance of adult entertainment permit: 
(1)	All present and prospective employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall file an application for an adult entertainment permit with the city clerk, which shall include all information required by section 3-65 herein, together with payment of a sixty dollar ($60.00) fee. 
(2)	The police chief shall submit the names of all applicants for an adult entertainment permit to the county health department. If, in the sixty (60) days immediately preceding submission of an application, an applicant was a known carrier of any notifiable communicable disease, as defined in Chapter 10D-3, Florida Administrative Code, the health department shall notify the police chief and no permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant presents a statement from a licensed physician certifying that the applicant is free of all notifiable communicable diseases. 
(3)	No later than fifteen (15) days from the filing of an application and, if applicable, upon presentation of the statement of a licensed physician as required in subsection (c)(2) above, the city clerk shall issue a permit. 
(4)	It shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue the applicant a written permit which shall be signed by the police chief, and shall bear the name, address, sex, age, signature, photograph and fingerprints of the applicant. The police chief shall procure the fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant and shall keep the same on permanent file in his office, which prints and photograph shall be furnished by the applicant at the time of filing his application. Upon delivery of the permit to the applicant, the applicant may begin working on the licensed premises as a permanent employee. The fee for an adult entertainment permit shall be forty dollars ($40.00) per year. All persons licensed under this section shall display their licenses in conspicuous places. The license shall be available for inspection at all times by the public. 
(d)	Obtaining permit by fraud. It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, or cause to counterfeit, change, deface, alter, cover, obstruct or remove a license so displayed. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent or untruthful statement, either written or oral, or in any way knowingly to conceal any material fact, or to give or use any fictitious name in order to secure or aid in securing a permit required by this chapter, and any such permit so secured shall be void. 
(e)	Revocation. Should a permit be issued as a result of false information, misrepresentations of fact or mistake of fact, it shall be summarily revoked. 
(f)	Expiration and renewal. A permit under this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance. A permittee under this chapter shall be entitled to a renewal of his permit as a matter of course, except when said permit has been suspended or revoked, upon presentation of his previous permit or presentation of an affidavit as to its loss or destruction to the police chief. 
(g)	Possession of permit required. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for an employee, as defined in this chapter, to work, perform or to exhibit or display specified anatomical areas in an adult entertainment establishment without an adult entertainment permit in his/her immediate possession at all times or within the establishment at the time of his performance. 
(2)	No person charged with violating this section shall be convicted if he produces his adult entertainment permit to the police chief within seventy-two (72) hours of detention, or in court, a permit theretofore issued. 
(3)	Upon receipt of a properly authenticated notification from the police chief verifying issuance of a valid permit, the clerk of the court is authorized to dismiss such cases at any time prior to the defendant's appearance in court. 
(h)	Violations. Any person who violates the provisions of this section, or otherwise fails to secure a permit as required by this section, shall be prosecuted and punished in accordance with general law. 
(i)	Suspension of permit. 
(1)	Procedure. Upon receiving notice that a jury or other trier of fact in a court of law has found that a permittee violated any provision of this chapter, whether or not an adjudication of guilt has been entered, the city clerk shall suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of his action. Notification shall be by certified mail and shall be sent to the address on the permit application, which shall be considered the correct address. 
(2)	Periods of suspension. A single violation of this chapter shall result in the suspension of the adult entertainment permit for thirty (30) days. Upon a second violation of this chapter within a period of two (2) years from the date of a prior violation of this chapter, but not including any time during which the permit was suspended, the permit shall be suspended for ninety (90) days. Upon a third violation of this chapter within a period of two (2) years from the first of three (3) violations, but not including any time during which the permit was suspended, the permit shall be suspended for one hundred eighty (180) days. All periods of suspension shall begin on the fifteenth day from the date the city clerk mails a notice of suspension to the permittee or on the date the permittee delivers his permit to the city clerk, whichever comes first. 
(3)	Surrender of permit required. If a permittee, after having been mailed notice of the suspension of his permit in the manner herein provided, fails to surrender his permit to the city clerk within fifteen (15) days, the period of suspension of the permit shall be extended, and shall not expire until a period has elapsed after the date of surrender of the permit, whichever comes first, which is identical in length with the original period of suspension. 
(j)	Appeal. If an application for a permit is denied or if a permit is suspended or revoked, the procedures specified in section 3-46 shall be available to the applicant or permittee, in the manner therein specified. If the applicant or permittee does not appeal the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee shall be deemed to have failed to have exhausted his administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-36), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-81. - Immunity from prosecution. 
All officers and employees of the city who are acting within the scope of their authority and duties under this chapter shall be immune from prosecution, civil and criminal, and for trespass upon real property. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-37), 2-6-85)  
Secs. 3-82—3-91. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LOCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 3-92. - Prohibited in certain zoning districts. 
No person shall cause or permit the establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or an adult dancing establishment in any C1, C1A, TTP, M1, M2, IP, P1, or PUD zoning district of the city. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-38), 2-6-85; Ord. No. 921-89, § 11, 7-19-89)  
Sec. 3-93. - Minimum distance from certain other adult business establishments, religious institutions, schools, public parks, residentially zoned property, or establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
No person shall cause or permit the establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or an adult dancing establishment within one thousand (1,000) feet of another such establishment; within one thousand (1,000) feet of any pre-existing religious institution, school or public park; within one thousand (1,000) feet of an area zoned for residential use within or outside the city; or within one thousand (1,000) feet of an establishment that in any manner sells or dispenses alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-39), 2-6-85; Ord. No. 921-89, § 12, 7-19-89)  
Sec. 3-94. - Measurement of distance. 
Distance from a proposed adult entertainment establishment to an existing adult entertainment establishment, a church, an establishment that sells or dispenses alcohol, a public park or a school shall be measured at the points where the lot lines of the property upon which the subject buildings or activity is located are closest. The distance from a proposed adult entertainment establishment to an area zoned for residential use shall be measured at the points where the lot line of the property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is situate and the residentially zoned area boundary are closest. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-40), 2-6-85)  
Secs. 3-95—3-104. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4. 
 
Sec. 3-105. - Exhibit or display of anatomical areas prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning, managing or operating a commercial establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this chapter, to permit, sell or dispense alcoholic beverages on the premises of the commercial establishment where said person knowingly, or with reason to know, permits or suffers any person on the premises to exhibit or display specified anatomical areas or employ any devices or coverings which are intended to give the appearance of specified anatomical areas. For purposes of this chapter, any persons present on the premises who are responsible for managing or supervising the day-to-day operations of the establishment shall be deemed to act as the licensee and their actions or knowledge shall be imputed to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-41), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-106. - Exhibit or display of specified anatomical areas by employees or patrons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, employee or patron of a commercial establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this chapter, to consume, possess or have custody of alcoholic beverages where said person knowingly and willfully observes or participates in the exhibition or display of specified anatomical areas or the exhibition or display of any devices or coverings which are intended to give the appearance of specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-42), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-107. - Straddle dancing prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any owner, employee, customer or patron of a commercial establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this chapter, to participate in a straddle dance, as that term is defined in section 3-4 of this chapter, where said employee, customer or patron knows, or has reason to know, that alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or brought onto the premises for consumption on the premises. 
(b)	No owner or employee, while on the premises or within the scope of an employee's employment, shall contract or agree to perform, for any form of consideration, a straddle dance within five hundred (500) feet of the premises. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for a customer or patron of a premises to touch with the hands specified anatomical areas of an owner or employee, whether said owner or employee is clothed or not. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for an owner or employee to touch with the hands specified anatomical areas of a customer or patron. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for an owner or employee to permit a customer or patron of a premises to touch with the hands specified anatomical areas of an owner or employee, whether said employee is clothed or not. 
(f)	It shall be unlawful for a customer or patron of a premises to suffer or permit an owner or employee to touch with the hands specified anatomical areas of such customer or patron. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-43), 2-6-85)  
Sec. 3-108. - Sitting in lap prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or employee, whether clothed or not, of a commercial establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this chapter, to sit in or otherwise occupy the lap of any customer or patron, where such owner, employee, customer or patron knows, or has reason to know, that alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or brought onto the premises for consumption on the premises. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any customer or patron of a commercial establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this chapter, to sit in or otherwise occupy the lap of any owner or employee, whether such owner or employee is clothed or not, where such owner, employee, customer or patron knows, or has reason to know, that alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or brought onto the premises for consumption on the premises. 
(c)	For purposes of this section, "lap" means the area between the waist and knees of any individual. 
(Ord. No. 725-85, § 1(2.1-44), 2-6-85)  
Chapter 3.5 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1015-91, adopted November 6, 1991, amended the code by adding new chapter 2.2, regarding alarm systems. For classification purposes, Ordinance No. 1015-91 has been redesignated as new chapter 3.5 at the discretion of the editor. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1136-96, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 1996, repealed Ch. 3.5. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 3.5 to read as herein set out. See the Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Cross reference— See also fire protection and prevention, ch. 8. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3.5-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)	Alarm systems means either a burglar alarm system as defined in section 3.5-26 of this chapter or any other type of alarm. 
(2)	Automatic telephone dialing device or digital alarm communicator system means an alarm system which automatically sends a prerecorded voice message or coded signal over regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise, indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
(3)	Fee means the reasonable fees to be paid for applications and record keeping or the assessment of a monetary charge payable to the city, authorized pursuant to this chapter, to defray the expenses of responding to a false alarm or alarm malfunction. 
(4)	Key holder/emergency contact means that person or persons designated by the owner of the alarm system as a holder of keys to the premises who is thereby authorized to respond to an alarm of the owner. The key holder/emergency contact shall be required to have the ability to activate/deactivate the alarm system. 
(5)	Owner means any person who owns the premises in which an alarm system is installed or the person or persons who lease, operate, occupy or manage the premises. 
(6)	Premises means any building, structure, or combination of buildings and structures which serve as dwelling units, single-family or multi-family; or any other area within a building, structure or combination thereof which is used for any purpose other than residential, wherein an alarm system is installed. 
(7)	Required operative alarm system means an alarm system which the owner of a premises is required to maintain in an operative condition pursuant to statute, law, ordinance, rule or regulation of any governmental entity. 
(8)	Serve shall mean hand delivery by a representative of either the fire department or police department to the owner or authorized representative who responded to the premises. In the event the owner or authorized representative fails to respond to the premises within thirty (30) minutes, serve shall mean placing the form or other matter in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or authorized representative. 
(9)	Alarm system contractors means registered alarm system contractors, Class I or II, or residential shall be those contractors that comply with all requirements defined in Chapter 489, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96)  
Sec. 3.5-2. - Disconnection of alarm system. 
(a)	Except for premises protected by a required operative alarm system, the police department enforcement official is authorized to order the disconnection or deactivation of any alarm system by written notice to the alarm contractor, alarm company, owner and/or lessee of the premises wherein an alarm system is installed for any of the following reasons: 
(1)	Failure to meet all requirements or pay the fees provided for in this Chapter within thirty (30) days of the charging of the fee. 
(b)	If the disconnection or deactivation order is due to an alarm contractor or alarm company failing to meet all requirements or pay the fees provided for in this Chapter within thirty (30) days of the charging of the fee; then the owner and/or lessee of the premises wherein an alarm system is installed shall be notified concurrently with the alarm contractor or alarm company of the disconnection or deactivation order. As part of the notice, the alarm contractor, alarm company, owner and/or lessee of the premises wherein the alarm system is installed shall be on official notice that no response will be made to the premises if the alarm system remains active beyond the specified date in the notice, which will be at least fifteen (15) days after the date of mailing or delivery, unless official appeal is requested by the alarm contractor or alarm company pursuant to section 3.5-3. 
(c)	If the disconnection or deactivation order is due to the owner and/or lessee failing to meet all requirements or pay fees provided for in this Chapter within thirty (30) days of the charging of the fee. The written notice to disconnect or deactivate shall be mailed or hand delivered to the owner and/or lessee and shall specify the date on which the owner and/or lessee shall be required to disconnect or deactivate the alarm system, which shall be at least fifteen (15) days following the date of the notice. The owner/lessee may appeal the order of the enforcement official pursuant to section 3.5-3. The alarm company shall be notified by written notice after the time limit for appeal has passed pursuant to section 3.5-3. As part of the notice, the owner and/or lessee along with the alarm company shall be on official notice that no response will be made to the premises if the alarm remains active beyond the specified date of the disconnect or deactivation order. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1149-97, § 1, 11-19-97; Ord. No. 1232-00, § 1, 8-26-00)  
Sec. 3.5-3. - Appeal. 
(a)	A notice of disconnect or deactivation order may only be appealed by the owner and/or lessee if the owner and/or lessee is the cause of the disconnect or deactivation order. 
(b)	A notice of disconnection or deactivation order may only be appealed by the alarm contractor or alarm company if the contractor or company is the cause of the disconnect or deactivation order. 
(c)	An alarm contractor, alarm company, owner and/or lessee to whom a notice to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system was mailed or hand delivered pursuant to section 3.5-2 shall be entitled to appeal, pursuant to section 3.5-3 (a) or (b), the order of the enforcement official to the enforcement official or the city manager or designee, if the matter cannot be resolved at the enforcement official level. The order may then be appealed to the office of the city manager. An appeal must be made in writing, stating the reason why the order to disconnect or deactivate should be withdrawn, and shall be made within fifteen (15) days of the notice to disconnect. The city manager or designee shall review the facts and circumstances and shall determine whether the alarm company, owner and/or lessee has shown good cause why the order should be withdrawn. If the city manager or designee affirms the order to disconnect or deactivate the alarm system, the alarm contractor, alarm company, owner and/or lessee shall have ten (10) days following the mailing or hand delivery of the written decision of the enforcement official, city manager or designee within which to comply with the order. The appeal of an order to disconnect or deactivate shall suspend the effective date of the order until the appeal has been acted upon by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1232-00, § 1, 8-26-00)  
Sec. 3.5-4. - Failure to disconnect or unauthorized reconnection of alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to fail to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system which has been ordered disconnected or deactivated pursuant to section 3.5-2, including those situations in which the city manager or designee affirmed the order to disconnect or deactivate; and it shall be unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to reconnect an alarm system which has been disconnected or deactivated pursuant to the order of the enforcement official, unless the reconnection of the alarm system is authorized pursuant to section 3.5-6 hereof. A fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) will be imposed on the owner and/or lessee for each alarm activation learned of by any means whatsoever by the police department while an alarm system is under an active disconnection or deactivation order. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1232-00, § 1, 8-26-00)  
Sec. 3.5-5. - Failure to pay registration fee, administrative fee or fine. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful and an offense against the city for any person or alarm company to fail to pay any registration fee, administrative fee, assessed fine, or other monetary penalty due the city under the provisions of this chapter, within thirty (30) days after written demand has been served by mail or hand delivery upon such person or company by the city. 
(b)	If the owner of the premises fails to pay the fee, fine or penalty timely, the owner shall be notified in writing, by certified mail or hand delivery of the city's intent to impose a lien to cover all costs and/or fees incurred. If payment is not received within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice to the owner indicating the total due, the city manager or designee shall impose a lien on the property in the amount of the fee, fine or penalty, including administrative costs and fees incurred by the city. The lien may be recorded in the official records of the county. Liens created under this section shall remain liens co-equal with the lien of all state, county, district and municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, and claims, until paid, and shall bear interest annually at a rate not to exceed the legal rate allowed and such liens may be foreclosed pursuant to the procedure set forth in Chapter 173, Florida Statutes. 
(c)	If a licensed business is renting or leasing the premises and fails to pay the fees, fines, or penalties timely, the enforcement official shall notify the licensing division of the fees or fines owed to the City of Rockledge. The licensing division will place a hold on the company's occupational license for the next license renewal until the outstanding fees, fines, or monetary penalties are paid. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1149-97, § 2, 11-19-97; Ord. No. 1232-00, § 1, 8-26-00)  
Sec. 3.5-6. - Reconnection of alarm systems. 
Any order to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system may be rescinded by the police department enforcement official upon a finding by said enforcement official that the reason for the disconnect or deactivation order has been corrected. Before any reconnection of any alarm system, after the order to disconnect said system, a reconnection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed to the person or company responsible for the disconnection or deactivation order. The enforcement official shall not rescind an order to disconnect or deactivate if the owner and/or lessee, or alarm company has failed to pay any fee or fine charged pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1232-00, § 1, 8-26-00)  
Sec. 3.5-7. - Automatic telephone dialing alarm device or digital alarm communicator system. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to install, maintain, operate or use any automatic telephone dialing alarm device or digital alarm communicator system within the city if the system requires connection to the emergency communications center of the police or fire departments. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to install, maintain, operate, or use any automatic telephone dialing alarm device or digital alarm communicator system within the city unless such system is currently approved by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and has been approved by the enforcement official, unless otherwise required by Florida Statutes. 
(c)	Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided for in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96)  
Sec. 3.5-8. - Newly installed alarm systems. 
All newly installed alarm systems that have complied with section 3.5-27 shall not be fined for excessive alarms, and the total number of alarms shall not be counted against the owner or lessee of a newly installed alarm system for a period of sixty (60) days. the time limit in this section shall be measured from the date the system was activated as set forth in section 3.5-27. This section only applies to first time installed alarm systems at the installed address. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1149-97, § 3, 11-19-97; Ord. No. 1232-00, § 2, 8-26-00)  
Sec. 3.5-9. - Alarm system operations. 
The city, its officers, employees and agents shall not assume any duty or responsibility for the installation, maintenance, operation, repair or effectiveness of any privately owned alarm system, those duties and responsibilities being solely those of the owner of the premises. Additionally, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises to silence an activated alarm and thereafter reset the same. The city shall not provide, nor make available, the services of its police department or fire department emergency communications centers for use by owners as a central location for alarm system receiving equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96)  
Sec. 3.5-10. - Registration of alarm system contractors. 
Every alarm system contractor performing work in the city shall be certified as required by Chapter 489, Florida Statutes. Every alarm system contractor performing work in the city must show proof of such insurance and state license as defined in Chapter 489, Florida Statutes, or city ordinance, to the enforcement official upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1149-97, § 4, 11-19-97)  
Sec. 3.5-11. - Audible alarms. 
All audible sound systems shall sound no longer than five (5) minutes for residential and ten (10) minutes for businesses unless otherwise directed by state statute. Every audible alarm system installed within the city must have a device to automatically terminate the audible signal within the above stated time limits. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1149-97, § 4, 11-19-97)  
Sec. 3.5-12. - Testing of alarm. 
(a)	Prior to any test of any alarm system the police department will be notified prior to the activation of the test. 
(b)	Failure of the owner and/or lessee to notify the police department of an alarm test which results in a response from the police department will be classified as a false alarm and will be taken into account as to the penalties described in section 3.5-29. 
(c)	Failure of any alarm company or monitoring agency to notify the police department of an alarm test which results in a response from the police department to the false alarm will result in a fifty dollar ($50.00) fine imposed on the responsible company for the false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1232-00, § 3, 8-26-00)  
Sec. 3.5-13. - Requirements of the alarm monitoring agency. 
All alarm monitoring agencies are required to furnish the law enforcement agency with the following information when dispatching or reporting an alarm: 
(1)	Alarm monitoring personnel must call the premises generating the alarm before contacting law enforcement; 
(2)	Give the name of the monitoring agency; 
(3)	Give the name or I.D. number of the reporting operator; 
(4)	Give a call back telephone number of the monitoring agency; 
(5)	Give the name of business or homeowner and address of the activated alarm; 
(6)	If a call has been made to a key holder, the key holder's name and estimated time of arrival (thirty (30) minutes maximum, unless extenuating circumstances can be shown for allowing more time); 
(7)	Any other information that may be of value or required by the individual enforcement agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96)  
Sec. 3.5-14. - Penalty and enforcement. 
(a)	Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense against the city and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced either by prosecution as a misdemeanor through the state attorney's office for the Eighteenth Judicial Circuit of Florida in and for Brevard County, or through the powers and jurisdiction of the City Code Enforcement Board, or by any other legal or equitable form of action. The provisions of chapter 3.5 shall not be enforced within the city prior to October 1, 2000, and the provision of said chapter 3.5 shall commence to be enforced in the city on October 1, 2000, and continually thereafter except as the same may subsequently be amended or repealed. The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to modify, waive, or reduce penalties in the event of clearly demonstrated hardship or extraordinary circumstances and this shall be applicable to section 3.5-3. 
(b)	The city manager, enforcement official, or designee shall have the authority to suspend section 3.5-28 and 3.5-29 of the alarm ordinance in times of catastrophe such as hurricanes or tornados. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1149-97, § 5, 11-19-97; Ord. No. 1232-00, § 4, 8-26-00)  
Secs. 3.5-15—3.5-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 3.5-26. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)	Burglar alarm system means any mechanical, electrical or radio controlled device which is designed to be used for the detection of any unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility, or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or both, which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, alarm systems shall be deemed to include audible alarms at the site of the installation of the detection device, proprietor alarms and automatic telephone direct dial devices or digital alarm communicator systems. 
(2)	Burglar alarm technician means any person who inspects, installs, repairs or performs maintenance on burglar alarm systems and is licensed by the State of Florida or works under a state licensed alarm contractor. 
(3)	Enforcement official means the police chief or his designated representative. 
(4)	False burglar alarm means the activation of any alarm system as defined in section 3.5-1 of this Chapter which results in the response of the police department caused by the negligence, malfunction, or intentional misuse of the system by the owner or his employees, servants or agents or any other activation not caused by forced entry or attempted forced entry or robbery. An alarm is not considered a false burglary alarm if the alarm is activated due to malicious causes beyond the control of the owner, or acts of God beyond the control of the owner such as lightning strikes or severe weather conditions, as documented by the investigating officer(s). 
(5)	Transfer of alarm system means any time that an alarm contractor or alarm company account is changed by name to a new owner or lessor of the alarm system by an alarm contractor or alarm company. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1232-00, § 5, 8-26-00)  
Sec. 3.5-27. - Notice of existence of burglar alarm system. 
(a)	Every person who installs, sells, owns, leases, possesses, or operates any burglar alarm system within the city shall furnish the City of Rockledge or designee a completed "alarm registration application" form prior to the alarm system being activated whether the system is monitored or not. 
(b)	If the alarm system is installed or transferred to another owner or lessor by a licensed alarm system contractor, or alarm company, it shall be the sole responsibility of the contractor or company which is installing or transferring the burglar alarm system to provide the owner or lessee with a copy of the most current city alarm ordinance, and an "alarm registration application" form. The "alarm registration application" shall be completed by the alarm contractor or alarm company and delivered to the City of Rockledge or designee by the alarm contractor or alarm company prior to the system being activated along with a registration fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). A grace period of seven (7) calendar days will be allowed for the contractor or alarm company to assure the system is registered and that no undue hardship is incurred by the alarm system contractor or alarm company. Any alarm contractor or alarm company not complying with the registration of newly installed alarm systems or re-registration of transferred ownership of any alarm system shall be assessed a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and the owner or lessee of the alarm system shall not receive the exemptions set forth in section 3.5-8 if applicable. Alarm contractors or alarm companies shall not delegate the requirements to register alarm systems to the owner or lessee of the alarm system. Furthermore, the City of Rockledge or its designee will not accept "alarm registration applications" from the owners or lessees of alarm systems unless the system is being installed pursuant to sec[tion] 3.5-27(c). Failure of alarm contractors or alarm companies to pay imposed fines or adhere to this section will result in disconnection or deactivation orders being issued on the alarm system in violation as stated in sec[tion] 3.5-2, which will include a non-response to alarm activation by the Rockledge Police Department. 
(c)	If the alarm system is not installed by an alarm contractor or alarm company, the owner or lessee of the premises shall, before activating the system, furnish to the City of Rockledge or designee the "alarm registration application" along with the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) registration fee. Failure to register the alarm system will result in a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine being issued at the discretion of the enforcement official. 
(d)	All "alarm registration application" forms shall be fully completed and include the following information if applicable: 
(1)	The name(s), address, business and home telephone number of the owner, lessee, operator, manager or person in possession of the premises wherein the alarm system is installed; 
(2)	The name, address and telephone number (home and business) of a minimum of two (2) persons (but not more than three (3) persons) who can be notified by the enforcement official in the event of the activation of the alarm system, who shall be capable of responding to the premises within thirty (30) minutes, and who has a key and is authorized to enter the premises to ascertain the status thereof; 
(3)	The name, address and telephone number of the alarm contractor wherein the alarm system is installed; 
(4)	The name, address and telephone number of the alarm maintenance/repair contractor wherein the alarm system is installed; 
(5)	The name, address and telephone number(s) of the alarm monitoring agency wherein the alarm signal is received; 
(6)	That a copy of the most current alarm ordinance was provided to the owner or lessor of the alarm system by the alarm contractor or alarm company; and 
(7)	The date of activation of the alarm system. 
(8)	When any of the information required in the "alarm registration application" form has changed, it shall be reported to the Rockledge Police Department, Records Division, by the owner within twenty (20) days of such change. 
(e)	Alarm systems that are not monitored by alarm companies, or monitoring agencies and were not installed by alarm contractors or alarm companies must re-register the alarm system when the owner or lessee changes. Registrations are non-transferable to a new owner, lessee, or address. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1149-97, § 6, 11-19-97; Ord. No. 1232-00, § 5, 8-26-00)  
Sec. 3.5-28. - Responsibility for burglar alarm activation, owner response, burglar alarm malfunction and corrective action. 
(a)	The responsibility for burglar alarm activation shall be that of the owner or occupant of the premises in which the burglar alarm system is installed. A response to an alarm activation shall result when any officer or member of the police department shall be dispatched to the premises where the alarm has activated or learns of the activation of the alarm system(s), by any means whatsoever, and responds thereto by traveling to that premises. After responding to an alarm activation, the alarm monitoring agency shall notify any person identified within their system of the activation of the alarm system, and such person should thereupon travel to the premises to ascertain the status thereof. For alarm activations that are learned of by any means other than alarm companies or their monitoring agency the enforcement official or designee shall attempt to notify any person identified in the "alarm registration application" form or files of the activation of the alarm system; who has a key and is authorized to enter the premises, and such person should thereupon travel to said premises to ascertain the status thereof. Should any owner, occupant, or key holder/emergency contact elect not to respond to the premises or fail to respond to the premises within thirty (30) minutes of the alarm activation, it will result in the alarm activation automatically being classified as an alarm malfunction regardless of the cause of the alarm activation and be subject to fees imposed in sec[tion] 3.5-29, unless the investigating officer(s) is able to determine on premises at the time of response that the alarm activation was due to criminal activity or attempted criminal activity, or weather related activation. 
(b)	The officer or member of the police department who responds to said premises shall serve the owner or an authorized representative a copy of the alarm response report. If no response is made to the premises by the owner, occupant, or key holder/emergency contact within thirty (30) minutes, the enforcement official shall mail a copy of the alarm response report to the registered owner of the alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1149-97, § 7, 11-19-97; Ord. No. 1232-00, § 5, 8-26-00)  
Sec. 3.5-29. - Fee charges; burglar alarm malfunctions or false burglar alarms. 
(a)	No fee shall be assessed for the first four (4) alarms at the same premises responded to by the police department during each calendar year. Thereafter, the following fees shall be paid by the owner for each false alarm responded to by the police department at the same premises during the calendar year: 
MONITORED ALARM SYSTEMS AND NON-MONITORED ALARM SYSTEMS OR ALARMS NOT REPORTED BY ALARM COMPANIES OR MONITORING COMPANIES 
Number of alarms 	Fee per alarm 
Fourth 	Warning 
Fifth 	$25.00 
Sixth 	50.00 
Seventh 	75.00 
Eighth 	100.00 
Ninth 	125.00 
Tenth 	150.00 
Eleventh 	175.00 
Twelfth 	200.00 
Thirteenth 	225.00 
Fourteenth 	250.00 
Fifteenth 	300.00 
Sixteenth through twentieth 	500.00 each 
Twenty-first 	disconnection order for the remainder of the year, plus one more year 
 
(b)	Should any fee assessed pursuant to this Chapter remain unpaid in excess of ninety (90) days from the date the charge is billed, a collection fee in the amount of thirty (30) percent of the outstanding balance shall be assessed and shall be payable by the person or company that was billed in addition to the original fee. The owner, lessee, or alarm company shall also be responsible for any legal fees or costs incurred by the city in enforcement of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1136-96, § 2, 12-18-96; Ord. No. 1232-00, § 5, 8-26-00)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Adult businesses, Ch. 3; regulations concerning alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments, §§ 3-77, 3-105 et seq.; possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in parks, § 14-4. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Hours regulated. 
(a)	Hours of sale in general. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, consume or permit to be sold, served, or consumed, in any place in the city which holds a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages under the beverage laws of the state, any alcoholic beverage between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday or Saturday; or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on any Sunday; [provided] that it shall not be unlawful for any person holding a beverage license for the sale of beer, ale or wine in the city under the beverage laws of the state, to sell, serve, consume or permit to be sold, served or consumed in such licensed premises any beer, ale or wine between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays. 
(b)	Exception for New Year's Day. The hours of sale specified in subsection (a) of this section shall not be applicable on the morning of any New Year's Day, on which day establishments within the city holding a valid license for the sale of alcoholic beverages, under the beverage laws of the state, may sell, serve, consume or permit to be sold, served or consumed at such licensed premises alcoholic beverages until 4:00 a.m., and shall not be required to close at 2:00 a.m. as provided in subsection (a) above. 
(Code 1964, § 3-14; Ord. No. 770-85, § 1, 11-20-85) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate hours, F.S. §§ 562.14(1), 562.45(2).  
Sec. 4-2. - Zoning regulations and restrictions. 
Additional regulations and restrictions concerning the location of establishments engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages are contained in the land development regulations of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 3-17; Ord. No. 684-84, § 11, 3-21-84; Ord. No. 945-90, § 2, 2-21-90) 
Editor's note— The land development regulations of the city are published separately from this volume.  
Sec. 4-3. - Drinking on city property. 
No person shall drink or consume alcoholic beverages on any property of the city. This prohibition may be removed for specific special events, upon approval by the city council or as provided by policies and/or regulations of the county parks and recreation department. 
(Code 1964, § 3-32; Ord. No. 1649-2014 , § 1, 7-16-14)  
Sec. 4-4. - Drinking on streets or sidewalks. 
No person shall drink or consume alcoholic beverages on any public street or sidewalk of the city. This prohibition may be removed for specific special events, upon approval by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 3-33; Ord. No. 1649-2014 , § 2, 7-16-14)  
Sec. 4-5. - Employment of minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any vendor licensed under the state beverage law to employ any person under eighteen (18) years of age, unless such employment is specifically permitted by F.S. § 562.13. 
(Code 1964, § 3-22)  
Sec. 4-6. - Furnishing to minors. 
No person shall sell, give, serve or permit to be served any alcoholic beverages, including wines and beer, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Code 1964, § 3-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 562.11(1).  
Sec. 4-7. - False representation of age. 
No minor shall make false statements as to his age or identity, or furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false registration card, identification card, or other document for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic beverages, including beer. 
(Code 1964, § 3-36) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 562.11(2).  
Secs. 4-8—4-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 4-18. - Policy and intent. 
The city council finds that the consumption of alcoholic beverages while driving or riding in or on a motor vehicle poses a grave imminent hazard to the health and welfare of the residents of the city. Therefore, it is declared to be the policy of the city that the consumption of alcoholic beverages and the possession of any open containers containing alcoholic beverages while driving or riding in or on a motor vehicle is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 853-87, § 1(3-8), 10-21-87)  
Sec. 4-19. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following meanings: 
(a)	Motor vehicle means any vehicle, as defined in Florida Statutes, which is self-propelled, and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power, but not including any bicycle or moped. 
(b)	Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight. Proof that a beverage in question was contained in an opened bottle or can labeled as beer, ale, malt liquor, malt beverage, wine, wine cooler or other similar name or names and which bears the manufacturer's insignia, name or trademark shall be prima facie evidence that such beverage is an alcoholic beverage. 
(c)	Highway means any public street, avenue, boulevard, roadway, alley, sidewalk, parking lot or other right-of-way or any area upon which the public has the right to travel, whether public or private, located within the city. 
(d)	Open container means any bottle, can or other receptacle or container containing any alcoholic beverage or any mixture containing an alcoholic beverage, which has been opened or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed. 
(e)	Possession. An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of a person if such a container is physically held by or readily accessible to the person by being within such person's grasp or if such person is observed drinking from such open container. An open container shall not be considered to be in the possession of a person if the open container is located in a locked glove compartment, or other locked compartment, trunk or other nonpassenger area of the vehicle as intended by the manufacturer. An open container shall not be considered in the possession of a person if the open container is contained in a properly sealed box or located in the refrigerator or other cabinet of a motor home or recreational vehicle type unit, which is defined as: "… primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle." 
(f)	Readily accessible means that the open container that contains any alcoholic beverage is in the vehicle and although not in the actual, physical, manual possession of the driver or passenger is located in a place and manner that it can be easily reached. 
(Ord. No. 853-87, § 1(3-9), 10-21-87)  
Sec. 4-20. - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons in any motor vehicle to possess, to have readily accessible or to transport, or to allow others to possess, to have readily accessible or to transport any open container containing any alcoholic beverage, or any mixture containing an alcoholic beverage, while the motor vehicle is upon a street or highway within the city. 
(Ord. No. 853-87, § 1(3-10), 10-21-87)  
Sec. 4-21. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(a)	To paying passengers and their guests on a bus, limousine, taxicab or other motor vehicle that is operated by duly licensed drivers in the course of conducting an on-going, duly licensed and authorized business or providing paid passenger transportation or service; provided, that no open container containing any alcoholic beverage is in the possession of or readily accessible to the driver. 
(b)	To any open container in a refrigerator in the living area of house trailers, travel trailers, camping trailers, motor homes, campers and other similar types of facilities that are primarily designed and constructed to provide temporary living quarters and utilized for traveling and recreational purposes and that are equipped with refrigeration facilities. 
(c)	The possession of any open container containing any alcoholic beverage by any state-licensed beverage salesperson, vendor or agent, but only for purposes specifically related to their employment as salespersons, vendors or agents and only during normal working hours for such business. 
(d)	The possession of any open container containing any alcoholic beverage by any duly ordained or authorized minister, pastor, priest, rabbi or any other similarly designated person of any religious order, monastery, church or religious body, but only for purposes specifically related to their fulfillment of their religious duties. 
(e)	The possession of any open container containing any alcoholic beverage by any law enforcement officers and employees of law enforcement agencies, but only while in the performance of their lawful duties. 
(f)	The possession of any open container containing any alcoholic beverage by any person or persons engaged in picking up empty beverage containers solely for the purpose of collecting the deposit or value of such containers. 
(g)	The possession of any open containers containing any alcoholic beverage by any person or persons participating in a litter control or pickup program. 
(h)	The exceptions stated herein shall apply to only possession and transportation of alcoholic beverages and open containers, and not to drinking or consuming alcoholic beverages, except for the exception that applies to passengers as stated in subsection (a) herein. 
(Ord. No. 853-87, § 1(3-11), 10-21-87)  
Sec. 4-22. - Penalty. 
Any operator of a vehicle who violates this article prohibiting possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles is guilty of a noncriminal moving traffic violation, punishable as provided in F.S. Ch. 318. A passenger of a vehicle who violates this article is guilty of a nonmoving traffic violation, punishable as provided in F.S. Ch. 318. 
(Ord. No. 853-87, § 1(3-12), 10-21-87; Ord. No. 1021-91, § 1, 12-4-91)  
Sec. 4-23. - Signage. 
City personnel shall post and maintain appropriate signage at all appropriate entrances to the city warning of the enforcement of this article. Failure of a person accused of violating this article to observe such warning or failure of the city to have such signage properly posted at the time of the alleged offense shall not constitute a defense to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 853-87, § 1(3-23), 10-21-87)  
Chapter 5 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1161-98, § 1, adopted July 15, 1998, repealed ch. 5, which pertained to animal control and derived from Ord. No. 999-91, § 2, adopted June 5, 1991. 
 
Chapter 6 - BOATS AND VESSELS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Wrecked, abandoned and derelict property, § 13-14. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Scope of application. 
(a)	All vessels operated or anchored on navigable waters within the corporate limits of the city, and the owners, operators or occupants of such vessels, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, except to the extent that any regulation herein contained is preempted by county, state or federal law. 
(b)	The provisions of this chapter are intended to be in addition to all county, state and federal laws, regulations and requirements pertaining to the regulation of boats and vessels and persons owning or using boats or vessels while on navigable waters in the city, and any such county, state or federal law or regulation which imposes more stringent requirements than those contained by this chapter shall apply, so that the most stringent requirements shall be deemed in force and effect and required to be met. 
(Ord. No. 962-90, § 1, 5-16-90; Ord. No. 981-90, § 1, 10-3-90)  
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
(a)	As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, the term: 
(1)	Live-aboard vessel means: 
a.	Any vessel used solely as a residence; or 
b.	Any vessel represented as a place of business, a professional or other commercial enterprise, or a legal residence. 
A commercial fishing boat is expressly excluded from the term "live-aboard vessel." 
(2)	Anchorage means prevention of drift of a vessel by the means of tying off to a permanent or temporary landmark, either in the waterways or on shore; or by the means of dropping an anchor to the floor of the waterway; or attaching a line to another vessel anchored in the waterway. 
(3)	Emergency means a situation presenting a threat of harm, injury or hazard to life, limb or property. 
(4)	City means the City of Rockledge. 
(5)	County means Brevard County, Florida. 
(6)	State means the State of Florida. 
(7)	Federal means United States of America. 
(Ord. No. 962-90, § 1, 5-16-90; Ord. No. 981-90, § 1, 10-3-90)  
Sec. 6-3. - Live-aboard vessels. 
(a)	Use regulated. The use of a boat or vessel as a "live-aboard vessel" in or upon navigable waters within the city is regulated by this chapter pursuant to Florida Statutes. 
(b)	Lights and visual warning devices required. Every owner or other person in control of a live-aboard vessel on navigable waters within the city is hereby required to display on said vessel at night all such lighting and visual warning devices as are required by applicable county, state or federal laws and regulations. 
(c)	Marine sanitation device. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy any boat, vessel or watercraft as a live-aboard vessel on any navigable waterway in the city unless such vessel is equipped with a properly functioning and operating marine sanitation device complying in all respects with the applicable requirements of county, state or federal laws and regulations. 
(d)	Registration of live-aboard vessel status. The owner or other party in control of a live-aboard vessel on navigable waters within the city shall register such live-aboard status of the vessel with the city building department on forms provided by the city, and obtain a registration certificate therefor within seventy-two (72) hours after receipt of notification in writing of such requirement. At the time of registration of the live-aboard vessel status, the registrant shall state the estimated length of time the live-aboard status of the vessel will continue within the city. 
(e)	Compliance with laws and regulations. The owner or other party in control of a live-aboard vessel on navigable waters within the city and all persons residing or aboard such vessel shall at all times comply with all applicable county, state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to such vessel and the use thereof. 
(f)	State registration required. Each such vessel must display a current boat registration as required by Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 962-90, § 1, 5-16-90; Ord. No. 981-90, § 1, 10-3-90)  
Sec. 6-4. - Indicia of live-aboard vessel activity. 
For the purpose of determining whether a particular vessel, boat or watercraft is a live-aboard vessel within the purview of this chapter, consideration shall be given to the following quoted excerpts from Florida Attorney General's Opinion Number 85-45: 
"Accordingly, you alternatively phrase your first question as an inquiry into the indicia municipal marine patrol officers may look [at] to assist in determining whether a vessel is a legal residence and thus within the definition of `live-aboard vessel' at Section 327.02(13)(b), Florida Statutes. 
"A `legal residence' is a location where a person is presently living with the present intention of making it his permanent abode. Minick v. Minick, 149 So. 483 (Fla. 1933); Wade v. Wade, 113 So. 374 (Fla. 1927). And see, Walker v. Harris, 398 So. 2d 955, 958 (4 D.C.A. Fla., 1981), stating: `A person may have several temporary local residences, but can have only one legal residence. A legal residence, or domicile, is the place where a person has fixed an abode with the present intention of making it their [sic] permanent home.' See also, Black's Law Dictionary 807 (5th Ed. 1979), defining `legal residence' as `permanent fixed place of abode which person intends to be his residence and to which he intends to return despite…temporary absences.' While subjective intention is the best evidence of `legal residence,' Florida courts have clearly recognized that residence may be established by objective facts as well. See, Brown v. Brown, supra, at 383, stating that `residence is a matter of objective fact.' See also, Walker v. Harris, supra, at 958, stating that, although subjective intent is the best proof of domicile, `this is not to suggest that proof of legal residence cannot be measured by objective factors.' 
"Therefore, I am of the opinion that vessels which are used as a person's primary residence may be `live-aboard vessels' for purposes of municipal regulation permitted by Section 327.60(2), F.S., even though they are not used solely as a residence but are also used for recreational purposes, if such vessels are represented as such person's `legal residence' pursuant to Section 327.02(13)(b), F.S. (1984 Supp.), and that the determination of whether such vessels are represented as a person's legal residence may be based on a combination of the person's subjective intent and objective facts. However, this office ordinarily refrains from resolving questions of fact in order to avoid an unwarranted intrusion into the province of the judiciary; thus, I must decline to discuss specific objective `indicia' from which municipal marine patrol officers may infer that a vessel is a `legal residence' and therefore a `live-aboard vessel' for purposes of Section 327.60(2). Such questions of fact can only be resolved by a court of law in appropriate judicial proceedings. See, e.g., the court's discussion of the testimony of record in Walker V. Harris, supra; and the relative weight to be accorded thereto. Cf., United States v. Calhoun, 566 F. 2d 969 (5th Cir. 1978) (court's discussion of objective facts in evidence supporting determination of taxpayer's `legal residence')." 
(Ord. No. 962-90, § 1, 5-16-90; Ord. No. 981-90, § 1, 10-3-90)  
Sec. 6-5. - Prohibited mooring, etc., at city property. 
(a)	No vessel shall dock, tie up, moor or land at or on city property, or use city property as a place to launch a vessel except at a municipal marina or other designated area which is marked for boating activity, except in the case of emergency. Emergency conditions shall be corrected within not more than seventy-two (72) hours and the vessel removed from city property. 
(Ord. No. 962-90, § 1, 5-16-90; Ord. No. 981-90, § 1, 10-3-90)  
Sec. 6-6. - Certain discharges prohibited. 
It is declared to be unlawful for any person to discharge, or permit or allow any other person on a vessel under his control or command to discharge, any human or animal excreta from any head, toilet or similar facility on any vessel, or throw, discharge, deposit or leave, or cause or permit to be thrown, discharged, deposited or left from any vessel any garbage, trash, excreta or other refuse matter of any description into any navigable waters within the city. 
(Ord. No. 962-90, § 1, 5-16-90; Ord. No. 981-90, § 1, 10-3-90)  
Sec. 6-7. - Enforcement. 
City officials shall have the right to solicit the assistance of the Florida Marine Patrol in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and any law enforcement or code enforcement officer of the city shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 962-90, § 1, 5-16-90; Ord. No. 981-90, § 1, 10-3-90)  
Sec. 6-8. - Penalty for violation. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an offense against the city punishable upon conviction by fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, and, in addition, the provisions of this chapter shall also be enforceable by proceedings before the city code enforcement board, or by suit by prohibitory or mandatory injunctive relief, or by any other lawful remedy existing at law or in equity for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 962-90, § 1, 5-16-90; Ord. No. 981-90, § 1, 10-3-90)  
Chapter 7 - CABLE FRANCHISE AND COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1365-2005, §§ 1—31, adopted January 19, 2005, repealed §§ 7-1—7-29 and enacted new sections as set out herein. The former sections 7-1—7-29 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 937-89, §§ 1—29, 12-20-89. 
Cross reference— Licenses, Ch. 11; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Short title and findings of minimum standards. 
(a)	Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as The City of Rockledge Cable Franchise and Communications Network Ordinance. The franchise agreement shall cover the incorporated areas of the City of Rockledge. 
(b)	Findings of minimum standards. In awarding this franchise the city council has considered and made the following findings regarding relevant procedural and substantive items, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)	Identifying the future cable-related community needs and interest and finding the franchisee will meet same; 
(2)	Reviewing the performance of the cable operator under the franchise during the current franchise term and finding the franchisee has performed satisfactorily; 
(3)	Considering the economic impact upon private property within the franchise area and finding the impact of awarding the franchise will be positive; 
(4)	Considering the public need for such franchise, if any; and finding the same exists and will be met by awarding this franchise to the applicant; 
(5)	Considering the capacity of the city's public rights-of-way to accommodate the cable system; and finding said capacity exists for the award of this franchise; 
(6)	Considering the present and future use of the city's public rights-of-way to be used by the cable system and finding said use will not be detrimentally harmed by an award of this franchise; 
(7)	Considering the potential disruption to existing users of the public rights-of-way to be used by the cable system and the resultant inconvenience which may occur to the public; and finding said will not exist; 
(8)	Considering the financial ability of the franchise applicant to perform; and finding same exists; and 
(9)	Reviewing other societal interests as are generally considered in cable television franchising and finding same will be positively served by an award of this franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 1, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Basic service shall have the meaning provided in applicable federal law. Additional signals may be added to the basic tier by the grantee. 
Council is the City Council of the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
Gross Receipts means all revenue collected from monthly cable service charges, installation charges, disconnect and reconnect fees, pay-per-view, leased access channels, and premium pay channels, not to include revenues collected for state taxes and franchise fees. However, such fees shall be limited only to the amount received exclusively from operation of said cable system in the City of Rockledge. 
Person means any individual, partnership, joint venture, association, firm, corporation, club, society or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit. 
Service area means all of the incorporated areas of the City of Rockledge. 
Subscriber means any person or entity legally receiving for any purpose any service provided by the cable operator. 
System shall mean the lines, fixtures, equipment, attachments, and all appurtenances thereto which are used in the construction, operation, and maintenance of a cable communications network including but not limited to the cable/fiber optic services. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 2, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-3. - Franchising provisions. 
(a)	Franchise required. Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity desiring to install and operate any cable television system or desiring to use the city rights-of-way to build a communications or cable network in the incorporated area of the City of Rockledge shall apply to the council for a franchise pursuant to this chapter. The issuance of a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall allow the franchisee to install, construct, maintain and operate a cable system of origination, transmission and distribution of electronic signals by cable/fiber optics and associated and similar devices including, but not limited to installation along, under, over, through, across and upon the public rights-of-way in accordance with the requirements of this chapter throughout the city described and for which approval has been received. 
Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity desiring to install and operate any cable television system in the City of Rockledge shall apply to the city for a permit, granting the privilege to install, construct, maintain and operate a cable system of origination transmission and distribution of electronic signals by cable/fiber optics and associated and similar devices along, under, over, through, across and upon the public rights-of-way under the jurisdiction of the city in accordance with such rules and regulations as shall be recommended by the city manager or his designee and approved by the council. 
The city hereby grants Bright House Networks, LLC a franchise renewal solely for the right and privilege to own, construct, install, maintain and operate a cable communications system within the franchise area. 
(b)	Franchise application procedure. All applications, by companies not currently franchised by this city, to construct, operate, or maintain any cable system in the City of Rockledge or to traverse any portion of those areas for the transmitting or conveying of such service elsewhere, shall be filed with the council or such office of the city as it shall designate and each such application shall set forth, contain, or be accompanied by the following: 
(1)	The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)	A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following: 
a.	The names and residence addresses of all general partners and corporate officers of the applicant. 
b.	The names, residence addresses and business addresses of all persons and entities having, controlling, or being entitled to have or control fifteen (15) percent or more of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such person or entity. 
c.	The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant and of any other business entity owning or controlling in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant. 
d.	A detailed description of all previous experience of the applicant in providing cable services or related or similar services. 
e.	A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, prepared by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a responsible lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the city setting forth a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed system in the city. The council shall have the right to reject an applicant's financial statement based upon the council's finding the certified public accountant is not qualified to render the opinion. 
f.	A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the miles of cable completed, the miles of cable to be completed with the time schedule for completion; and the total cost of completion of such system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof. 
(3)	A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant, which shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
a.	A detailed map indicating all areas to be served, the cable mileage to be build in each area, a time schedule for building each area and a time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be served. Included herein shall be a detailed description of where the cable will be aerial or underground. 
b.	A statement or schedule setting forth all classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of any said classifications, including installation charges, service charges, special, extraordinary, or other charges. The purchase price, terms, and nature of any optional or required equipment, device, or other thing to be offered for sale to any subscriber shall be described and explained in detail. 
c.	A detailed statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant. 
(4)	A copy of the form of any agreement, understanding, or other instrument to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber. 
(5)	A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and understandings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation which may affect control or operation of the system contrary to this chapter, as amended, or franchise agreement and copies thereof. 
(6)	A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any public utility, providing for the use of any facilities of the public utility, including but not limited to poles, lines or conduits. 
(7)	True and exact copies, if filed, of the last and most current FCC Cable TV Information Report, FCC Form 325 as submitted to the FCC, or any other reporting form required by a federal or state agency. If none have been filed, a detailed written explanation of why same has not been filed. 
(8)	Any other reasonable information which could materially affect the granting of the franchise as determined by the city and requested by same. 
(9)	All of the materials and information required by the applicant shall be submitted no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled first hearing on the request for a new franchise. Failure to do so shall preclude the matter from being heard at a public hearing. 
(10)	The council may select a consultant to assist in the evaluation of the franchise application and the expense shall be borne by the applicant. The cost shall be provided to the applicant by the city council or their designee by certified mail prior to commencing the evaluation process. The applicant shall submit a certified check in the amount no later than ten (10) days from receipt of said notice. If multiple applications are received the costs shall be prorated among the applicants. These application processing fees are over and above any construction, inspection, permit or franchise fees. In the event applicant(s) fails to make timely payment hereunder, the application shall be deemed withdrawn by applicant and city shall take no other action on said application until said application fee is paid. 
(c)	Application fee. Each original application submitted for a franchise shall be accompanied by an application processing fee in an amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(d)	Public hearing on applications. 
(1)	Upon receipt of an original application for a franchise submitted under the provisions of this article, the council shall publish once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a paper of general circulation in the city a notice of consideration of a cable franchise. Said notice shall name the applicant, describe the proposed service area, invite objections to the establishment of a cable system in the proposed service area from existing cable systems and the general public and set a time and date certain, at least thirty (30) days from the date of the first publication of the notice, for a public hearing on all applications filed for the establishment of a cable system and for all objections to the establishment of such cable system. 
(2)	The application shall be a matter of public record. An application may be amended in writing at any time prior to the time and date set for the public hearing. No amendments to filed applications, oral or written, and no new applications shall be received after the time and date set for the public hearing. No public hearing shall be scheduled until the application is considered complete as determined by the city and such public hearing may be continued from time to time and from place to place as determined to be necessary by the council. Final action shall be taken within ninety (90) days once the application is considered complete by the city. 
(e)	Issuance of franchise. 
(1)	The council may issue a franchise considered at a public hearing only after investigating the applicant and using the following guidelines in determining the merits of the application: 
a.	The financial stability of the applicant and the ability of the applicant to make the necessary investment to erect, operate and maintain the proposed cable system. 
b.	The quality and technical reliability of the proposed system based upon the proposed plan of construction and the method of distribution of signals. 
c.	The experience of the applicant in the erection, operation and maintenance of a quality cable system for the general public pursuant to public franchise agreements. 
d.	The potential for disruption of future service by destructive competition because of the presence of too many competing companies based upon the number of potential subscribers in the proposed service areas. 
e.	The desirability and feasibility of granting additional rights and privileges to use the streets, alleys, public ways and public places of the city and the method of placement of the necessary wires, poles, cables, underground conduits, conductors and fixtures to operate and maintain the proposed system. 
f.	The location and type of permanent facilities proposed to be constructed for such cable system. 
g.	The economic impact on private property, public need, present and future capacity of public rights-of-way, and potential disruption to existing users of rights-of-way. 
h.	The city shall not grant any overlapping franchises for cable service within its jurisdiction on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome than those in any existing franchise within the city. 
(2)	In considering the desirability of an additional or expanded cable operator, the City Council shall balance the desirability to promote competition in the cable television industry so as to promote (1) the provision of high-quality cable services at the lowest economic price; (2) a diversity of information against the unreasonable disruption of private and public property by multiple cable operations. 
(3)	The council shall notify in writing all applicants of its decision within thirty-five (35) days from the adjournment of said public hearing. 
(f)	Franchise award. Nonexclusive franchises may be awarded by the city council to applicants upon a finding that such award is consistent with the public interest, furthers the goal of providing efficient cable service to all residents of the city and does not result in material abuse of city streets, easements and rights-of-way. The city shall adopt by resolution such application and other administrative procedures and fees as are deemed necessary and desirable for efficient administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 3, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-4. - Initial performance guarantee. 
(a)	Within one (1) year from the date of issuance of an original franchise, the franchisee shall accomplish construction of twenty-five (25) percent of the proposed cable system within said service area where the density is twenty (20) homes per trunk cable mile, and shall thereafter equitably and reasonably extend energized trunk cable to a substantial percentage of its franchise area each year. A substantial percentage is hereby determined to be twenty five (25) percent of the homes within the service area described in the franchise. Failure to accomplish said significant construction of the proposed cable system within said service area within a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance of an original franchise or the extension of a service area or failure to equitably extend energized trunk cable to at least twenty-five (25) percent of its franchise area each year thereafter may result in cancellation of said franchise by the city council as provided in this chapter. However, said twenty-five (25) percent shall only apply to areas where the density is twenty (20) homes per cable mile. 
(b)	In the event a franchisee has not completed construction and is not offering cable service to at least seventy-five (75) percent of the homes within the service area described in its franchise at the expiration of three (3) years from the date of the issuance of said franchise, the council shall have the right to withdraw the franchise in the interest of the public convenience and necessity. Said action shall be taken only after a public hearing established by the council for the purpose of allowing the franchisee to show cause why such action should not be taken. 
(c)	Said franchisee shall have one (1) year to sell its system but must continue to operate the system for those subscribers who are already connected. 
(d)	It shall be the responsibility of the city to inspect and verify performance. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 4, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-5. - Bonding requirements. 
(a)	Initial performance bond. Each new franchisee shall, within thirty (30) days after the effective date of an original franchise granted under this chapter, post with the city a performance bond with good and sufficient surety in the amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of the obligations imposed by the franchise awarded hereunder from the date thereof including, but not limited to, faithful compliance with the construction timetable proposed by the franchisee in its bid as incorporated into the franchise, unless appropriate extension is approved by the city upon authorization of the city council. If the franchisee shall fail to perform the obligations heretofore or hereinafter set out in this franchise, the franchisee shall forfeit in total to the city the hereinabove initial performance bond. The city's right to recover under the bond shall be in addition to any other rights retained by the city under this chapter and other applicable law, any proceeds recovered under the bond may be used to reimburse the city for loss of expected payments of the franchise fee and other valuable consideration given for the grant of the franchise, and such additional expenses as may be incurred by the city as a result of franchisee's failure to comply with the obligations imposed by the franchise including, but not limited to, attorney's fees and costs of any action or proceeding, the cost of refranchising with another entity, and the cost of removal or abandonment of any property, or other costs which may be in default. In the event franchisee satisfactorily performs any and all obligations hereunder for a period of eight (8) years from the award of its franchise, applicant shall be entitled to file a request for a return of the bond hereunder. The city council hereby waives said bond for this renewal franchise to be awarded to Bright House Networks on the basis that this franchisee has established in the City of Rockledge a record of satisfactory performance and has in place a significant investment. 
(b)	Guarantee bond. Each franchisee shall within sixty (60) days of the effective date an initial franchise is granted under this chapter, furnish to the city a bond in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). This bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period of five (5) years from the date the franchise is granted under this chapter to guarantee the compliance with performance requirements and payment of all sums which may become due to the city under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 5, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-6. - Service requirements. 
(a)	System capability. 
(1)	The franchisee's cable distribution system shall provide at least seventy (70) television channels. 
(2)	Each franchisee shall at all times provide programming on its basic service pursuant to FCC requirements and provided that such programming is available. 
(3)	The franchisee shall extend cable television service to any residence within the city which is located on property within one hundred twenty five (125) feet of any portion of the subscriber distribution facilities of the franchisee's existing plant at the time of application for service. The one hundred twenty five (125) feet is measured following appropriate easements and rights of way and running contiguous with power and telephone. Such extension shall be made within sixty (60) calendar days after receipt of a legitimate written request for such service. There shall, however, be no obligation on the part of the franchisee to extend cable service in an area that does not have a density of at least (20) homes per trunk cable mile continuous to existing plant. Provided, however, the franchisee at its option may serve any building in excess of one hundred twenty five (125) feet if the owner of said building is willing to pay the actual cost of the service extension to such building; franchisee will pay for one hundred twenty five (125) feet as measured from the structure desiring service. 
(b)	Lock-out devices. The franchisee shall make available, to any residential subscriber so requesting, a "parental guidance" or "lock-out" device which shall permit the subscriber, at his or her option, to eliminate any channel from reception. The franchisee shall advise all residential subscribers regarding the availability of this device, and an additional reasonable charge for any such device may be imposed. 
(c)	Denial of service. 
(1)	The franchisee shall not, without good cause, fail to provide available service to individuals or prospective subscribers nor shall the franchisee terminate service without good cause. Service shall be provided to all interested customers where economically feasible. 
(2)	Franchisee may deny service to any subscriber where such subscriber has previously been a subscriber of the franchisee and franchisee previously terminated subscriber's service due to non-payment. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 6, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-7. - General penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable system within the incorporated City of Rockledge for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any signal, pictures, programs or sound. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 7, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-8. - Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
The franchisee shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city and to such reasonable regulation as the city shall hereafter provide, provided that such regulation is not destructive of the rights granted herein. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 8, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-9. - Territorial area involved. 
This chapter relates to the present territorial limits of the city and to any area henceforth added thereto during the term of this franchise. 
In the event the city annexes property into the municipal limits of the city, and said area is presently being served by a county franchised company, said franchised company shall not be obligated to obtain a franchise pursuant to this chapter in order to continue serving the annexed area unless required by the city to do so. Said company shall be obligated to pay the city a franchise fee for said area in accordance with the rates set by the city pursuant to this chapter and applicable law. Said company shall submit a letter indicating their agreement to comply with all rules and regulations set forth in this cable ordinance. In the event the company serving the annexed area desires to extend its service beyond the annexed area, said company shall be required to apply for and obtain a franchise pursuant to the terms and conditions of the ordinance prior to construction/installation of any additional cable outside the annexed area. Any existing city franchised cable operator shall not be obligated to provide service to an area that when annexed by the city is being served by an existing county franchised cable operator. The city shall notify the current franchisee of any annexations including the legal description of the annexed area. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 9, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-10. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)	Liability in case of emergency. If, at any time in case of fire, disaster, or other emergency, it shall appear necessary in the judgment of the city to cut, move or otherwise interfere with any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances or appurtenances thereto of the franchisee, the city shall not be liable for any injury or damage to such property and equipment of the franchisee as a result of such emergency cutting, moving or interference. The city shall hold the franchisee harmless for damage or injury to property or person other than the franchisee if such damage or injury to property is the result of city's cutting, moving, or interfering with franchisee's system plant and facilities. City shall immediately notify franchisee of such emergency and franchisee shall make necessary repairs. 
(b)	Indemnification. 
(1)	The franchisee shall hold the city harmless and shall pay any and all damages which the city may be required to pay as a result of the negligence of franchisee, its agents, employees or contractors resulting from the performance of their work-related duties. 
(2)	The franchisee agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of this franchise liability insurance insuring the city and the franchisee with regard to all damages mentioned in subparagraph (a) above in the minimum amounts of: 
a.	One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any one person, within the limit, however, or one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident. 
b.	One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident. 
(3)	The insurance policy obtained by the franchisee in compliance with this paragraph must be approved by the city and such insurance policy, along with written evidence of payment of required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the city clerk during the term of this franchise. 
(4)	Whenever in the judgment of the council said insurance shall be deemed insufficient or inadequate, then franchisee, upon demand by said council, shall furnish such new or additional insurance in such reasonable amount or amounts as may be specified by it and cost to be borne by the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 10, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-11. - Signal quality requirements. 
The franchisee shall operate and maintain its cable system in full compliance with the standards set forth by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 11, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-12. - Operation and maintenance of system. 
(a)	The franchisee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruption, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
(b)	The franchisee shall maintain a local business office (within Brevard County), or agent, which shall be open, or available, during all usual business hours and have a listed telephone in the local telephone directory, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. 
(c)	All subscriber complaints and requests pertaining to repairs, quality of service, equipment malfunctions, or adjustments shall be handled in an expeditious manner by the franchisee. Complaints shall be directed to the franchisee's local office and shall be resolved or a reasonable explanation for the absence of resolution shall be given no later than three (3) working days except for adjustments which shall be five (5) working days after receipt of notice thereof excluding periods of natural disasters. A complete record of all written complaints received and the measures taken to resolve them shall be kept by the franchisee for three (3) years and made available to the city manager upon request. The city manager shall be designated as the official of the city who has primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the Franchise and implementation of complaint procedures. Notice of the procedures for reporting and resolving complaints shall be given to each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the cable system. 
(d)	The franchisee agrees to comply with the following measures to insure prompt and efficient service to customers in the City of Rockledge: 
(1)	Keep at least one (1) repair crew with a vehicle, tools, and equipment adequate for making repairs on call, twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, for the specific purpose of responding promptly to customer calls for restoration of interrupted service, pursuant to FCC regulations; and taking into account the safety of company employees. 
(2)	Simultaneous with the execution of this chapter, the franchisee shall implement a policy and program whereby customers within the City of Rockledge will be given fair and equitable credit or reduction in their cost of service for interruptions of service lasting more than one twenty-four-hour day per billing period. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 12, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-13. - Carriage of signals. 
All Federal Communications Commission regulations shall be complied with regarding the carriage of the programming of any existing or future television broadcasting station which covers the City of Rockledge in its principal broadcasting area. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 13, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-14. - Program alteration. 
All programs of broadcasting stations carried by the franchisee shall be carried in their entirety as received, with announcements and advertisements and without additions except as the Federal Communications Commission may otherwise specify. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 14, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-15. - Other business activities. 
This chapter does not take the place of any other franchise, license, or permit which might be required by law of the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 15, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-16. - Safety requirements. 
(a)	The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. 
(b)	The franchisee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the city's codes and ordinances, state and federal law, and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the city or of a public utility serving the city. 
(c)	All structures and all lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under, and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys and public ways or places of the city, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair. 
(d)	The franchisee shall have sufficient employees to provide safe, adequate, and prompt service for its facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 16, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-17. - Conditions on street occupancy. 
(a)	All transmissions and distribution structures, lines, and equipment erected by the franchisee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places. 
(b)	In case of disturbance by franchisee of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area, the franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. 
(c)	If at any time during the period of this franchise the city shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way, the franchisee, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, relay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense except shall be compensated as other users of the public rights-of-way are compensated for moving their facilities. This would not apply to the relocation of city water lines under the city agreement with the City of Cocoa. 
(d)	Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the franchisee shall be placed in such manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way. 
(e)	The franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings or structures. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid to franchisee by the person requesting same, and payment shall be paid in advance of franchisee raising or lowering their wires. The franchisee shall be given not less than five (5) business days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(f)	The franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public ways and places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the franchisee, except that, in an emergency situation and at the option of the city, such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the franchisee. 
(g)	In all sections of the city where the cables, wires, or other like facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the franchisee shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground, to the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the franchisee to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 17, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-18. - Removal of facilities upon request. 
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the franchisee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his request. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 18, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-19. - Transfer of franchise. 
The franchisee shall not transfer this franchise to another person without prior approval of the city, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The request for transfer shall come from the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 19, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-20. - Change of control of franchisee. 
Approval of the city council shall be required where ownership or control of more than fifty (50) percent of the right of control of the current franchise holder is acquired by a person or group of persons, none of whom already own or control fifty (50) percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively. By its acceptance of this chapter the franchisee specifically grants and agrees that any such acquisition occurring without approval of the city council shall constitute a violation of this chapter by the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 20, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-21. - City rights in franchise. 
(a)	The right is hereby reserved to the city or the city council to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the police power; provided that such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the rights herein granted. 
(b)	The city shall have the right to inspect the books, records, maps, plans and other financial records of the franchisee applicable to the Rockledge Franchise at any time during the normal business hours. 
(c)	The city shall have the right, during the life of this franchise, to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the franchisee any wire and pole fixtures necessary for a police alarm system, on the condition that such wire and pole fixtures do not interfere with the cable operations of the franchisee or violate any applicable Federal, State or Local construction code applicable thereto. 
(d)	The city shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter and make such inspections as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with the terms of this chapter and other pertinent city ordinances and provisions of law. 
(e)	At the expiration of the term for which this franchise is granted, absent right of renewal pursuant to 47 U.S.C. 546, or upon its termination and cancellation, as provided for herein, the city shall have the right to require the franchisee to remove at its own expense all portions of the cable system from all public ways within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 21, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-22. - Maps, plats, and reports. 
(a)	The franchisee shall make available in its office, true and accurate maps or plats of all existing and proposed system facilities within the franchise area. 
(b)	If requested by the city council, the franchisee shall file with the city clerk not later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the end of the franchisee's fiscal year, a copy of its report to its stockholders (if it prepares such a report), an income statement applicable to its operations during the preceding twelve-month period, and a balance sheet. If requested by the city council, these reports shall be prepared or approved by a certified public accountant and there shall be submitted along with them such other reasonable information as the city council shall request. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 22, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-23. - Franchise fee/payment to the city. 
(a)	Franchisee shall pay to the City of Rockledge a franchise fee of five (5) percent of gross receipts, as defined in section 7-2 of this chapter, derived from the operation of the cable system in the franchise area. Payments shall be made to the city on a monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, or annual basis as determined by the city. Sufficient notice shall be given by the city to the franchisee on any payment schedule change. Payments shall be made thirty (30) days after the close of the designated period. 
(b)	The city shall have the right to an annual audit of franchisee's revenue records for the operation of the cable system in the franchise area. Within a three-year period, if a discrepancy is determined as a result of the audit process, an adjustment will be made. If a deviation of greater than ten (10) percent of gross receipts for the City of Rockledge is found, the cost of the audit shall be borne by the franchisee. 
(c)	The provisions of section 7-23 and other provisions referring to franchise fees within this agreement shall not be in effect so long as the franchisee pays the Florida Communications Services Tax or a similar tax or fee throughout the term of this franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 23, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-24. - Forfeiture of franchise. 
(a)	In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the city by virtue of this chapter or otherwise, the city reserves the right to terminate and cancel this franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchisee hereunder, pursuant to federal law, in the event that the franchisee: 
(1)	Violates any material provisions of this chapter or any rule, order, or determination of the city or city council made pursuant to this chapter, however no material provision of this franchise ordinance shall be unilaterally modified by the city; 
(2)	Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged as bankrupt; or 
(3)	Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this chapter or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city. 
(b)	Such termination and cancellation shall be by resolution duly adopted after thirty days written notice to the franchisee and shall in no way affect any of the city's rights under this chapter or any provision of law. In the event that such termination and cancellation depends upon a finding of fact, such finding of fact as made by the city council shall be conclusive, provided however, that before this franchise may be terminated and cancelled under this paragraph, the franchisee must be provided with an opportunity to be heard before the city council in a full public proceeding affording due process. At least thirty (30) days before any action or proceeding to terminate is commenced by the city, franchisee shall be furnished written notice of the alleged violation and a reasonable opportunity to cure and correct the same. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 24, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-25. - Term of franchise. 
This franchise ordinance shall remain in full force and effect for a period of ten (10) years from January 1st, 2005 to January 1st, 2015 and shall be subject to renewal by the city through negotiations of a new franchise document mutually agreed upon by both parties, pursuant to federal law. Renewal applications shall be accompanied by a fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 2, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-26. - Erection, removal, and common user of poles. 
(a)	No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the franchisee without prior approval of the city with regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent aspects. However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of the franchisee shall be a vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the franchisee at its own expense whenever the city manager determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. 
(b)	Where poles or other wire-holding structures already exist for use in serving the city and are available for use by the franchisee, franchisee will make every effort to utilize such existing poles. 
(c)	Where the city or public utility serving the city desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the franchisee but agreement therefore with the franchisee cannot be reached, the city council may require the franchisee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the council shall determine to be just and reasonable, if the council determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the franchisee's operations. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 26, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-27. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)	When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be filed with the city shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)	Franchisee shall make every reasonable effort to provide its service to all inhabitants of the city requesting same, provided it is economically feasible for the franchisee to do so, and will not withhold service from any prospective subscriber whose premises is passed by franchisee's cable without justifiable cause. 
(c)	The franchisee shall provide one (1) basic and one (1) standard cable service outlet to City Hall, police stations, fire stations, public libraries, emergency services buildings, and public school buildings within the city's franchise area at no cost to the facility, provided, however, each facility must be within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of the franchisee's distribution system. The franchisee shall continue to provide the above service to all standard drops to city or public school buildings in existence at the location as of the date of this chapter. The distribution of the cable facility inside such buildings and the extent thereof shall be the option, duty and expense of the building owner. 
(d)	In the case of any emergency or disaster, the franchisee shall provide the system capability to transmit an emergency alert signal as required by FCC EAS regulations and shall be coordinated by the county. 
(e)	In the event the federal legislation is revised and/or amended, then the terms and conditions of this franchise agreement may be revised or amended if legally mandated by the federal legislation, or if the parties decide by mutual written agreement to revise or amend this document. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 27, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-28. - Force majeure. 
Prevention or delay of performance by the franchisee of any obligation under this chapter because of circumstances beyond the control of the franchisee, unforeseen circumstances or Acts of God shall not be deemed noncompliance with, or in violation of, this chapter. To the extent the Franchisee's performance of any obligation in this chapter is delayed by circumstances described in the preceding sentence, the franchisee's compliance with such obligation shall be excused until such circumstances are removed or resolved which shall be accomplished within a reasonable amount of time. The franchisee shall have a reasonable time following the removal or resolution of such circumstances to complete its performance under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 28, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-29. - No third party beneficiary. 
This chapter is solely for the benefit of, and shall be binding upon, the parties hereto and their respective successors in interest. No right or cause of action shall accrue upon, or by reason hereof, to or for the benefit of any person not a party to this chapter or a successor in interest. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 29, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-29.1. - Entire agreement. 
This agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties and supersedes all previous discussions, understandings and agreements. Modifications to and waivers of the provisions herein may only be made by agreement of both parties and only in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 30, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-29.2. - Acceptance. 
Franchisee shall forfeit and shall be deemed to have forfeited and abandoned all rights and privileges conferred by this chapter, and this chapter shall be null and void and of no force and effect unless franchisee shall, within thirty (30) days after adoption hereof, file with the city clerk its written acceptance of the rights and privileges hereby conferred and of the terms, conditions, and restrictions hereby imposed. 
(Ord. No. 1365-05, § 31, 1-19-05)  
Sec. 7-30. - Rates and charges. 
(a)	Any rate or charge established for cable television service, equipment, repair and installation shall be reasonable, just and fair to the public. In determining whether a rate or charge is reasonable, just and fair, the city shall apply the cable television rate regulation criteria established by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) by rule as amended from time to time. 
(b)	Should a franchisee desire to change any rate or charge, it shall submit a written proposal for the amounts and effective date of such change to the city manager who shall evaluate the proposal in a manner consistent with FCC cable television rate regulation standards and report this evaluation to the city council. The city manager's report shall be placed before the council at a duly noticed public hearing. At such hearing, evidence shall be taken and received on whether the proposed rate or charge is consistent with FCC standards. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall decide the matter by majority vote and adopt a resolution approving, disapproving or modifying the proposed rate changes and providing such relief as is appropriate and authorized by FCC rate regulation standards. The resolution shall set forth findings of fact and conclusions regarding the city council's determination. 
(Ord. No. 1068-94, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-94)  
Chapter 8 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisance vegetation, § 10-17; fireworks, § 13-6; interference with fire department signal system, § 13-11. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - General duties of chief. 
The chief of the fire department shall have charge and control of the fire department, firefighting personnel, fire equipment and apparatus of the city, and of any volunteer fire company whose services may be offered. He shall order and superintend the work of such company, and shall make recommendations to the city council from time to time as he deems appropriate for the better and more adequate protection of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 9-4)  
Sec. 8-2. - Powers of assistant chief in absence of chief. 
In the absence or disability of the chief of the fire department the assistant chief shall have charge and control of the fire department to the same extent as the chief. 
(Code 1964, § 9-6)  
Sec. 8-3. - Authority of officer in charge at fire. 
The chief of the fire department, or the fire department officer in charge, during any fire, shall have full and plenary police authority with power to order and make arrests of all persons in any way interfering with, hindering or impeding the work of the firefighting force, and shall have full power to regulate traffic on any and all streets in the area of the fire. 
(Code 1964, § 9-5)  
Sec. 8-4. - Adoption, enforcement of state regulations. 
(a)	All rules and regulations issued by the state fire marshal, under authority of F.S. § 633.05, shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. 
(b)	The chief of the fire department is hereby authorized to perform within the city any duties imposed upon him by such law or in accordance therewith, and to have such assistance as he shall require from other officials of the city in the discharge of such duties. 
(Code 1964, § 9-7)  
Sec. 8-5. - Unauthorized use of equipment. 
No engine or other apparatus used for extinguishing fires shall be assigned to any private use or enterprise, or used therein, or carried or placed beyond the place assigned to it, except in case of fire, or for repairs, without written consent of the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1964, § 9-14)  
Sec. 8-6. - Obstructing firemen. 
No person shall resist, impede, obstruct or interfere with the movements of the chief of the fire department or his assistants or any regular or volunteer fireman in the execution of his duty. 
(Code 1964, § 9-16) 
Cross reference— Interfering with officers, § 13-9. 
State Law reference— Assault or battery of firefighter, F.S. § 784.07; preventing or obstructing extinguishment of fire, F.S. § 806.10.  
Sec. 8-7. - Refusal to obey firemen; interference with equipment. 
No person shall refuse to obey any lawful order of any officer of the regular or volunteer fire department at any fire, or meddle or interfere with any engine, carriage, hook and ladder, truck, hose, or fire apparatus when engaged at or going to any fire. 
(Code 1964, § 9-17) 
State Law reference— Obstructing or preventing extinguishment of fire, F.S. § 806.10.  
Sec. 8-8. - False fire alarms. 
No person shall knowingly turn or send in a false alarm of fire. 
(Code 1964, § 9-20) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 806.101.  
Sec. 8-9. - Unauthorized persons prohibited in vicinity of fires. 
No person, except firemen, policemen, owners of property immediately contiguous thereto or in danger therefrom and their agents and servants, newspaper and radio reporters, and representatives and agents of fire insurance companies, shall be allowed in the immediate vicinity of any fire without the express consent of the officer of the fire department in command at such fire, or in command of some section or subdivision of the department. 
(Code 1964, § 9-15)  
Sec. 8-10. - Crossing fire lines. 
No person shall go beyond a certain line to be designated by the chief or other officer in command at a fire. 
(Code 1964, § 9-18)  
Sec. 8-11. - Parking near fires. 
No person, except a member of the fire department or public official, shall park within three hundred (300) feet of any fire, or in any manner which will interfere with the proper operation of the apparatus or hose lines, or within any prescribed fire lines which have been established. 
(Code 1964, § 9-19) 
Cross reference— Parking, stopping and standing, § 21-31 et seq.  
Chapter 9 - GARBAGE AND TRASH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Prohibited discharges from boats and vessels, § 6-6; health and sanitation, Ch. 10; nuisance accumulations of refuse, § 10-18; wrecked, abandoned and derelict property, § 13-14; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 17; vehicles spilling load, § 18-8. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 9-1—9-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COLLECTION SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 9-11. - Ownership of recyclable materials. 
(a)	Recyclable materials placed at the curb or at the designated collection point shall remain in the ownership of the individual placing said recyclable materials at said curb or designated collection point until said recyclable materials are collected by the city or an authorized collector of recyclable materials. 
(b)	Once recyclable materials are collected by the city or an authorized collector of recyclable materials said recyclable materials become the property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 960-90, § 2, 5-2-90)  
Sec. 9-12. - Prohibiting unauthorized taking of recyclable materials. 
No individual other than an officer, employee or agent of the city authorized for such purposes shall tamper or meddle with any container of recyclable materials, or the contents of such container, nor remove the container of recyclable materials, nor engage in scavenging of its contents, from the location where said container of recyclable materials has been placed by the depositor of the recyclable materials. 
(Ord. No. 960-90, § 2, 5-2-90)  
Sec. 9-13. - Billing, collection of charges. 
(a)	All garbage and trash collection charges due the city shall be included on a monthly water, sewer and garbage collection bill submitted to the owner or occupant of the premises from which the garbage and trash is collected. In any instance where premises do not receive the usual water and sewer bill, the garbage and trash collection charge shall be separately billed to the occupant of the premises for which the service is rendered. 
(b)	All accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid by the fifteenth of the month following the billing period for which service is rendered. If a delinquent account is not paid within thirty (30) days, the superintendent shall cease all refuse collection for that account unless otherwise directed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 844-87, § 1, 9-2-87; Ord. No. 960-90, § 1, 5-2-90)  
Sec. 9-14. - Collection fees for pickup of bulky items, furniture, appliances, etc. 
(a)	An owner or occupant of property who places for pickup and collection bulky items such as discarded household furniture and appliances will be charged an appropriate collection fee according to a schedule of collection fees compiled by the superintendent of public works, representative examples of such fees being as follows: 
Chair ..... $2.00 
Couch ..... 3.00 
Freezer ..... 3.00 
Refrigerator ..... 3.00 
Stove ..... 3.00 
Washing machine ..... 3.00 
(b)	The fees authorized by this section shall be paid to the city employee in charge of making the collection at the time the collection is made. 
(Code 1964, § 11-10A; Ord. No. 497-78, § 2, 9-20-78; Ord. No. 844-87, § 1, 9-2-87; Ord. No. 960-90, § 1, 5-2-90)  
Sec. 9-15. - Prearrangement for pickup of bulky items. 
An owner or occupant of property desiring the pickup and collection of bulky items such as discarded household furniture and appliances shall prearrange such pickup and collection by request in person or by telephoning the street department of the city department of public works. 
(Code 1964, § 11-10A; Ord. No. 497-78, § 2, 9-20-78; Ord. No. 844-87, § 1, 9-2-87; Ord. No. 960-90, § 1, 5-2-90)  
Sec. 9-16. - Wastes prohibited in containers. 
No person shall deposit or place in or cause to be deposited or placed in any garbage container or recycling container required by this chapter the following: 
(a)	Offal. The term "offal" shall mean all matter of a waste nature of butchered animals. 
(b)	Dead animals. The term "dead animals" shall mean all animals which may die or may be killed for other than food purposes. 
(c)	Excreta. The term "excreta" shall mean all human body wastes and animal dung and excrement. 
(d)	Fish heads, fish or fowl viscera or entrails, unless the same are contained in a plastic bag securely enclosed and tied. 
(e)	Ashes, sawdust, grass trimmings and other items of a fine nature unless the same are contained in a plastic bag securely enclosed and tied. 
(f)	Sharp items, razors, needles, broken glass and other similar material, unless same are placed in sealed boxes and labeled: "DANGER: CONTENTS CONTAINED ARE SHARP ITEMS." 
(g)	Hazardous waste of any variety. 
(h)	Flammable or explosive items; these items shall be disposed of as directed by the fire chief or designee, and the cost of disposal borne by the owner or possessor. 
(Code 1964, § 11-13; Ord. No. 838-87, § 6, 6-17-87; Ord. No. 844-87, § 1, 9-2-87; Ord. No. 960-90, § 1, 5-2-90; Ord. No. 989-91, § 6, 1-9-91)  
Sec. 9-17. - Fee for container. 
No building permit for the construction of any new single-family dwelling, duplex or triplex shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall first pay to the city at the time of the filing of the application for such permit, in addition to any other fee or charge properly payable under the ordinance of the city, a fee computed at the rate of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per dwelling unit described in the application. Such fee shall entitle the applicant to delivery and right to use for garbage collection and recycling purposes only one (1) wheeled garbage container and one (1) recycling container at each dwelling unit described in the application. When the certificate of occupancy is issued for such new residential construction the city shall deliver one (1) wheeled garbage container and one (1) recycling container to the premises of each dwelling unit for which the said sum of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) has been paid, said containers to be used only for the collection of garbage and recyclable materials at said premises. 
(Ord. No. 996-91, § 1, 5-1-91; Ord. No. 1181-99, § 1, 3-24-99) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 996-91, § 1, adopted May 1, 1991, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 8-24. Said provisions have been included herein as § 9-17 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 9-18. - Garbage collection fees. 
In order to cover the costs of inspecting, collecting, hauling and disposing of garbage, trash and recyclable materials, service charges in the amounts set forth below shall be paid to the city by the owner or occupant of each residence, building, structure, establishment, enterprise, land or premises from which garbage, trash or recyclable material are collected: 
(a)	Residential. The rate for residential recycling, garbage and trash collection shall be thirteen dollars and ninety cents ($13.90) per month per residence. A "residence" within the meaning of this section shall include a single residential unit, duplex residential unit, triplex residential unit, and each residential unit of a townhouse, mobile home or manufactured home subdivision. 
(b)	Commercial, multiple residence complexes and all entities other than "residential". The rate for garbage and trash collection from commercial establishments, multiple residence complexes, and all entities other than "residential" as defined in subsection (a) above shall be four dollars and seventy-five cents ($4.75) per cubic yard of garbage and trash collected on each occasion of collection by the city. There shall be a minimum charge of thirty dollars ($30.00) per month regardless of the amount of garbage and trash collected or the size of the garbage and trash container. The rate for collection of recyclable materials from multiple residence complexes shall be two dollars and thirty-five cents ($2.35) per month per residence. 
The rates in subsection (a) above shall be effective on all bills for services rendered after October 1, 2016. 
The rates in subsection (b) above shall be effective on all bills for services rendered after October 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 1323-03, § 2, 9-17-03; Ord. No. 1389-05, §§ 1—3, 9-7-05; Ord. No. 1424-06, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-06; Ord. No. 1467-07, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-07; Ord. No. 1523-09, §§ 1, 2, 9-9-09; Ord. No. 1692-2016 , §§ 1, 2, 9-7-16)  
Chapter 10 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Adult businesses, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 5; prohibited discharges from boats and vessels, § 6-6; garbage and trash, Ch. 9; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 17. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisance animals, § 5-16; wrecked, abandoned and derelict property, § 13-14; storage of wrecked or dismantled motor vehicles, § 13-15. 
 
Sec. 10-16. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words, terms or phrases shall have the meanings set forth below: 
Board means the nuisance abatement board of the city. 
City means the City of Rockledge. 
City Council means the city council of the City of Rockledge. 
Code enforcement officer means any authorized agent or employee of the city whose duty it is to assure compliance with provisions of this Code. 
Improved lot means any lot on which improvements have been made, including, but not limited to, construction of a building or structure, change of grade through filling or excavation, platted residential subdivision, with installed water or sewer lines, clearing of property to begin construction, or any other physical alteration which has significantly disturbed the natural vegetation on the site. 
Invoice for cost of abatement of nuisance means a written notice served by the city manager upon a property owner informing the property owner of the cost incurred by the city in causing the abatement of a nuisance as described in this article upon such property owner's failure to abate such nuisance within the time prescribed for abatement by the owner in a notice of violation or in an order of the nuisance abatement board. 
Notice of violation means a written notice from a code enforcement officer to a property owner informing such property owner of the existence or presence of a nuisance described in this article. 
Nuisance means any condition, occurrence, event, happening or thing declared to be a nuisance by any provision of this article. 
Nuisance abatement board means the administrative board created by the city council by the provisions of section 10-19 of this Code. 
Parkage is that space between the private property survey line of the property owner and the paved or graded portion of the public street adjacent thereto and includes that area between the sidewalk and street. 
Property owner means the owner or owners of the fee simple title to real property in the city upon which property a public nuisance is alleged to exist. 
Request for hearing means a written request from a property owner to the nuisance abatement board requesting said board to conduct a hearing on the issue of the existence or nonexistence of an alleged nuisance described in a notice of violation, or a written request from a property owner to the city council requesting a hearing on the amount of an invoice from the city for nuisance abatement costs. 
Undergrowth means herbaceous plants, plants and grasses with stems that wither away annually as distinguished from trees or shrubs with woody stems that live from year to year. 
Unimproved lot means any lot which remains undisturbed and in a natural vegetative state. 
Untended vegetation shall mean grass, weeds or undergrowth in excess of twelve (12) inches in height from the ground, dead trees, hedges, or dense growth of trees, vines, or other vegetation which tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare by creating a fire hazard; by providing a nesting, breeding or feeding area for insects, rodents, snakes, or other species of pest or vermin, or disease-bearing organisms; by impairing the vision of motorists or bicyclists or impeding pedestrians to the extent that traffic and pedestrian safety is impaired; or by adversely affecting the aesthetic appearance of the property upon which the vegetation is found, and adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 832-87, § 2, 5-20-87; Ord. No. 1152-97, § 1, 12-3-97)  
Sec. 10-17. - Maintenance of undergrowth and untended vegetation. 
(a)	Maintenance of improved residential lots/parcels, with a building or structure. The owner of an improved lot or parcel in a residential zone with a lot size of one (1) acre or less shall keep such lots free and clear of all fallen trees and limbs. All untended vegetation, grass and undergrowth shall be cut to a height not exceeding twelve (12) inches. However, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require natural areas located within larger improved lots, one acre or more, to be cut to a height less than twelve (12) inches within such areas. 
(b)	Maintenance of improved residential lots/parcels, without a building or structure. The owner of an improved lot or parcel in a residential zone shall keep such lot/parcel of land and that portion of his property abutting and within ten feet of any improved lot/parcel, sidewalk, street or bicycle path and free and clear of all fallen trees and maintain all untended vegetation, grass and undergrowth therein shall be cut to a height not exceeding of twelve (12) inches. 
(c)	Maintenance of unimproved residential lots/parcels. The owner of an unimproved lot in a residential zone with lot sizes of one (1) acre or less shall keep that portion of his property abutting and within ten feet of any improved lot, sidewalk, street or bicycle path free and clear of all fallen trees and limbs and all untended vegetation, grass and undergrowth therein shall be cut to a height not exceeding of twelve (12) inches. 
(d)	Maintenance of non-residential zoned lots/parcels. The owner of every lot, piece and parcel of land located within a non-residential zone within the city shall keep such lot, piece, or parcel of land and that portion of his property abutting and within ten feet of any improved lot/parcel, sidewalk, street or bicycle path and free and clear of all fallen trees and maintain all untended vegetation, grass and undergrowth therein shall be cut to a height not exceeding of twelve (12) inches. 
(e)	No property maintenance permit required; other restrictions and requirements applicable. No permit shall be required for limited property maintenance required by this section; however the requirements, restrictions, and limitations imposed by other sections of this Code and applicable provisions of the land development regulations pertaining to environmental preservation, tree removal, change of grade, etc. shall be effective. In the event of any conflict between this section and other provision of this Code or applicable provision of the land development regulations, the other sections of this Code or applicable provisions of the land development regulations shall prevail and govern. 
(f)	Abutting property owner maintenance of parkages. It shall be the responsibility of every owner of real property within the city to at all times cause to be cut and mowed the undergrowth, grass and untended vegetation, and to cause to be cut and trimmed the flowers, vines, grasses, shrubbery and trees, in a manner that protects and promotes the public health, safety and welfare and presents an aesthetically pleasing appearance in those areas of the parkage most nearly abutting their properties. Parkages abutting improved residential or commercial lots/parcels shall be maintained as provided in this subsection (a) of this section for improved residential lots/parcels. Parkages abutting unimproved residential lots/parcels shall be maintained as provided in subsection (b) of this section for maintained portion of the unimproved residential lot/parcel. At all times this area shall be maintained in order to provide clear and safe visibility for pedestrian and vehicle movement. Every property owner shall have the duty of removing any refuse or other debris existing within the adjacent parkage, but the placement of refuse for collection in a manner and in containers specified by other provisions of this code is not prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 832-87, § 2, 5-20-87; Ord. No. 1152-97, § 2, 12-3-97)  
Sec. 10-18. - Garbage, refuse, dead animals, debris, other accumulations constituting a nuisance. 
Uncontained and exposed garbage, refuse, surface closets, dead animals, trash, waste and unused lumber or metals, or other waste materials, sawdust, or debris of any kind, are things that attract flies and insects, harbor rodents, vermin and dangerous reptiles, increase the danger of fires and the spread thereof, produce unpleasant odors, stenches and smells, and are otherwise dangerous to the health, comfort, convenience and general welfare of residents of the city, and any of such things, separately or severally, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. No owner of any lot, place or area in the city shall cause, permit or allow to be placed, deposited, stored, kept or allowed to exist upon such lot, place or area any uncontained and exposed garbage, refuse, surface closet, dead animal, trash, waste lumber or metal, or other waste materials, sawdust, or debris of any kind. Any public nuisance as described in this section may be abated by the city in the manner hereinafter provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 832-87, § 2, 5-20-87) 
Cross reference— Garbage and trash, Ch. 9.  
Sec. 10-19. - Nuisance abatement board created. 
There is hereby created the nuisance abatement board of the city, hereinafter referred to as the "board," composed of the city manager, fire chief and director of public works, all of the city, the purpose, duty and function of which board is to serve as a quasijudicial administrative board of the city to hear and determine the issue of the existence or nonexistence of any alleged violation of the provisions of this article as charged in a notice of violation presented by a code enforcement officer of the city when a hearing on such issue is timely requested in writing by a property owner, and to perform such other duties and functions as the city council may from time to time prescribe by ordinance to further the objectives of this article. The city manager shall be the chairman of the board. Two (2) members of the board will constitute a quorum, and the concurring vote of two (2) members will be necessary to carry any motion, action or ruling of the board. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public and reasonable advance public notice shall be given of all meetings of the board. The board shall cause a written record to be prepared and maintained of its proceedings and actions. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its affairs and shall meet as often as required to effectively discharge its duties. In all hearings conducted by the board strict rules of evidence shall not be imposed, however, substantive rights of due process shall be observed and protected. 
(Ord. No. 832-87, § 2, 5-20-87)  
Sec. 10-20. - Notice of violation. 
When any code enforcement officer of the city finds and determines that any public nuisance as described in this article exists, he shall serve the owner of record of the property upon which the nuisance exists with a written notice of violation, which notice shall contain the following information: 
(a)	Identify the property upon which the nuisance exists. 
(b)	Describe the alleged nuisance. 
(c)	Describe the action required to abate the nuisance. 
(d)	Contain the city's estimate of the cost of abating the alleged nuisance in the manner described in said notice. Such estimate shall in no way be binding upon the city in its abatement of the nuisance if the nuisance is abated by the city. 
(e)	Instruct the owner to abate the alleged nuisance within ten (10) days after date of service of violation upon the owner, and that if the owner fails to so abate the alleged nuisance within said ten-day period the city will cause the nuisance to be abated and the property owner will be liable to the city for the cost of such abatement work, and unless such cost is paid in full within thirty (30) days after invoicing, the city will assess a lien against the property for such abatement costs with interest thereon at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum from the date of assessment, and the property owner will be liable for the city's costs in enforcing the lien, including the city's reasonable attorney's fees. 
(f)	Advise the property owner that if the property owner denies the existence of the nuisance as alleged in this notice of violation and desires a hearing before the nuisance abatement board for determination of the issue of the existence or nonexistence of the alleged nuisance, the property owner may obtain such hearing if, within ten (10) days after the date of service of the notice of violation upon the property owner, the property owner serves upon the nuisance abatement board a written request for hearing; and that the owner's failure to serve upon the nuisance abatement board such a request for hearing within said ten-day period shall constitute the property owner's waiver of the right to a hearing on the issue of the existence or nonexistence of the alleged nuisance, and shall also be deemed as the property owner's acknowledgment and agreement that the nuisance exists as alleged in the notice of violation. 
(g)	State both the street address and mailing address of the nuisance abatement board. 
A copy of this article (sections 10-16 through 10-27, inclusive) shall be served upon the property owner with the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 832-87, § 2, 5-20-87; Ord. No. 1094-95, § 1, 2-15-95)  
Sec. 10-21. - Request for hearing on existence of nuisance. 
Any property owner upon whom a notice of violation has been served as provided in section 10-20 of this article shall be entitled to a hearing by the nuisance abatement board of the city on the issue of the existence or nonexistence of the alleged nuisance described in the notice of violation; provided, that the property owner serves upon the nuisance abatement board a written request for hearing within ten (10) days after date of service of the notice of violation upon the property owner. Failure of a property owner to serve upon the nuisance abatement board a written request for hearing within the ten-day period above-stated shall constitute the property owner's waiver of the right to a hearing on the issue of the existence or nonexistence of the alleged nuisance, and shall also be deemed as the property owner's acknowledgment and agreement that the nuisance exists as alleged in the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 832-87, § 2, 5-20-87)  
Sec. 10-22. - Hearing on existence of nuisance. 
Within twenty (20) days after timely service upon the city of a written request for hearing by a property owner pursuant to section 10-21 of this article, the nuisance abatement board (board) shall conduct a hearing on the issue of the existence or nonexistence of the public nuisance alleged in the notice of violation served on the property owner by the code enforcement officer. The board shall serve the property owner with written notice of the time and place of the hearing not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. The property owner shall have the right to be present and to be heard at the hearing and the right to be represented at the hearing by an attorney. At the hearing the nuisance abatement board shall receive sworn testimony and other evidence on the issue of the existence or nonexistence of the alleged nuisance and at the conclusion of the hearing the board shall issue its final order. The board's final order will be in writing and will contain findings of fact and a final determination as to the existence or nonexistence of the alleged nuisance. A copy of the board's order shall be served upon the property owner within five (5) days after the hearing and, if the order contains a finding that a nuisance does in fact exist, such order shall require the property owner to cause such nuisance to be abated within ten (10) days from the date of service of the order upon the property owner. The order shall also inform the property owner that in the event the property owner fails to abate the nuisance within said ten-day period, the city will thereafter at its earliest practicable opportunity cause the nuisance to be abated and charge the cost of abatement to the property owner. Further, the order shall in substance state that if the property owner fails to abate the nuisance and in consequence thereof the city abates the same, the city will thereafter serve upon the property owner a written notice of cost of abatement of nuisance, and an invoice for such cost, and unless the property owner pays the amount of such invoice to the city within thirty (30) days after service of the invoice upon the property owner the amount of such nuisance abatement cost will automatically be assessed against the real property upon which the nuisance was located, which assessment will constitute a lien against said real property which will bear interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum from the date of the lien until fully paid, and said lien may be enforced at the expense of the property owner as provided in section 10-26 below. 
(Ord. No. 832-87, § 2, 5-20-87)  
Sec. 10-23. - Abatement of nuisance by city. 
If a property owner fails to abate an alleged nuisance within the time stated in the notice of violation, or if a property owner timely files a request for hearing and fails to abate the nuisance within ten (10) days after the nuisance abatement board has conducted a hearing, found a nuisance to exist and ordered the property owner to abate such nuisance, the city shall take the action described in the notice of violation to abate the nuisance and remedy the condition or situation described in the notice of violation. Authorized representatives of the city shall have the right to go upon the land described in the notice of violation at reasonable times to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 832-87, § 2, 5-20-87)  
Sec. 10-24. - Invoicing property owner for abatement costs. 
In any instance wherein the city causes labor to be performed or materials to be supplied to abate a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this article, upon completion of the abatement work the city manager shall ascertain the necessary and reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating the nuisance, including reasonable costs of administration incurred in such abatement, and the city manager shall prepare a written invoice for cost of abatement of nuisance which shall contain a reasonably detailed itemization of the city's cost in abating the nuisance. A copy of such invoice shall be served upon the property owner together with a demand for payment to the city within thirty (30) days from the date of service of the invoice of all such costs and expenses. Said invoice shall advise the property owner that if the property owner contests the reasonableness of the amount of the invoice and desires a hearing before the city council for determination of the issue of the reasonableness of the amount of the invoice, the property owner may obtain such hearing if, within ten (10) days after date of service of the invoice upon the property owner said property owner serves upon the city council a written request for hearing. 
(Ord. No. 832-87, § 2, 5-20-87)  
Sec. 10-25. - Hearing on amount of abatement costs. 
If within ten (10) days after date of service of an invoice for the cost of abatement of nuisance upon a property owner such property owner serves upon the city council a written request for hearing on the issue of the reasonableness of the amount of the nuisance abatement costs reflected on an invoice, such property owner shall have a right to a hearing before the city council on such issue; provided, that nothing contained in this section is to be construed to permit a review of the determination by the nuisance abatement board of the existence of the public nuisance. The city council shall conduct said hearing within thirty (30) days from the date of service upon the city of the property owner's written request for hearing and shall cause written notice of the time and place of the hearing to be served upon the property owner not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. At said hearing the council shall receive testimony and other evidence on the issue of the reasonableness of the amount of the abatement costs invoiced by the city manager and at the conclusion of the hearing the city council shall determine and announce its decision as to the amount of the reasonable cost of abating the nuisance and the amount so determined by the city council shall be due and payable by the property owner to the city within five (5) days after the hearing by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 832-87, § 2, 5-20-87)  
Sec. 10-26. - Lien for costs of abatement by city. 
If a property owner fails to pay the city the nuisance abatement costs as invoiced by the city manager or as determined by the city council, as the case may be, on or before the date such payment is due under the provisions of this article, the amount of such abatement costs shall automatically be an assessment against the real property upon which the nuisance existed, and such assessment shall create and constitute a lien against such property, subject only to the lien for taxes due the city, the county, and the state. Said assessment shall bear interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum from the date of assessment until fully paid and shall be collectible in the same manner as liens for taxes and with the same interest, penalties and advertising costs as are applicable to defaults in payment of other city taxes, and under the same procedure as to sale and forfeiture as applies to other city taxes. As an alternative to enforcement of the city's lien by sale of the property as for delinquent taxes the city may enforce its said lien by a proceeding in the circuit court of the county to foreclose the lien of the assessment in the manner in which a lien for mortgages is foreclosed under the Laws of Florida, and it shall be lawful to join in any complaint for foreclosure any one or more lots or parcels of land, by whomever owned, if assessed under the provisions of this article. In any such foreclosure action in which judgment is rendered in favor of the city, the city shall be entitled to recover of and from the defendants, as part of the judgment, the city's court costs and reasonable attorney's fees. The property subject to lien may be redeemed at any time prior to or within ten (10) days after the foreclosure sale by the owner paying the total amount due under the judgment of foreclosure including interest, court costs, advertising costs and reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 832-87, § 2, 5-20-87) 
State Law reference— Foreclosure of mortgages, F.S. Ch. 702.  
Sec. 10-27. - Service of notices and proof of service. 
(a)	All notices to property owners served pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be deemed properly served when: 
(1)	Mailed to such owner by United States certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to such owner at the last known mailing address of such owner as shown on the records in the office of the county property appraiser, with proper postage affixed; or 
(2)	Hand delivered to such owner by any code enforcement officer or police officer of the city, if such service is effected in the county; or 
(3)	Personal service upon such owner by a sheriff, deputy sheriff or other law enforcement officer authorized to serve judicial process under the law of the jurisdiction wherein service is made, if service is effected outside the county. 
(b)	All notices to the city served pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be deemed properly served when: 
(1)	Mailed to the city by United States certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to City of Rockledge, P.0. Box 488, Rockledge, Florida, 32955, with proper postage affixed. 
(2)	Hand delivered to the city manager, city clerk or any code enforcement officer of the city. 
(3)	Personally served upon the city manager, city clerk or any code enforcement officer of the city by the sheriff or any deputy sheriff of the county, in the manner prescribed by state law for service of summons ad respondendum. 
(c)	Proof of service shall be as follows: 
(1)	For service effected pursuant to subsection (a)(1) above, by affidavit of the person mailing the notice accompanied by the return receipt for certified mail furnished by the postal department. 
(2)	For service effected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) above, by affidavit of the police officer or code enforcement officer making the service. 
(3)	For service effected pursuant to subsection (a)(3) above, by sheriff's return of service or other form of certificate permitted and recognized as an acceptable and lawful form of proof of service under the law of the jurisdiction wherein the service is made. 
(Ord. No. 832-87, § 2, 5-20-87)  
Chapter 10.5 - MOTION AND STILL PHOTOGRAPHY PRODUCTION PERMITS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1093-94, § 1, adopted Nov. 16, 1994, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Ch. 22. In order to maintain the alphabetical sequence of chapters, said provisions have been included herein as Ch. 10.5 at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 10.5-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Rockledge Motion and Still Photography Production Permit Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1093-94, § 1, 11-16-94)  
Sec. 10.5-2. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this chapter are to establish a one-stop permitting process for motion picture and still photography on public property owned or controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city, to provide a means whereby acts otherwise prohibited by this Code may be allowed during such productions, and to provide for an exemption from other City Code permit requirements in recognition of the positive economic impact of the motion picture and television industry. 
(Ord. No. 1093-94, § 1, 11-16-94)  
Sec. 10.5-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly requires otherwise: 
City equipment is any tangible property, other than real property, purchased by public funds and utilized in the normal course and scope of providing governmental service by the city. 
City facility is any public street, sidewalk, place or building owned or controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city to include, but not be limited to, city park and recreation facilities and other city buildings. 
City manager is the contact for the motion picture and television division of the city and acts as liaison with the Brevard County Film Commissioner. 
Photography is the commercial taking or making of a motion picture, television, videotape, or still production utilizing city facilities. This term shall include, and a production permit shall be required for, such productions on private property not at a studio involving the erection of tents or other temporary structures or involving the use of pyrotechnics, explosives, or other incendiary devices. 
Product permit (also referred to herein as permit) is the permit required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1093-94, § 1, 11-16-94)  
Sec. 10.5-4. - Film commissioner. 
The film commissioner, under the direction of the executive director of the Brevard County Tourist Development Council, has been authorized by county ordinance to act as the agent for the County of Brevard in the receipt and procession of applications for production permits and to coordinate same with the city for activity within the city. After review and approval by the city and final approval by the city manager, the permit will be issued by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1093-94, § 1, 11-16-94)  
Sec. 10.5-5. - Permit required; suspension and/or revocation; violation. 
(a)	No person shall advertise, engage in, participate in, and/or start any motion and still photography production on private property or on or upon any city facility or utilizing city equipment unless a production permit shall first have been obtained from the city manager. The city may adopt a reasonable fee schedule for the production permits. Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided for by law. 
(b)	Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the production permit once issued shall be grounds for immediate suspension of the production until such time as the non-compliance is remedied. The suspension shall be initially communicated orally, followed by a written suspension order. Continued failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the production permit may result in revocation of the permit. Continuation of the production in violation of the suspension and/or revocation shall be punishable as provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 1093-94, § 1, 11-16-94)  
Sec. 10.5-6. - Application for permit. 
(a)	Any person seeking the issuance of a production permit shall file an application with, and on forms provided by, the city manager prior to commencement of production. The application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the applicant. 
(b)	The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Location(s) of the production. 
(2)	Duration and type of the production. 
(3)	Proof of liability insurance coverage with the city named as an additional insured. The amount of said coverage shall be as determined by the city manager on a case by case basis. 
(4)	Special effects to be utilized, especially incendiary or explosive devices. In addition, the application shall list the person in charge (pyrotechnician) of such special effects together with his/her qualifications and licensure by the applicable federal and/or state agencies. 
(5)	Proposed utilization of city equipment. 
(6)	Necessity for closures of public streets or sidewalks and for what duration. 
(7)	A written summary or explanation of the portion of the production to be shot within unincorporated areas of the city. 
(8)	Number and type of vehicles and/or equipment and number of personnel to be on location with the production. 
(9)	An agreement to pay for extraordinary services provided by the city. 
(10)	Execute a hold harmless/indemnification agreement for the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1093-94, § 1, 11-16-94)  
Sec. 10.5-7. - Exemption from other City Code requirements. 
(a)	Once a production permit has been issued, and notwithstanding any other provisions of the City Code to the contrary, other city permits may be required for any of the activities forming a part of the production. 
(b)	The provisions of this Code, insofar as certain acts are required or prohibited, may be suspended in connection with the conduct of a production pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1093-94, § 1, 11-16-94)  
Sec. 10.5-8. - Cost for extraordinary services. 
The city shall recover direct costs for extraordinary services rendered in connection with a production. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to, charges for personnel and/or equipment committed in support of the production which are outside the normal scope of government services. Based on the information contained in the permit application, an estimate of these costs shall be provided to the applicant prior to the issuance of the permit. The applicant agrees to pay the city in advance for any services provided by it at its usual rates. The city manager will provide coordination and advise the applicant of estimated costs. 
(Ord. No. 1093-94, § 1, 11-16-94)  
Chapter 11 - BUSINESS, OCCUPATIONS, SOLICITATION, CANVASSING AND FOR PROFIT ACTIVITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), adopted July 18, 2007, repealed the former Ch. 11, §§ 11-1—11-13, and enacted a new Ch. 11 as set out herein. The former Ch. 11 pertained to licenses and derived from Ord. No. 1102-95, § 1, 6-21-95; Ord. No. 1212-00, § 1, 5-17-00; Ord. No. 1309-03, § 1, 7-16-03. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Short title. 
Business ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07)  
Sec. 11-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to insure the public welfare by overseeing all business transactions and operations. This shall include uninvited solicitors and canvassers within the city by permitting same. Further, to levy a tax and issue receipts therefore on all businesses as allowed by state statute. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07)  
Sec. 11-3. - Exclusions. 
This chapter does not include the taxing of: 
(1)	Religious institutions which shall mean churches, ecclesiastical or denominational organizations, or established physical places for worship in this state at which nonprofit religious services and activities are regularly conducted and carried on, and shall also mean church cemeteries. 
(2)	Educational institutions which shall mean state tax-supported or parochial, church and nonprofit private schools, colleges or universities conducting regular classes and courses of study required for accreditation by or membership in the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, department of education or Florida Council of Independent Schools. Nonprofit libraries, art galleries and museums open to the public are defined as educational institutions and eligible for exemption. These institutions shall be permitted at no fee. 
(3)	Charitable institutions which shall mean only nonprofit corporations operating physical facilities in the city at which are provided charitable services, a reasonable percentage of which shall be without cost to those unable to pay. These institutions shall be permitted at no fee. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07)  
Sec. 11-4. - Definitions to be used in this chapter. 
Business shall mean any activity as defined and listed by the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) published by the U.S. Bureau Census (www.census.gov/naics). 
Business tax receipt shall mean those taxes authorized by the Local Business Tax Act, set out in F.S. ch. 205. 
Business permit shall mean the method by which the city grants the privilege of engaging in or managing any business as defined in the NAICS within its jurisdiction. 
Canvasser or solicitor shall mean any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided, that such definition shall include any person who, for himself or for another, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
Peddler includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicles or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance, or roadside stand; and further provided, that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this article. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster" and as defined by NAICS Section 454390-454393, as may be from time to time amended. 
Public street means any state highway, county road or municipal street in the city. 
Right-of-way means land in which the public agency owns the fee or has an easement devoted to or required for the use of a public street, or land abutting a paved road which has been maintained by the city, or if ditches exist, the land lying between the ditches on either side of any road and the edge of the pavement of such road within the city. 
Roadside stand means any other vehicle, stall, building, tent, counter or other method or device which is being utilized for the display, storage or sale of any type of goods or service. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07)  
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX 
 
Sec. 11-5. - Tax levied. (Local Business Tax Act) 
A tax is hereby levied and imposed for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession or occupation within the city's jurisdiction. Such local business tax is levied on any activity as defined and listed by the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) as published by the U.S. Bureau of the Census (www.census.gov/naics). 
(1)	Local business tax schedule. For the tax period commencing October 1st of each year, and ending September 30th of the following year, and each and every year thereafter, the amount of the local business tax levied and imposed upon each person or entity which engages in or manages any business as listed in the NAICS, within the City of Rockledge, is hereby fixed, graded, determined, levied and imposed at the rates or amounts as set out in Table A, attached to this part. 
(2)	Change to local business tax schedule at Table A. The local business tax amount for each business may be changed after all procedures set out in F.S. § 205.043, are complied with by the city and adopted by resolution of the city council. 
Table "A" 
Numbering system is based on the most current edition of the North American Industry Classification System. 
Sector 11 Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting ..... $100.00 
Sector 21 Mining ..... $100.00 
Sector 22 Utilities ..... $100.00 
Sector 23 Construction 
236000—236117 ..... 150.00 
236118 ..... 100.00 
236200—237990 ..... 150.00 
238000—238990 ..... 100.00 
Sector 31 Manufacturing ..... 150.00 
Sector 32 Manufacturing ..... 150.00 
Sector 33 Manufacturing ..... 150.00 
Sector 42 Wholesale Trade ..... 150.00 
Sector 44 and 45 Retail Trade ..... $750.00 maximum 
Retailer with inventory pay $70.00 for the first $50,000.00 of inventory and $10.00 additional for each $10,000.00 of inventory, rr portion thereof, thereafter. 
Retailers without inventory (i.e. Mail order, Internet sales, Drop ship companies) ..... 150.00 
Sector 48 Transportation ..... 100.00 
Sector 49 Warehousing ..... 200.00 
See Section 531 for mini-storage and self-storage units 
Sector 51 Information ..... 150.00 
Sector 52 Finance and Insurance 
Insurance companies doing business in Rockledge, apart from agents, solicitors or agencies regardless of whether or not a local office or agent is maintained ..... 150.00 
Each office or establishment when no state license is required ..... 150.00 
Each independently state licensed agent ..... 150.00 
Sector 53 Real Estate, Rental and Leasing 
531000—531110 $7.00 per rental unit with a minimum fee of ..... 100.00 
531111—531120 ..... 100.00 
531130 $7.00 per rental unit with a minimum fee of ..... 100.00 
531190 ..... 100.00 
531200—531210 Each independently state licensed agent ..... 150.00 
531300—533110 ..... 100.00 
Sector 54 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services 
All sections of Sector 54 unless noted otherwise below ..... 150.00 
541110 Each practicing lawyer or attorney ..... 150.00 
541211 Each certified public accountant ..... 150.00 
541310 Each licensed architect ..... 150.00 
541320 Each licensed landscape architect ..... 150.00 
541330 Each licensed professional engineer ..... 150.00 
541360 Each licensed geophysical surveyor ..... 150.00 
541370 Each licensed land surveyor ..... 150.00 
Sector 55 Management of Companies and Enterprises ..... 150.00 
Sector 56 Administrative, Support and Waste Management ..... 100.00 
Sector 61 Educational Service ..... 150.00 
Sector 62 Health Care and Social Assistance 
All sections of Sector 62 unless noted otherwise below ..... 150.00 
621111 Each independent practitioner ..... 150.00 
621210 Each independent practitioner ..... 150.00 
621310 Each independent practitioner ..... 150.00 
621320 Each independent practitioner ..... 150.00 
621340 Each independent practitioner ..... 100.00 
621391 Each independent practitioner ..... 150.00 
Sector 71 Arts, Entertainment and Recreation 
All sections of Sector 71 unless noted otherwise below ..... 150.00 
711211—711410 ..... 200.00 
711500—712190 ..... 100.00 
713000—713290 ..... 750.00 
713900—713999 ..... 200.00 
Sector 72 Accommodations and Food Service 
All sections of Sector 72 unless noted otherwise below ..... 150.00 
721110 $10.00 per rental unit (Min. $70.00, Max. $750.00) 
721120 ..... 750.00 
721190—721999 $10.00 per rental unit (Min. $70.00, Max. $750.00) 
Sector 81 Other Services (except Public Administration) 
All sections of Sector 81 unless noted otherwise below ..... 100.00 
812110—812113 Each *DBPR licensed person ..... 70.00 
*Department of Business and Professional Regulations 
Sector 92 Public Administration ..... 100.00 
Any and all business activities not noted above or not classified in the North American Industry Classification System ..... 150.00 
(3)	The city shall issue a "local business tax receipt" to each business operating within the city which must be displayed at the place of business and be available for the public to view including city officials. 
(4)	Transfer of business tax receipts. 
a.	All municipal business tax receipts, unless otherwise provided, may be transferred to a new owner upon payment of a transfer fee of ten (10) percent of the annual license tax, but not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and presentation of the original receipt and evidence of sale. 
b.	Upon written application and presentation of the original receipt, any receipt may be transferred from one location to another location in the same municipality upon payment of a transfer fee of ten (10) percent of the annual business tax, but not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Transfer of the business tax receipt is subject to all applicable zoning and building codes. 
c.	A change of business name will also be regarded as a transfer and will be subject to the same fee schedule as listed above. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07)  
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL BUSINESS PERMIT 
 
Sec. 11-6. - Permit required. 
Any business conducting business or operations within the jurisdiction of the city is required to have a local business permit. This permit will be applied for by the business at the time the local business tax is paid to the city, pursuant to article II of this chapter. Upon approval of the business permit application the city shall issue a permit which must be displayed with the local business tax receipt. This permit must be renewed annually when the local business tax is paid by the business. 
(1)	Form of application. The application for local business permit shall contain: 
a.	The name of the business entity. 
1.	If the entity is conducting a business under a "doing business as", the name of the actual entity. 
b.	Type of business entity. 
c.	Address where business will conduct its operations which will include phone number. 
1.	If the business entity has a home office other than one located within the city, the address of the home office. 
d.	Address of registered agent which will include phone number. 
1.	Corporations. The name and address of its registered agent per F.S. § 607.0501, is sufficient. 
2.	Partnership. The name and address of each general partner. 
3.	Sole proprietorship. The name and address of the owner of the business. 
(2)	Registered agent required. All non-corporations shall designate a registered agent for the service of notice, process and other documents within Brevard County which shall have operating hours the same as those required for corporate registered agents. 
(3)	Sale of business. All purchasers of businesses within the city must submit an application for a business permit within ten (10) days of obtaining ownership. 
(4)	Suspension or revocation. 
a.	Any business permit issued by the city under the provisions of this chapter with respect to a business, occupation, or profession may be suspended or revoked by a majority vote of the Rockledge City Council when said city council shall have ascertained and determined in the exercise of its sound discretion that the operation of such business, occupation, or profession at the premises constitutes a public nuisance, and that the suspension or revocation of the permit will promote the public peace, health, welfare, harmony and good order of the city. 
b.	In case of revocation the city shall refund the pro rata unearned or unused portion of the local business tax receipt, but no refund shall be made where the permit is temporarily suspended. 
(5)	Safety inspection of business premises. 
a.	The Rockledge Fire Department and/or Police Department and/or Building Division may conduct a safety inspection of any place of business located within the city limits, including trade vehicles/trailers used by canvassers, solicitors or peddlers, to insure all federal, state and city ordinances are complied with, prior to issuance of a business permit. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07)  
Sec. 11-7. - Unlawful to engage in business or occupation without local business tax receipt and business permit. 
No person shall operate or conduct any business or occupation in the City of Rockledge without a valid current Rockledge Local Business Tax Receipt and Business Permit as herein required unless expressly exempt by law. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07)  
Sec. 11-8. - Delinquent payments, penalties, enforcement. 
(a)	Those local business taxes not paid and business permits not renewed by October 1 shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent for the month of October, plus an additional five (5) percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid; provided that the total delinquency shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the local business tax for the delinquent establishment. 
(b)	Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation or profession without first obtaining a city business permit and paying the local business tax, if required hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the tax determined to be due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(c)	Any person who engages in any business, occupation, or profession covered by this chapter, who does not pay the required local business tax and/or fails to apply for a business permit within one hundred fifty (150) days after the initial notice of tax due, and who does not obtain the required business permit or pay the local business taxes is subject to a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorney fees, and any additional administrative cost incurred as a result of collection efforts. 
(d)	In addition to the penalties herein provided, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by proceedings before the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board, and pursue any and all remedies available at law or in equity, including injunctive relief, for the abatement of any such unlawful business or occupation. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07)  
ARTICLE IV. - UNLICENSED CONTRACTORS 
 
Sec. 11-9. - Unlicensed contractors; failure to obtain building permit. 
(a)	Intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to authorize the issuance of citations for violations of F.S. §§ 489.127 and 489.132(1), as may be amended or renumbered from time to time by the state legislature. It is also the intent and purpose of this section to establish a procedure to implement the issuance of such citations. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other lawful means. 
(1)	The commencement or performance of work for which a building permit is required without such building permit being in effect creates a grave threat to the public health, safety and welfare and jeopardizes the safety of occupants of buildings. 
(2)	The performance of construction by contractors who are not duly licensed, when a contracting license is required, may pose a danger of significant harm to the public when incompetent or dishonest unlicensed contractors provide unsafe, unstable or short-lived products or services. 
(b)	Citation authorized for construction contracting violations. The building official or designee is hereby authorized to issue a citation for any violation of F.S. §§ 489.127 and 489.132(1), whenever based upon personal investigation, the building official or designee has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that such violation has occurred. A citation shall be issued in accordance with the rules and procedures established by this section and Florida Statutes. This section does not authorize or permit the building official or designee to perform any function or duty of a law enforcement officer. 
(c)	Citation form. A citation issued by the building official or designee shall be in a form which shall contain at a minimum: 
(1)	The time and date of issuance. 
(2)	The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
(3)	The time and date of the violation. 
(4)	A brief description of the violation and the facts constituting reasonable cause. 
(5)	The name of the building official or designee. 
(6)	The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
(7)	The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(d)	Penalty. In addition to any other criminal penalties provided by F.S. § 489.127(2), a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be levied for any violation of this section. All monies collected by the city from citations issued under this section shall be deposited in the city's general fund and may be expended for any public purpose. A person cited for a violation pursuant to this section is deemed to be charged with a non-criminal infraction. Each violation is a separate civil infraction. Each day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate civil infraction. 
(e)	Refusal to sign citation. Except in the absence of the person who has committed the violation, the building official or designee shall require the person to sign and accept a citation being issued. If the person refuses to sign and accept the citation, the building official or designee shall write the words "refused to sign" or any other words of similar meaning in the space provided in the citation for the person's signature and shall leave a copy of the citation with the person if possible, or mail a copy to the person, if possible, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. Following such refusal to sign and accept, the building official or designee shall also contact the city police department to report such violation of the provision and F.S. § 489.127(5)(m). 
(f)	Stop work. Any person who is issued a citation under this section shall immediately cease the act for which the citation was issued upon receipt of the citation. 
(g)	Correction of violation; payment of penalty; notice of hearing. Upon receipt of a citation, the person charged with the violation shall elect either to: 
(1)	Correct the violation and pay to the city the civil penalty in the manner indicated on the citation; or 
(2)	Within ten (10) days of receipt of the citation, exclusive of weekends and legal holidays, request an administrative hearing before the city's code enforcement board to appeal the issuance of the citation in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection (h) below. Any request for an administrative hearing shall be made and delivered in writing to the building official by the time set forth in this subsection. Failure to request an administrative hearing in writing within the ten-day time period shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to an administrative hearing. A waiver of said right shall be deemed an admission of the violation, and penalties shall be imposed as set forth on the citation. 
(h)	Administrative hearings; accrual of penalties. 
(1)	All administrative hearings held pursuant to this section shall be conducted by the code enforcement board in accordance with the requirements of existing statute. 
(2)	During the administrative hearing, if the violator demonstrates to the code enforcement board that the violation is invalid or that the violation has been corrected prior to appearing before the code enforcement board, the code enforcement board may dismiss the citation unless the violation is irreparable or irreversible, in which case the code enforcement board may order the violator to pay a civil penalty as set forth in subsection (3) below. 
(3)	During the administrative hearing, if the code enforcement board finds that a violation exists, the code enforcement board may order the violator to pay a civil penalty of not less than the amount set forth on the citation but not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation. In determining the amount of the penalty, the code enforcement board shall consider the following facts: 
a.	The gravity of the violation. 
b.	Any actions taken by the violators to correct the violation. 
c.	Any previous violations which were committed by the violator. 
(4)	During the administrative hearing, if the code enforcement board finds that the violator had not contested or paid the civil penalty set forth in the citation within the time required in this section, the code enforcement board shall enter an order ordering the violator to pay the civil penalty set forth on the citation, and a hearing shall not be necessary for the issuance of such order. 
(5)	All civil penalties imposed by the code enforcement board under this section shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until a judgment is recorded by a court to collect or foreclose on a lien filed under this section, whichever occurs first, regardless of whether or not the order of the code enforcement board sets forth this accrual requirement. 
(i)	Appeals of code enforcement board decisions. Any person aggrieved by a final administrative order of the code enforcement board pursuant to this section, including the city council, may appeal the order to the circuit court in accordance with F.S. § 489.127(5)(J), as may be amended or renumbered from time to time by the state legislature. 
(j)	Recording code enforcement board orders. A certified copy of an order of the code enforcement board imposing a civil penalty under this section may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against any real or personal property owned by the violator. Such orders shall be enforced in accordance with state law. 
(k)	Notice. All notices required by this section shall be provided to the violator by certified mail, return receipt requested; by hand delivery by a law enforcement officer or building official or designee; by leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with some person of his or her family above fifteen (15) years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice; or by including a hearing date within the citation. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07)  
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS 
 
Sec. 11-10. - Business permit and local business tax receipt required. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to engage in such business within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a business permit therefore in compliance with article III of this chapter and payment of local business taxes per article II of this chapter. 
(1)	Additional information for application for business permit. Applicants for permits under this part must file with the city building official a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the city building official, which shall give the following information in addition to that required by article III of this chapter. 
a.	Name and description of the applicant. 
b.	Permanent home address and full local address for the applicant. 
c.	A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
d.	If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
e.	The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
f.	The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold or orders taken for the sale thereof are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed and the proposed method of delivery. 
(2)	Investigation, action on application; issuance of permit. 
a.	Upon receipt of such application, the application shall be referred to the police for the running of a criminal background check, which shall be reported to the building official. 
b.	Criminal activity discovered. Should the criminal background check reveal negative information the building official shall refer the application and negative information to the city manager for review. The city manager can approve the application or refer it to the city council for final action. 
c.	If, as a result of the background check of the applicant, no negative information is revealed, then the building official shall execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for, and it and the local business tax receipt shall be issued upon payment for the prescribed tax, deliver to the applicant his permit and receipt. Such permit shall show the name and address of the permittee, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the permit number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such soliciting or canvassing. The building official shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued. 
(3)	Permit fees. 
a.	The fees for permits required by this article shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per week, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month, or fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. 
b.	The annual fees herein provided shall be assessed on a fiscal year basis from October 1 to September 30, and on or after April 1 the amount for the permit shall be one-half the amount stipulated above for the full year. 
c.	None of the fees provided for by this article shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a fee is believed by a permittee or applicant for a permit to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the city manager for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the city manager may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The city manager shall then conduct an investigation, comparing applicant's business with other businesses of like nature and shall make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the fee fixed by this article is unfair, unreasonable or discriminatory as to applicant's business and shall fix as the fee for the applicant an amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory or, if the fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the fee so fixed. In fixing the fee to be charged, the city manager shall have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales or any other method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the fees as prescribed by subsection (3)a. of this section. Should the city manager determine the gross sales measure of the fee to be the fair basis, he may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the city or at the end of each three month period, a sworn statement of the gross sales and pay the amount of fee therefor; provided that no additional fee during any one fiscal year shall be required after the permittee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license as prescribed in subsection (3)a. of this section. 
(4)	Expiration of permits. All annual permits issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on September 30 next following their issuance. Other than annual permits shall expire on the date specified in the permit. 
a.	Permit, card not transferable; misuse. No permit or card issued under the provisions of this article shall be used or displayed at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(5)	Permit card. The building official shall also issue to each permittee, at the time of delivery of his permit and tax receipt, a card which shall contain the words "permitted solicitor", the period for which the permit issued, and the number of the permit, in letters and figures easily discernible from a distance of ten (10) feet. Such card shall, during the time such permittee is engaged in soliciting, be displayed constantly by the permittee in such a way as to be conspicuous and shall not be displayed or used by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(6)	Exhibition of permit. Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit their permits at the request of any citizen. 
(7)	Use of minor prohibited. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall employ or utilize in any fashion during the conduct of the permitted business any person under the age of eighteen (18). 
(8)	Loud noises and amplifying devices. No peddler, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, make any cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loud speaking radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefore to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such peddler proposes to sell. 
(9)	Use of streets, rights-of-way in congested places. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the business of peddler or operate any roadside stand within any right-of-way of any public street in the city, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this section, the judgment of the building official or his designee, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(10)	Limited hours of activity. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall engage in any activities authorized by a business permit within residentially zoned districts or properties used for residential purposes in other zoning districts except during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., inclusive. This restriction of business hours for peddlers, solicitors and canvassers within residentially zoned districts shall be placed on the business permit when issued. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07; Ord. No. 1539-09, § 1, 12-2-09)  
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 11-11. - Duty of police to enforce. 
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person engaging in business and who is not known by such officer to be duly permitted to produce his business permit and local tax receipt and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07)  
Sec. 11-12. - Reports, records of violations. 
The chief of police shall report to the building official all convictions for violation of this article and the building official shall maintain a record for each permit issued and record the reports of violation therein. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07)  
ARTICLE VII. - APPEALS 
 
Sec. 11-13. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the building official in the denial of a permit, or the action of the city manager in the assessing of the fee, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a permit shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city council, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the city council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1449-07, § 2(Exh. A), 7-18-07)  
Chapter 12 - NOISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisance animals, § 5-16; noisy operations by peddlers, § 15-25; quiet zones, § 21-3. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle noise, F.S. §§ 316.272, 403.415. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - General provisions. 
(1)	Excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and a substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated. Whereas the citizens have a right to, and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound and it is the policy of the City of Rockledge to abate excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the citizens or degrade the quality of life. 
(Ord. No. 1491-08, § 1, 8-20-08)  
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Ambient sound level is the total sound pressure level in the area of interest including the noise source of interest. 
A-Weighting is the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing frequency sensitivity. 
Background sound level is the total sound pressure level in the area of interest excluding the noise source of interest. 
Commercial area is any area with any zoning classification other than RCE, R1, R2, R2A, R3, TH, MH, or RVP and the abutting public right-of-way and public spaces. 
Commercial facility is any premises, property, or facility involving traffic in goods or furnishing of services for sale or profit, including but not limited to: Banking and other financial institutions; dining establishments; establishments for providing manufacturing, retail or wholesale services; establishments for recreation and entertainment; office and industrial buildings; transportation; and warehouses. 
Construction is any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, or demolition of buildings or structures. 
C-Weighting is the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models a flat response (output equals input) over the range of maximum human hearing frequency sensitivity. 
dBA is the A-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
dBC is the C-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
Decibel (dB) is the unit of measurement for sound pressure level without regard to weighting. 
Emergency work is any work or action necessary to deliver essential services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electric, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way or abating life-threatening conditions. 
Impulsive sound is a sound having duration of less than one (1) second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
Industrial facility is any activity and its related premises, property, facilities, or equipment involving the fabrication, manufacture, or production of durable or nondurable goods. 
Motor vehicle is any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by an engine or motor. 
Muffler is a sound-dissipative device or system for attenuating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine. 
Multi-dwelling unit building is any building wherein there are two (2) or more dwelling units. 
The "municipality" is the City of Rockledge, Florida. (aka the "city") 
Noise is any sound of such level, nature and/or duration as to be or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the municipality or in any portions thereof, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the confines of a place of employment. 
Noise control officer (NCO) is an officially designated employee of the municipality trained in the measurement of sound and empowered to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
Noise disturbance is any sound that (a) endangers the safety or health of any person, (b) disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or (c) endangers personal or real property. 
Person is any individual, corporation, company, association, society, firm, partnership, joint stock company, the municipality or any political subdivision, agency or instrumentality of the municipality. 
Public right-of-way is any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, sidewalk, or alley that is leased, owned, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Public space is any real property or structures thereon that is owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Pure tone is any sound that can be judged as a single pitch or set of single pitches by the NCO. 
Real property line is either (a) the imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another, or (b) the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one in a multi-dwelling unit building. 
Residential area is any area or property with a zoning classification of RCE, R1, R2, R2A, R3, TH, MH, or RVP and the abutting public rights-of-way and public spaces. 
Residential property is property used for human habitation, including but not limited to: private property used for human habitation; commercial living accommodations and commercial property used for human habitation; recreational and entertainment property used for human habitation; and community service property used for human habitation. 
Sound level is the instantaneous sound pressure level measured in decibels with a sound level meter set for A-weighting on slow integration speed, unless otherwise noted or required by this Code. 
Measuring instrument is an instrument such as a sound level meter, integrating sound level meter or dosimeter used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to Type 1 or Type 2 standards as specified in the latest version of ANSI Standard S1.4-1983 or IEC 651/804. 
Sound pressure level (SPL) is 20 multiplied by the logarithm, to the base 10, of the measured sound pressure divided by the sound pressure associated with the threshold of human hearing, in units of decibels. 
Weekday is any day, Monday through Friday that is not a legal holiday. 
(Ord. No. 1491-08, § 1, 8-20-08)  
Sec. 12-3. - Powers, duties and qualifications of the noise control officer. 
(1)	The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the noise control officer/s. (NCOs) 
(2)	The NCO shall have the power to: 
(a)	Coordinate the noise control activities of all municipal departments and cooperate with all other public bodies and agencies to the extent practicable; 
(b)	Review the actions of other municipal departments and advise such departments to the effect, if any, of such actions on noise control; 
(c)	Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this chapter; and 
(d)	Insure that noise level readings are taken in accordance with the requirements of section 12-5 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1491-08, § 1, 8-20-08)  
Sec. 12-4. - Duties and responsibilities of other departments. 
(1)	All departments and agencies of the municipality shall carry out their programs according to law and shall cooperate with the NCO in the implementation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)	All departments charged with new projects or changes to existing projects that may result in the production of noise may consult with the NCO prior to the approval of such projects to ensure that such activities comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1491-08, § 1, 8-20-08)  
Sec. 12-5. - Sound measurement procedures. 
(1)	Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including but not limited to, design, maximum, and fluctuating rates. 
(2)	All tests shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
(a)	The NCO shall, to the extent practicable, identify all sources contributing sound to the point of measurement. 
(b)	Measurements shall be taken at or within the property line of the affected person. 
(c)	The measuring instrument must be calibrated using a calibrator recommended by the measuring instrument manufacturer before each series of readings. 
(3)	The measuring instrument must be recertified and the calibrator must be recalibrated at least once each five (5) years by an approved certifying agency. A copy of written documentation of such recertification and recalibration shall be kept with the equipment to which it refers. 
(4)	No outdoor measurements shall be taken: 
(a)	During periods when wind speeds (including gusts) exceed fifteen (15) mph; 
(b)	Without a windscreen, recommended by the measuring instrument manufacturer, properly attached to the measuring instrument; 
(c)	Under any condition that allows the measuring instrument to become wet (e.g., rain, snow, or condensation);or 
(d)	When the ambient temperature is out of the range of the tolerance of the measuring instrument. 
(5)	The report for each measurement session shall include: 
(a)	The date, day of the week, and times at which measurements are taken; 
(b)	The time of calibration; 
(c)	The weather conditions; 
(d)	The identification of all monitoring equipment by manufacturer, model number, and serial number; 
(e)	The normal operating cycle of the sources in question with a description of the sources; 
(f)	The ambient sound level, in dBA, with the sources in question operating; 
(g)	The background sound level, in dBA, without the sources in question operating; and 
(h)	A sketch of the measurement site, including measurement locations and relevant distances, containing sufficient information for another investigator to repeat the measurements under similar conditions. 
(6)	Prior to taking noise measurements the investigator shall explore the vicinity of the source in question to identify any other sound sources that could affect measurements, to establish the approximate location and character of the principal sound source, and to select suitable locations from which to measure the sound from the source in question. 
(7)	When measuring continuous sound, or sound that is sustained for more than one second at a time, the measuring instrument shall be set for A-weighting, slow response, and the range (if the measuring instrument is designed to read levels over different ranges) shall be set to that range in which the meter reads closest to the middle of the scale. The minimum and maximum readings shall be recorded to indicate the range of monitored values along with the central tendency average most often displayed. 
(8)	The measuring instrument shall be placed at a minimum height of three (3) feet above the ground or from any reflective surface. When handheld, the microphone shall be held at arm's length and pointed at the source at the angle recommended by the measuring instruments manufacturer. 
(9)	If extraneous sound sources, such as aircraft flyovers or barking dogs, that are unrelated to the measurements increase the monitored sound levels, the measurements should be postponed until these extraneous sounds have become of such a level as not to increase the monitored sound levels of interest. 
(10)	The monitoring session should last for a period of time sufficient to ensure that the sound levels measured are typical of the source in question. 
(11)	The background sound levels shall be subtracted from the measured sound levels of the source of interest by using Table 1 to determine the sound levels from the source of interest alone. If the ambient sound level is less than three (3) dBA higher than the background sound level, the source level cannot be derived and a violation of the ordinance cannot be substantiated. 
Table 1 Correction for Background Levels in dBA 
Difference Between Ambient and Background Sound Levels 	Correction Factor to Be Subtracted from Ambient Level for Source Level 
3 	3 
4,5 	2 
6-9 	1 
10 or more 	0 
 
(Ord. No. 1491-08, § 1, 8-20-08)  
Sec. 12-6. - Sound level limitations. 
(1)	No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound source on a particular category of property or any public space or right-of-way in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the background sound level by at least ten (10) dBA during daytime hours and by at least five (5) dBA during nighttime hours when measured at or within the real property line of the receiving property, except as provided in section 12-6(6). Such a sound source would constitute a noise disturbance. On weekdays, daytime hours are 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Weekday nighttime hours are 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. On weekends, daytime hours are 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Weekend nighttime hours are 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
(2)	If the background sound level cannot be determined, the absolute sound level limits set forth in Table 2 shall be used. 
(3)	If the sound source in question is a pure tone, the limits of Table 2 shall be reduced by five (5) dBA. 
TABLE 2 Maximum Permissible Sound Levels 
Source Property 	Residential Receiving Property 	Commercial Receiving Property 
Weekdays 
  
Weekend 	6:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 
9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 	10:00 p.m.—6:00 a.m. 
9:00 p.m.—9:00 a.m. 	(All times) 
Residential 	55 	50 		65 
Commercial 	65 	50 	65 	
Industrial 	65 	50 	65 	
 
(4)	Nonrepetitive impulsive sound sources shall not exceed ninety (90) dBA or one hundred twenty (120) dBA at or within a residential real property line, using the fast meter response speed. 
(5)	In multi-dwelling unit buildings, if the background sound level cannot be determined, the daytime limit is forty-five (45) dBA and the nighttime limit is thirty-five (35) dBA for sounds originating in another dwelling within the same building. 
(6)	The following are exempt from the sound level limits of section 12-6(1): 
(a)	Noise from emergency signaling devices; 
(b)	Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within ten (10) minutes of its activation; 
(c)	Noise from domestic power tools, lawn mowers, and agricultural equipment when operated between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekends and legal holidays, provided they generate less than 85 dBA at or within any real property line of a residential property; 
(d)	Sound from church bells and chimes when a part of a religious observance or service; 
(e)	Noise from construction activity provided all motorized equipment used in such activity is equipped with functioning mufflers, except as provided in section 12-7(2)(f). 
(f)	Golf course lawn care and maintenance activities between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day. 
(g)	The generation of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency. 
(h)	The generation of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(i)	Noise generated from municipally sponsored or approved activities, celebrations or events. 
(j)	Noise generated from the operation of emergency electric generators during times that commercial electric services, provided by a public utility, is interrupted, or any maintenance cycle, which does not exceed once every seven (7) days, for a duration not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. The maintenance cycle exception does not include weekends and national holidays. 
(7)	When the source being analyzed is a stereo system with low frequency signals as part of its output, the stereo shall not cause a "C" weighted level of 10dB or greater above the "C" weighted ambient level at a distance of 10 feet from the source, or the complainant's property line, which ever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 1491-08, § 1, 8-20-08)  
Sec. 12-7. - Specific prohibited acts. 
(1)	No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit to be made verbally or mechanically any noise disturbance, as defined in section 12-6(1). 
(2)	No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the following acts: 
(a)	Operating, playing, or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, or similar device that reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance [as defined in section 12-6(1)] for any person other than the operator of the device. 
(b)	Using or operating any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day, such that the sound thereof creates a noise disturbance [as defined in section 12-6(1)] across a real property line. 
(c)	Owning, possessing, or harboring any animal or bird that, frequently or for continued duration, generates sounds that create a noise disturbance (as defined in section 12-6(1) across a residential real property line. A frequent or continued duration for noise created by animals shall be a continuous and/or incessant noise for a period of ten (10) minutes, or noise made intermittently for thirty (30) minutes or more. An animal shall not be deemed to make a noise disturbance for the purpose of this part if, at the time, the animal is making the noise in response to a trespassing person or animal upon private property in or upon which the animal is situated or for any other legitimate cause which teased or provoked the animal. If the owner of the animal is present and aware of the animal's activities, it shall be his/her responsibility to either summon authorities to deal with the intruding entity, or to cause the animal to cease making noise within the time frames set out above (i.e. ten (10) minutes incessant, thirty (30) minutes intermittent). 
(d)	Loading, unloading, opening, closing, or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, liquids, garbage cans, refuse, or similar objects, or the pneumatic or pumped loading or unloading of bulk materials in liquid, gaseous, powder, or pellet form, or the compacting of refuse by persons engaged in the business of scavenging or garbage collection, whether private or municipal, between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day on a weekday and between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following day on a weekend day or legal holiday except by permit, when the sound thereof creates a noise disturbance (as defined in section 12-6(1) across a residential property line. 
(e)	Operating or permitting the operation of any motor vehicle whose manufacturer's gross weight rating is in excess of ten thousand (10,000) lbs., or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a period of longer than five (5) minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion or emergency work on a public right-of-way or public space within 150 feet of a residential area between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day. 
(f)	Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, earthmoving, excavating, or demolition work between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day on a weekday or Saturday or at any time on a Sunday or legal holiday. 
(Ord. No. 1491-08, § 1, 8-20-08)  
Sec. 12-8. - Variance procedures. 
(1)	Variance from the requirements of this chapter may only be granted by the board of adjustment according to the requirements and procedures of Chapter 23 of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1491-08, § 1, 8-20-08)  
Sec. 12-9. - Enforcement procedures. 
(1)	The Rockledge Code Enforcement Board shall have original jurisdiction for the enforcement of all violations of this chapter in accordance with the procedures in Section 24.00 of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations. For the purposes of this part the "code inspector" described in Section 21.40 of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations shall be the NCO. 
(2)	The code inspector may issue an order requiring abatement of any sound source alleged to be in violation of this chapter within a reasonable time period and according to guidelines that the NCO may prescribe. 
(3)	Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine for each offense of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(4)	If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense. 
(5)	No provision of this ordinance shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy thereof, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other law. 
(6)	Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved by any decision of the code enforcement board according to the requirements and procedures of Section 3.30 of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1491-08, § 1, 8-20-08)  
Chapter 13 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property, § 4-3; consumption of alcoholic beverages on streets, § 4-4. 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Adoption of state misdemeanors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act, within the corporate limits of the city, which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor, and the commission of such acts is hereby forbidden. 
(Code 1964, § 16-29)  
Sec. 13-2. - Attempt to commit offense. 
Whoever attempts to commit any offense prohibited by this Code, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense, but fails in the perpetration thereof, or is intercepted or prevented in the execution of the same, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 16-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 777.04.  
Sec. 13-3. - Civil emergencies. 
Pursuant to F.S. § 870.042(2), the city council hereby designates the mayor as the officer empowered to declare a state of emergency and to exercise the emergency powers conferred in F.S. §§ 870.041—870.047, inclusive. The violation of any of the provisions of said statutes or of any emergency measure established pursuant thereto shall be punished as is provided by F.S. § 870.048.  
Sec. 13-4. - Curfew for minors. 
The purpose of this section is to: (i) promote the general welfare and protect the general public through the reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the city; (ii) promote the safety and well-being of the city's youngest citizens, persons under the age of eighteen (18), whose inexperience renders them particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in unlawful activities, particularly unlawful drug activities, and to being victimized by older perpetrators of crime; and (iii) foster and strengthen parental responsibility for children. 
(a)	Definitions. As used within this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
1.	Curfew hours refers to the hours of 12:00 a.m. through 6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, except in the case of a legal holiday; and the hours of 1:00 a.m. through 6:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. Juveniles under seventeen (17) years of age who are enrolled in school shall also be subject to a curfew during school hours when their school attendance is compulsory. 
2.	Emergency refers to unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition resulting therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life, limb or property. The term includes, but is not limited to, fires, natural disasters, automobile accidents, or other similar circumstances. 
3.	Establishment refers to any privately-owned place of business within the city operated for a profit, to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. With respect to such establishment, the term "operator" shall mean any person, and any firm, association, partnership (and the members or partners thereof) and/or any corporation (and the officers thereof) conducting or managing that establishment. 
4.	Minor refers to any person under eighteen (18) years of age who has not been emancipated by court order entered pursuant to Florida Statutes. 
5.	Officer refers to a police or other law enforcement officer charged with the duty of enforcing the laws of the State of Florida and/or the ordinances of the City of Rockledge. 
6.	Parent refers to: 
a.	A person who is a minor's biological or adoptive parent and who has legal custody of a minor (including either parent, if custody is shared under a court order or agreement); 
b.	A person who is the biological or adoptive parent with whom a minor regularly resides; 
c.	A person judicially appointed as a legal guardian of the minor; and/or 
d.	A person eighteen (18) years of age or older standing in loco parentis (as indicated by the authorization of an individual listed in part(s) 1., 2., or 3. of this definition, above, for the person to assume the care or physical custody of the child, or as indicated by any other circumstances). 
7.	Person refers to an individual, not to any association, corporation, or any other legal entity. 
8.	Public place refers to any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to: streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, parks, and/or the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities and shops. 
9.	Remain refers to the following actions: 
a.	To linger or stay at or upon a place; and/or 
b.	To fail to leave a place when requested to do so by an officer or by the owner, operator or other person in control of that place. 
10.	Temporary care facility refers to a location at which minors may be taken to be retrieved by a parent or referred to another appropriate agency. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for a minor, during curfew hours, to remain in or upon any public place within the city, to remain in any motor vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon, or to remain in or upon the premises of any establishment within the city, unless: 
1.	The minor is accompanied by a parent; 
2.	The minor is involved in an emergency; 
3.	The minor is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or returning home from such activity, without detour or stop; 
4.	The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or she resides with a parent; 
5.	The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious, or civic organization, by a public organization or agency, or by another similar organization or entity, which activity is supervised by adults, and/or the minor is going to or returning from such an activity without detour or stop; 
6.	The minor is on an errand at the direction of a parent, and the minor has in his or her possession a writing signed by the parent containing the following information: the name, signature, address and telephone number of the parent authorizing the errand, the telephone number where the parent may be reached during the errand, the name of the minor, and a brief description of the errand, the minor's destination(s) and the hours the minor is authorized to be engaged in the errand; 
7.	The minor is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning or terminating in, the City of Rockledge; or 
8.	The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for a minor's parent to knowingly permit, allow or encourage such minor to violate subsection 13-4(b). 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for a person who is the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a violation of subsection 13-4(b). 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for the operator of any establishment, or for any person who is an employee thereof, to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present at the establishment after curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(f)	It shall be unlawful for any person (including any minor) to give a false name, address, or telephone number to any officer investigating a possible violation of this section 13-4. 
(g)	Enforcement. 
1.	Minors. Before taking any enforcement action hereunder, an officer shall make an immediate investigation for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the presence of a minor in a public place, motor vehicle and/or establishment within the city during curfew hours is in violation of subsection 13-4(b). 
a.	If such investigation reveals that the presence of such minor is in violation of subsection 13-4(b), then: if the minor has not previously been issued a warning for any such violation, the officer may issue a verbal warning to the minor, or, if the minor has previously been issued a warning for any such violation, the officer may charge the minor with a violation of this section. 
b.	As soon as practicable, the officer shall: 
1.	Release the minor to his or her parent(s); or 
2.	Place the minor in a temporary care facility or place the minor in his or her school of enrollment. 
2.	Others. If an investigation by an officer reveals that a person has violated subsections 13-4(c), (d) and/or (e), and if the person has not previously been issued a warning with respect to any such violation, an officer may issue a verbal warning to the person, however, if any such warning has previously been issued to that person then the officer may charge the person with a violation of this section. 
(h)	Each violation of this section 13-4 shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, §§ 16-7—16-9; Ord. No. 486-78, §§ 1—3, 7-5-78; Ord. No. 1183-99, § 1, 6-16-99)  
Sec. 13-5. - Disorderly conduct. 
The following persons are hereby declared to be guilty of disorderly conduct, which shall be a violation of this Code: 
(1)	Any person who is engaged in any illegal occupation or business; proof of recent reputation for engaging in an illegal occupation or business shall be prima facie evidence of being engaged in an illegal occupation or business; 
(2)	Any prostitute; 
(3)	Any person who shall engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any public place; 
(4)	Any vagrant; 
(5)	Any person who is found begging in a public place; 
(6)	Any person found loitering in a house of ill fame or prostitution, or place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced, encouraged or allowed; 
(7)	Any person who shall loiter in and about any police station, police headquarters building, jail, hospital, court building or any other place or public building, scene of an accident, crime or disaster, for the purpose of soliciting employment of legal services or the services of sureties upon criminal recognizances; 
(8)	Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place; 
(9)	Any person who shall make, aid, countenance or assist in making undue noise, riot, disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending to a breach of the peace, within the limits of the city; 
(10)	All persons who shall collect in bodies or crowds for unlawful purposes, or for any purpose to the annoyance or disturbance of other persons; 
(11)	Any person who is idle or dissolute and goes about begging; 
(12)	Any person who uses or exercises any juggling or other unlawful games or plays; 
(13)	Any person who is found in a house of ill fame or gaming house; 
(14)	Any person lodging in or found at any time in any outhouse, shed, barn, garage or unoccupied building or underneath a sidewalk or lodging in the open air and not giving a good account of himself; 
(15)	Any person who shall be engaged in or aid or abet in any fight, quarrel or any other disturbance in the city; 
(16)	Any person who stands, loiters or strolls about in any place in the city waiting or seeking to obtain money or other valuable things from others by trick or fraud, or to aid or assist therein; 
(17)	Any person who shall engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing in any place in the city or who shall aid or abet or in any manner be concerned therein; 
(18)	Any tout, roper, steerer or capper, so called, for any gambling room or house who shall ply or attempt to ply his calling in the city; 
(19)	Any person found loitering about any hotel, block, barroom, juke joint, gambling house or disorderly house, or wandering about the streets either by night or by day, without known lawful means of support or without being able to give a satisfactory account of themselves; 
(20)	Any person who is known to be a thief, burglar, pickpocket, robber or confidence man, either by his own confession or otherwise, or by having been convicted of larceny, burglary or another crime against the laws of the state or any state in the United States, who is found lounging in or prowling or loitering around any boat landing, railroad depot, banking institution, place of amusement, auction room, hotel, store, shop, thoroughfare, car, public conveyance, public gathering, public assembly, public buildings, private dwelling house, house of ill fame, gambling house, barroom or any public place who is unable to give a reasonable excuse for being so found; 
(21)	Any person who fails to heed the lawful order of a police officer or interferes with any police officer while in the execution of his lawful duties; 
(22)	Any person who insults any police officer on the streets, public roads or other places while in the performance of his lawful duties or who makes derogatory or insulting remarks either to or about any police officer, or makes any sign, motion or gesture calculated to insult or humiliate such police officer or officers; 
(23)	Any person who willfully disturbs the peace of others within the city by violent or offensive conduct or by making undue noise or by using loud, profane or obscene language; 
(24)	Any person who shall accost, approach, proposition, pick up or attempt to pick up, insult or embarrass any female, or who shall aid, countenance, abet or assist or in any manner be concerned therein; 
(25)	Any person who shall enter upon any private, public or parochial school property, school cafeteria or any public place of business or upon the premises of such public place of business, or any other public place whatsoever in the city and while therein, thereon or in the immediate vicinity thereof, shall create a disturbance or breach of the peace in any way whatsoever, including but not restricted to loud and offensive talk, the making of threats or attempting to intimidate, or any conduct which causes a disturbance or breach of the peace or threatened breach of the peace. 
(Code 1964, § 16-62) 
State Law reference— Breach of the peace and disorderly conduct, F.S. § 877.03.  
Sec. 13-6. - Public displays of fireworks. 
The chief of police and the chief of the fire department may grant permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by organizations or groups of individuals, provided that every such display shall be handled by a competent operator approved by the chief of police and the chief of the fire department, and further provided that the display shall be of such a character, and so located, discharged or fired, as in the opinion of the chief of police and the chief of the fire department shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person. 
(Code 1964, §§ 16-17—16-19) 
State Law reference— Fireworks defined and prohibited, F.S. §§ 791.01, 791.02; exceptions for public displays under municipal regulation, F.S. § 791.02.  
Sec. 13-7. - Loitering. 
(a)	In parks. No person shall loiter in any park within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)	In public places. No person shall loiter upon the streets, sidewalks or other public places within the city. 
(c)	In or near city hall. No person shall loiter in or near the city hall. 
(d)	Around use or possession of drugs or harmful chemical substances. No person or persons shall loiter in any place with one or more persons knowing that a narcotic or dangerous drug, or harmful chemical substance, as defined in F.S. §§ 893.02, 893.03 and 877.11, is being unlawfully used or possessed thereat. 
(Code 1964, § 16-26; Ord. No. 487-78, § 1, 7-5-78) 
State Law reference— Loitering or prowling generally, F.S. § 856.021.  
Sec. 13-8. - Impersonating officer. 
No person shall impersonate any officer of the city or in any way assert or act as an officer or official of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 16-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 843.08.  
Sec. 13-9. - Interfering with officers. 
No person shall interfere or conduct himself in any manner which shall interfere with or prohibit any official or employee of the city from performing his official duties. 
(Code 1964, § 16-36) 
Cross reference— Obstructing firemen, § 8-6.  
Sec. 13-10. - Peeping toms. 
Any person who trespasses on or about the property of another and spies or looks through windows, transoms or doors is hereby defined as a peeping tom. No person shall be a peeping tom. 
(Code 1964, §§ 16-38, 16-39)  
Sec. 13-11. - Police and fire department signal systems; interference with, misuse. 
No person shall deface, injure, destroy or otherwise incapacitate any telephone or other fire or police signalling apparatus, device or mechanism, or use such apparatus, device or mechanism for any purpose other than that for which it is intended. 
(Code 1964, § 16-41)  
Sec. 13-12. - Reward for information leading to arrest and conviction for certain offenses. 
(a)	The city hereby offers a reward in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person or persons of one or more of the following designated offenses: 
(1)	Theft of property owned by the city. 
(2)	Destruction of property owned by the city. 
(3)	Defacing of property owned by the city. 
(b)	Only one reward of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be payable in connection with any one incident or occasion of theft, destruction or defacing of city property, and, if more than one person furnishes information leading to the arrest and conviction of one or more persons of the herein designated offenses occurring on the same occasion, the reward will be equally divided among the persons furnishing such information. 
(c)	Rewards authorized by this section are to be paid out of the general administrative contingency fund of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 16-65; Ord. No. 543-80, § 1, 1-2-80)  
Sec. 13-13. - Weapons safety. 
(1)	Purpose. The use and transport of weapons of all types in the proximity of persons and property manifest a present danger to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. The increased urbanization within the city makes it necessary to regulate the use and transportation of weapons within the city. 
(2)	Exclusion. The following activities are excluded from this section: 
(a)	The regulation of firearms and ammunition has been preempted by the State of Florida pursuant to F.S. § 790.33(1). This prohibits the city from enacting any regulation affecting firearms and ammunition. If for any reason the regulation of firearms and ammunition enacted within F.S. ch. 790, ceases to be law, then the version of said chapter, in effect at that time, is hereby adopted for a period of one (1) year. 
(b)	The use of animals, such as falconry. 
(c)	Any activities authorized by the city manager, by its employees or agents, within the scope of their duties. 
(3)	Definitions. 
(a)	Prohibited activity. The launching, propelling, or otherwise causing of any projectile from the user property by the user, outside or over the property line of the user property, in or onto other property, or properties. 
(b)	Projectile. Any object which may cause physical harm or property damage when launched or propelled by any means. 
(c)	User property. The property owned by the user, and/or property which user has the owner's permission to utilize said property for the activity. 
(d)	User. The person or persons who, by any means, cause a projectile to be launched, propelled or otherwise set in motion. 
(e)	Methods causing prohibited activity. Any force set in motion which puts a projectile in motion, such as, but not limited to: 
1.	Compressed gases, such as air, carbon dioxide, etc.; 
2.	Fluids under pressure; 
3.	Chemical reactions, such as rockets; 
4.	Mechanical force, such as bows and cross bows; 
5.	Human force, such as throwing knives, rocks and javelins. 
(4)	Transportation. All projectiles must be incapable of being launched when transported onto or off of the user property. 
(5)	Violation. It is a violation of this section for a user to knowingly, willfully or negligently: 
a.	Cause a projectile to cross the user's property line onto another property, or properties. 
b.	Transport a projectile in a condition which might allow it to be set in motion either intentionally or negligently. 
c.	Cause a projectile to be activated while not on the user's property. 
(6)	Hunting. Hunting is allowed only in those areas designated by any state agency authorized to designate areas for hunting. The city manager may authorize, at his discretion, hunting needed to insure public health or safety. 
(7)	Penalty. Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00) dollars. 
(8)	No defense. This section may not be used by any person as a defense or in any other fashion to defeat the applicability regarding a violation of any Federal or Florida Statutes, Brevard County or City of Rockledge Ordinances, case law or common law causes of action, for said person's intentional or negligent acts. 
(Code 1964, §§ 16-54—16-56; Ord. No. 1564-10, § 1, 11-17-10) 
State Law reference— Use of weapons by children, F.S. § 790.22.  
Sec. 13-14. - Wrecked, abandoned and derelict property. 
(a)	Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)	Abandoned property means all tangible personal property which does not have an identifiable owner and which has been disposed of in a wrecked, inoperative, or partially dismantled condition or which has no apparent intrinsic value to the rightful owner. 
(2)	Private property means all land and improvements other than public property as herein defined. 
(3)	Public property means lands and improvements owned by the federal government, the state, the county or the city, lying within the city, and includes buildings, grounds, parks, playgrounds, streets, sidewalks, parkways, rights-of-way and other similar property. 
(4)	Enforcement officer means the police chief or any police officer of the city, or any other officer or employee of the city designated by resolution of the city council to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(5)	Inoperative motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that is not capable of operating under its own power, or a motor vehicle with one or more flat tires, or a motor vehicle off the ground resting on blocks or other supports, or a motor vehicle not having properly displayed thereon a valid and current motor vehicle license plate. 
(b)	Nuisances declared. Abandoned property in all yards, open areas and vacant lots in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, and such nuisances shall be abated as herein provided. 
(c)	Prohibited on public property; procedure. No person or party shall discard, abandon, store, place, keep or maintain any abandoned property on public property within the city. 
(d)	Prohibited on private property; procedure. No person or party shall discard, abandon, store, place, keep or maintain any abandoned property in or upon any yard, vacant lot or open area of private property or in any open garage or carport on private property within the city. 
(1)	Whenever the enforcement officer shall ascertain that an article or articles of abandoned property are present in or upon any yard, vacant lot or open area of private property or in any open garage or carport on private property within the limits of the city in violation of this section or any zoning ordinance or regulation, antilitter ordinance or regulation, or other ordinance or regulation of the city, the enforcement officer shall cause a notice to be placed upon such article in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY. This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) located at (setting forth brief description of location) is improperly stored and is in violation of (setting forth ordinance or regulation violated) and must be removed within ten (10) days from date of this notice, otherwise it shall be presumed to be abandoned property and will be removed and destroyed by order of the City Council of Rockledge, Florida. Dated this: (setting forth date of posting of notice). Signed: (setting forth name, title address and telephone number of enforcement officer). 
Such notice shall not be less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the elements for a period of ten (10) days. In addition to posting, the enforcement officer shall mail a copy of the notice to the owner of the real property upon which the abandoned articles are located as shown by the real estate tax records used by the city on or before the date of posting of such notice. 
(2)	If at the end of ten (10) days after posting such notice the owner or any person interested in the abandoned article or articles described in such notice has not removed the article or articles and complied with the ordinance or regulation cited in the notice, the enforcement officer may cause the article or articles of abandoned property to be removed and destroyed, and the salvage value, if any, of such article or articles shall be retained by the city to be applied against the cost of removal and destruction thereof. 
(e)	Obstructing enforcement. It shall be unlawful to oppose, obstruct or resist any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the enforcement officer in the discharge of his duties as provided by this section. 
(f)	Immunity from prosecution for trespass. Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the enforcement officer shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable good faith trespass upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this section. 
(Code 1964, § 16-61; Ord. No. 729-85 § 1, 2-20-85; Ord. No. 953-90, § 2, 3-21-90) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 10-16 et seq.; parking inoperable motor vehicle on public street, § 21-32. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 765.16.  
Sec. 13-15. - Keeping or storing wrecked or dismantled motor vehicles. 
(a)	No person shall for any purpose keep, retain, store or place at any one time more than one motor vehicle which has been wrecked or dismantled or is in an inoperable condition upon any lot, parcel or tract of land in the city, except within an enclosed covered building; nor shall any person repair, rebuild, dismantle or tear down more than one motor vehicle at any one time upon any lot, parcel or tract of land in the city, except within an enclosed covered building; provided, however, that the one wrecked, dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle that is not required to be kept in an enclosed covered building under the foregoing provisions shall not be allowed to remain on the property outside of an enclosed covered building for a period exceeding seven (7) days. 
(b)	In areas zoned to permit storage, repair or maintenance of wrecked, dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles, such motor vehicles may be stored, placed, repaired and kept within an enclosure having opaque walls, or within a nontranslucent and nontransparent fence enclosure, the walls or sides of such enclosure to be of sufficient height to completely prevent all motor vehicles therein from being seen or viewed from abutting private properties or from any public property. The gate or entranceway into the enclosure must also be opaque, nontranslucent or nontransparent. 
(Code 1964, § 16-24; Ord. No. 730-85, § 1, 2-20-85) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 10-16 et seq.; use of streets for storage or sale of vehicles, § 18-4; parking inoperable motor vehicle on public street, § 21-32.  
Sec. 13-16. - Disposition of lost or abandoned property, unclaimed evidence. 
It appears that the state legislature through enactment of state statutes has intended to pre-empt unto itself power to legislate on the subject of disposition of lost or abandoned property found on public property, as well as the procedure for disposition of unclaimed evidence in criminal proceedings; therefore, all such state statutes applicable and pertaining to lost or abandoned property found on public property, and pertaining to disposition of unclaimed evidence in criminal proceedings, as amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference as part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 953-90, § 3, 3-21-90)  
Chapter 14 - PARKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals prohibited in parks, § 5-18; mooring boats at city property, § 6-5; loitering, § 13-7. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Purpose. 
The city council finds that in order to preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the community and the citizens thereof, it is necessary to regulate and restrict the conduct of individuals utilizing parks, playgrounds and places of public recreation within the city, and to confer upon law enforcement officers of the city lawful authority to enforce the rules and regulations applicable to the use of parks, playgrounds and places of public recreation within the city. 
(Ord. No. 768-85, § 1, 10-2-85)  
Sec. 14-2. - Authority of city police in county parks. 
The board of county commissioners operates within the city several parks, playgrounds, athletic facilities, swimming pools, and other places of public recreation, including McLarty Park, Rockledge Park and Taylor Park, and by resolution dated April 23, 1981, the board of county commissioners authorized the municipal police department of the city to make arrests for certain park violations denominated as misdemeanors by county ordinance, and to expel and eject from county parks violators of rules adopted by resolution of said board of county commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 768-85, § 1, 10-2-85)  
Sec. 14-3. - Facilities regulated. 
The regulations set forth in section 14-4 of this Code shall apply to all parks, recreational facilities and stormwater facilities within the city. 
(Ord. No. 768-85, § 1, 10-2-85; Ord. No. 1544-2010, § 1, 3-17-10 )  
Sec. 14-4. - Rules and regulations. 
No person utilizing any park or recreational facility specified in section 14-3 of this Code shall violate any of the following rules, regulations or prohibitions: 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person of any age to loiter, walk, stand, sit or lie in any of the above-described parks in the city after park hours, unless authorized by permit issued by the county district 4 recreation and parks department. Park hours for all above-described parks shall be from 7:00 a.m. until sunset. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any alcoholic beverages in any of the above-described parks in the city. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverages in any park grounds, parking lots, playgrounds, athletic facilities, or swimming pools located at any of the above-described parks in the city; provided, however, that beer only may be possessed and consumed in certain picnic areas, pavilions and campsites designated for said consumption, where a permit for said consumption has been issued by the county district 4 recreation and parks department. 
(4)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in any of the above-described parks in the city, except in designated roadways and parking areas. No person shall enter or exit any park by motor vehicle, except by such entrances and exits specifically designated and established for such purposes. 
(5)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the confines of the above-described parks in the city in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(6)	It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, keep or offer for sale any tangible or intangible object, thing or merchandise, or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession for any consideration within the confines of the above-described parks in the city without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the county district 4 recreation and parks department. 
(7)	It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any open fires, or other fires not in designated cooking grills and stoves, in any of the above-described parks in the city. 
(8)	It shall be unlawful for any person to use any loudspeaker, or other sound-amplifying equipment, within the confines of any of the above-described parks in the city without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the county district 4 recreation and parks department. 
(9)	It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, or participate in, any public meetings, assemblies, entertainments, tournaments, religious gatherings, demonstrations, parades or processions on any subject within the confines of any of the above-described parks in the city without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the county district 4 recreation and parks department. 
(10)	It shall be unlawful for any person to post any sign within the confines of any of the above-described parks in the city without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the county district 4 recreation and parks department. 
(11)	It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to leave the confines of any of the above-described parks in the city after being directed to so leave by supervisory personnel of the county district 4 recreation and parks department for violations of this section or other applicable posted park rules and regulations. 
(12)	The use of gill, cast or entangling nets of any size for the purpose of taking or harvesting fish is prohibited at all city parks, recreational facilities and stormwater facilities, including drainage canals. Such activities shall be unlawful. 
(13)	No person may launch or operate any motorboat, airboat, or personal watercraft, powered by internal combustion engine. Model boats, no larger than 48", are excluded from the internal combustion motor regulation found in this section. However electric trolling motors under five (5) horsepower in size shall be allowed. All launching area sites shall be as approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 768-85, § 1, 10-2-85; Ord. No. 1544-2010, § 2, 3-17-10 )  
Sec. 14-5. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any rule, regulation, prohibition or provision of section 14-4 of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be prosecuted and upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 768-85, § 1, 10-2-85)  
Chapter 16 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Roads and pavements, special assessments, Subpt. A, Art. VIII; local improvements and special assessments, Subpt. B, Art. 2; zoning, Subpt. B, Art. 3. 
Cross reference— Beautification board, § 2-151 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 16-1—16-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 16-11. - Creation; membership. 
There is hereby created and established a citizens advisory committee, hereby designated as the Rockledge Citizens Advisory Committee, consisting of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the city council, each for a term of one year. 
At its first regular meeting in October of each year the city council shall appoint seven (7) members to constitute the citizens advisory committee. Members may be appointed to succeed themselves. The city council may, in its discretion, appoint one or more nonvoting ex officio members of the committee. Each member of the committee at the time of his appointment must have been a resident of the city for at least one year. Vacancies in membership shall be filled by appointment by the city council as soon as practicable after the vacancy occurs. Any member of the committee who shall fail to attend three (3) regular meetings of the committee shall be deemed to have vacated his office unless excused by the committee. 
No member of the committee shall be a relative (blood, marriage or adoption) or persons residing in the same household may simultaneously serve on the committee at any time. This shall not preclude those individuals from serving on other boards or committee. 
(Code 1964, § 2-46; Ord. No. 1242-2001, § 1, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 16-12. - Organization and officers. 
As soon as practicable after their appointment each year, the members of the citizens advisory committee shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary from its members. The term of such officers shall be for a period of one year to run concurrently with the term of such member's appointment to the committee; provided, that nothing shall prevent the committee from naming a chairman, vice-chairman or secretary to succeed himself. 
(Code 1964, § 2-47)  
Sec. 16-13. - Bylaws. 
The committee shall adopt bylaws setting forth its organization and government. Only those bylaws or amendments thereto approved by the city council by appropriate resolution shall become effective. 
(Code 1964, § 2-48)  
Sec. 16-14. - Meetings; quorum, vote required; records. 
The citizens advisory committee shall hold meetings at such times and places as may be prescribed in the bylaws of the committee or as may be called by the chairman or vice-chairman of the committee. All regular and special meetings of the committee shall be open to the public. The time and place of meetings and the order of business and procedure to be followed at meetings shall be prescribed by the committee. Four (4) members of the committee shall constitute a quorum and a majority vote of the members present at a meeting with a quorum shall be required to decide any issue. A written record of the proceedings of the committee shall be kept, showing its action on each question considered. Copies of such record shall be promptly filed with the chairman of the planning commission and with the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1964, § 2-49)  
Sec. 16-15. - Goals and objectives. 
The goals and objectives of the citizens advisory committee are to encourage, promote, solicit and obtain active citizen participation in the preparation of comprehensive plan elements and other studies and projects being carried on by the planning commission from time to time. 
(Code 1964, § 2-50)  
Sec. 16-16. - Functions and duties. 
The functions and duties of the citizens advisory committee shall be, in general, to: 
(a)	Hold meetings for public participation in planning programs. 
(b)	Employ various methods of soliciting public interest in planning programs. 
(c)	Monitor the progress of planning programs. 
(d)	Conduct specified operations of planning programs. 
(e)	Report all activities to the planning commission. 
(f)	Conduct business meetings for the purpose of making decisions and developing recommendations. 
(g)	Submit written recommendations to the planning commission as it deems necessary or as requested. 
(h)	Prepare written reports or documents as requested by the planning commission. 
(i)	Perform other functions and duties at the direction of the planning commission. 
(Code 1964, § 2-51)  
Sec. 16-17. - Removal of members. 
Any members of the committee may be removed for cause by the city council. Further, any member who has three (3) consecutive unexcused absences, which are those not approved by the committee chairman prior to the meeting involved, or a total of four (4) absences during any twelve-month period, excused or unexcused, shall automatically be terminated and removed as a member of the committee. The city council shall appoint a replacement for any removed member at its next regularly scheduled meeting in the same manner as other appointment of members for the remainder of such term. 
(Ord. No. 1343-04, § 1, 3-24-04)  
ARTICLE III. - ROCKLEDGE COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
Sec. 16-18. - Rockledge Community Redevelopment Agency. 
(1)	Governing body: 
(a)	Name: The governing body for the Rockledge Community Redevelopment Agency shall be known as the Rockledge Community Redevelopment Agency Board of Commissioners. 
(b)	Number of commissioners: The board of commissioners shall consist of seven (7) commissioners, none of whom shall be members of the Rockledge City Council. 
(c)	Initial terms: The initial commissioners shall be appointed to terms as follows: 
1.	One (1) member shall be appointed for a term of (1) year. 
2.	One (1) member shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. 
3.	One (1) member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. 
4.	Four (4) members shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years. 
These initial appointees shall serve from the date of appointment until the second city council meeting in April after the passage of the appropriate number of years. 
(d)	Term: Other than the initial appointments per subsection 16-18(1)(c), all subsequent terms of office of the commissioners shall be for four (4) years after the initial appointments. All necessary appointments shall be made at the second city council meeting in April. 
(e)	The city council, by majority vote, shall appoint the individual commissioners. 
(f)	A commissioner shall receive no compensation for services, but is entitled to necessary expenses, including travel expenses incurred in discharge of duties. 
(g)	Each commissioner shall hold office until his or her successor has been appointed and has been qualified. 
(h)	The city council shall designate an initial chair and vice chair from among the commission members. 
(i)	The commission shall nominate a chair and vice chair from its membership at the first meeting in each new year. Said nominations shall be referred to and subject to approval by the city council. 
(j)	A person may be appointed as a commissioner if he or she resides in or is engaged in a business within the city. 
(k)	The city council may remove a commissioner for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or misconduct in office after a hearing and after the commissioner has been given a copy of the charges at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing and has had an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel. 
(l)	Absences: Following appointment, any member who has three (3) consecutive unexcused absences (those not approved by the chair prior to the meeting involved) or a total of four (4) absences during any 12-month period (excused or unexcused) shall automatically be terminated and removed as a member of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1355-04, § 1, 9-22-04; Ord. No. 1542-10, § 1, 2-17-10; Ord. No. 1542-2010, § 1, 2-17-10 )  
Sec. 16-19. - Powers. 
The Rockledge Community Redevelopment Agency is vested with the following powers pursuant to F.S. § 163.370. 
(1)	To make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary or convenient to the exercise of its powers under this division. 
(2)	To disseminate redevelopment information. 
(3)	To undertake and carry out community redevelopment projects and related activities within its area of operation, such projects to include: 
a.	Acquisition of a slum area or a blighted area of any portions thereof. 
b.	Demolition and removal of building and improvements. 
c.	Installation, construction or reconstruction of streets, utilities, parks, playgrounds, and other improvements necessary for carrying out the community redevelopment plan. 
d.	Disposition of any property acquired in the community redevelopment area at its fair value for uses in accordance with the community redevelopment plan. 
e.	Carrying out plans for a program of voluntary or compulsory repair and rehabilitation of buildings or other improvements in accordance with the community redevelopment plan. 
f.	Acquisition of real property in the community redevelopment project area which, under the community redevelopment plan, is to be repaired or rehabilitated for dwelling use or related facilities, repair or rehabilitation of the structures for guidance purposes, and resale of the property. 
g.	Acquisition of any other real property in the community redevelopment area when necessary to eliminate unhealthful, unsanitary or unsafe conditions, lessen density, eliminate obsolete or other uses detrimental to the public welfare, or otherwise, to remove or prevent the spread of blight or deterioration or to provide land for needed public facilities. 
h.	Acquisitions, without regard to any requirement that the area be a slum or blighted area, of air rights in an area consisting principally of land in highways, railway tracks, bridge entrances or other similar facilities which have a blighting influence on the surrounding area and over which air rights sites are to be developed for elimination of such blighting influences and for the provision of housing (and related facilities and uses) designed specifically for, and limited to, families and individuals of low or moderate income. 
i.	Construction of foundations and platforms necessary for the provision of air rights, sites of housing (and related facilities and uses) designed specifically for, and limited to, families and individuals of low or moderate income. 
(4)	To provide, or to arrange or contract for, the furnishings or repair by any person or agency, public or private, of services, privileges, works, streets, roads, public utilities or other facilities or in connection with a community redevelopment project; and to agree to any conditions that it may deem reasonable and appropriate attached to federal financial assistance and imposed pursuant to federal law relating to the determination of prevailing salaries or wages or compliance with labor standards, in the undertaking or carrying out of a community redevelopment project and related activities, and to include in any contract let in connection with such a project and related activities, provisions to fulfill such of said conditions as it may deem reasonable and appropriate. 
(5)	Within the community redevelopment area: 
a.	To acquire by purchase, lease, option, gift, grant, bequest, devise, eminent domain, or otherwise, any real property (or other personal property) for its administrative purposes together with any improvements thereon. 
b.	To hold, improve, clear, or prepare for redevelopment any such property; 
c.	To mortgage, pledge, hypothecate, or otherwise encumber, or to dispose of any real property; 
d.	To insure or provide for the insurance of any real or personal property or operations of the county or municipality against any risks or hazards, including the power to pay premiums on any such insurance; 
e.	To enter into any contracts necessary to effectuate the purpose of this division. 
(6)	To invest any community redevelopment funds held in reserves or sinking funds or any such funds not required for immediate disbursement in property or securities in which savings banks may legally invest funds subject to their control; to redeem revenue bonds issued pursuant to this part at the redemption price established therein or purchase such bonds at less than redemption price, all such bonds so redeemed or purchased to be canceled. 
(7)	To borrow money and to apply for and accept advances, loans, grants, contributions, and any other form of financial assistance from the federal government, the state, county, or other public body, or from any sources, public or private, for the purposes of this division and to give such security as may be required and to enter into and carry out contracts or agreements in connection therewith; and to include in any contract for financial assistance with the federal government for or with respect to a community redevelopment project and related activities such conditions imposed pursuant to federal laws as the county or municipality may deem reasonable and appropriate and which are not inconsistent with the purposes of this division. 
(8)	Within its area of operation, to make or have made all surveys and plans necessary to the carrying out of the purposes of this part and with the consent of the City Council to contract with any persons, public or private, in making and carrying out such plans, which plans may include, but not be limited to: 
a.	Plans for carrying out a program of voluntary or compulsory repair and rehabilitation of buildings and improvements; 
b.	Appraisals, title searches, surveys, studies, and other plans and work necessary to prepare for the undertaking of community redevelopment projects and related activities; 
c.	Plans for the enforcement of state and local laws, codes and regulations relating to the use of land and the use and occupancy of buildings and improvements and to the compulsory repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal of buildings, and improvements. 
(9)	To develop, test, and report methods and techniques, and carry out demonstrations and other activities, for the prevention and the elimination of slums and urban blight and developing and demonstrating new or improved means providing housing for families and persons of low income. 
(10)	To apply for, accept, and utilize grants of funds from federal government for such purposes. 
(11)	To prepare plans for and assist in the relocation of persons (including individuals, families, business concerns, nonprofit organizations and others) displaced from a community redevelopment area, and to make relocation payments to or with respect to such persons for moving expenses and losses of property for which reimbursement or compensation is not otherwise made, including the making of such payments financed by the federal government. 
(12)	To appropriate such funds and make such expenditures as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(13)	To close, vacate, plat or replat streets, roads, sidewalks, or other places. 
(14)	Within its area of operation to organize, coordinate, and direct the administration of the provisions of this division, as they may apply to the city in order that the objective of remedying slum and blighted areas and preventing the causes thereof within the city, and to establish such offices in order to carry out such purposes most effectively. 
(Ord. No. 1355-04, § 1, 9-22-04)  
Chapter 17 - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Special assessments, Subpt. A, Art. VIII; local improvements and special assessments, Subpt. B, Art. 2. 
Cross reference— Prohibited discharges from boats and vessels, § 6-6; garbage and trash, Ch. 9; health and sanitation, Ch. 10; planning, Ch. 16. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 17-1—17-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SERVICE CHARGES 
 
Sec. 17-11. - Free service prohibited. 
No sewage disposal service shall be furnished or rendered free of charge to any person whatsoever, and the city and each agency, department or instrumentality thereof which uses the sewage disposal service shall pay for such service at the rates fixed by this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 21-25)  
Sec. 17-12. - Charges established. 
The owner or occupant of each residence or other building or structure which is now or hereafter connected to any sanitary sewage main in the city, hereinafter referred to as "customer" or "user," shall pay the city a monthly sewage disposal service charge for the use and availability of the city sewer and wastewater treatment system as set out in this chapter; and, in addition thereto, shall pay the city a monthly gallonage charge based upon the amount of Cocoa city water consumed at such residence, building or structure, as determined by the meter readings of the water meter installed at the premises, except as herein specified. The rate for each customer or user shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(a)	Basic monthly sewer service charge. Each customer connected to the Rockledge sewer system and to whom a monthly water bill shall be rendered for water furnished by the City of Cocoa shall pay the City of Rockledge a basic monthly sewer service charge in an amount determined by the size of the water service meter at the premises, as follows: 
Meter Size (inches) 	Basic Monthly Sewer Service Charge 
¾ 	$14.00 
1 	25.00 
1½ 	47.00 
2 	73.40 
3 	179.00 
4 	278.00 
6 	443.00 
8 or larger 	$707.00 minimum, plus any additional charge determined by the city council to be just and equitable depending on the customer's demand upon the sewer system. 
 
Every condominium association or corporation, cooperative apartment corporation, owner, landlord, tenant or other party responsible to pay for sewer service to a condominium, cooperative apartment, rental apartment, trailer park other than travel trailer park, duplex, triplex, or other residential premises, except a motel, connected to the City of Cocoa water system and not having individual water meters for each living unit shall pay a monthly base sewer service charge of fourteen dollars ($14.00) for each living unit on the premises. The accumulated total of service charges per unit at the three-fourths-inch service meter rate shall, however, be not less than the listed service charge for the service meter actually installed in the single water service line, in which case the larger of the two (2) charges will be applied to the customer's water bill. 
Of the base sewer service charge four dollars ($4.00) per month per customer shall be applied as the renewal and replacement fee herein established for the purpose of providing funding for the upgrading and maintenance of the sewer system. These monies will be deposited into a separate account for the purpose hereinabove stated, and shall not be expended for any purpose other than the renewal or replacement of the sewer system or its related equipment. 
The rates in subsection (a) above shall be effective on all bills for services rendered after October 1, 2014. 
(b)	Gallonage charge. In addition to the monthly base sewer service charge stated above, each customer connected to the city's sewer system and to whom a monthly bill shall be rendered for water furnished by the City of Cocoa Water System serving inhabitants of the City of Rockledge shall pay the City of Rockledge for sewer service a quantity consumption charge based upon the number of gallons of water passing through such customer's water meter during the monthly billing period, at the rates set out below: 
For the period October 1, 2016 to September 30, 2017: 
0—5,000 gallons 	$3.60 per thousand gallons or any part thereof; 
5,000—15,000 gallons: 	$3.75 per thousand gallons or any part thereof; 
15,000—76,000 gallons 	$4.25 per thousand gallons or any part thereof; 
More than 76,000 gallons 	$5.00 per thousand gallons or any part thereof. 
For the period on or after October 1, 2017: 
0—5,000 gallons 	$3.75 per thousand gallons or any part thereof; 
5,000—15,000 gallons 	$3.90 per thousand gallons or any part thereof; 
15,000—76,000 gallons 	$4.40 per thousand gallons or any part thereof; 
More than 76,000 gallons 	$5.15 per thousand gallons or any part thereof. 
 
The rates in subsection (b) above shall be effective on all bills for services rendered after October 1, 2016. 
(c)	Cap on monthly sewer charges for individually metered single-family dwelling units with a three-quarter-inch water meter. The monthly charges established in subsections (a) and (b) above shall not exceed those accrued at a consumption level of fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons for any individually metered single-family dwelling unit with a three-quarter-inch water meter, regardless of the number of gallons of water consumed at the dwelling unit during the monthly billing period. 
(d)	Sewer only customers. Every owner, landlord, tenant, or other party responsible to pay for sewer service to residential or commercial customers not connected to Cocoa city water shall pay a monthly charge for the sewer service at the premises based upon the bathroom facilities, to-wit: 
Bathroom Facilities 	Monthly Sewer Service Charge 
1 Bathroom 	$25.00 (minimum) 
1½ Bathrooms 	28.25 
2 Bathrooms 	31.30 
For Each Additional Bathroom 	3.40 
 
The rates above shall be effective on all bills for services rendered after September 30, 2005. 
(e)	Sewer deposit required. Each customer opening a new or transferred account with the City of Cocoa for water service to premises that are connected to the City of Rockledge Sewer System, and for which a monthly water bill shall be rendered for water furnished by the City of Cocoa, and the owner or occupant of any premises having a private water supply, which premises hereafter become connected to the Rockledge Sewer System, shall pay a sewer service deposit based on the size of the service meter or water line from the private water source serving the facility, in accordance with the following schedule: 
Meter Size 
 (inches) 	Fee 
 ¾ 	$   40.00 
 1 	    80.00 
 1½ 	   160.00 
 2 	   256.00 
 3 	   640.00 
 4 	  1,000.00 
 6 	  1,600.00 
 8 or larger 	2,560.00 (minimum) 
 
This deposit shall be paid prior to the commencement of water or sewer service to the premises, and shall be held by the city until such time as the account is terminated. If at that time the sewer account and garbage collection charges due the city have been paid in full, the deposit will be refunded; however, if there is an outstanding balance due the city, either for sewer service or garbage collection, the deposit shall be applied sufficiently to cover same, and any remaining sum due the city shall be paid by the customer. Further, there shall be required of the customer proof that the water account has been closed. 
(Code 1964, § 21-26; Ord. No. 520-79, § 1, 6-20-79; Ord. No. 637-83, § 1, 1-5-83; Ord. No. 683-84, § 1, 3-21-84; Ord. No. 809-86, § 1, 9-17-86; Ord. No. 896-88, § 1, 12-7-88; Ord. No. 902-89, §§ 2, 3, 2-8-89; Ord. No. 903-89, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-89; Ord. No. 950-90, §§ 1, 2, 3-7-90; Ord. No. 1090-94, § 1, 9-21-94; Ord. No. 1112-95, § 1, 9-20-95; Ord. No. 1128-96, § 1, 9-18-96; Ord. No. 1160-98, §§ 1, 2, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 1187-99, §§ 1, 2, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 1280-02, §§ 1, 2, 8-21-02; Ord. No. 1324-03, §§ 1, 2, 9-17-03; Ord. No. 1390-05, §§ 1—3, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 1425-06, § 1, 9-20-06; Ord. No. 1497-08, § 1, 9-3-08; Ord. No. 1524-09, §§ 1, 2, 9-9-09; Ord. No. 1595-2012, §§ 1—3, 8-15-12 ; Ord. No. 1629-2013, §§ 1, 2, 9-4-13 ; Ord. No. 1651-2014 , §§ 1—3, 9-3-14; Ord. No. 1673-2015 , § 1, 9-9-15; Ord. No. 1691-2016 , § 1, 9-7-16)  
Sec. 17-13. - Surcharge to consumers outside city limits. 
In addition to the basic monthly rates, fees and charges for city sewer service established by the provisions of section 17-12 above, a surcharge of twenty-five (25) percent of such basic monthly rates, fees and charges shall be charged and collected by the city for sewer service provided to any premises located outside the municipal boundaries of the city. As to each premises located outside the city limits being provided with city sewer service, the basic monthly charge for sewer service shall first be determined in accordance with the provisions of section 17-12, and the surcharge of twenty-five (25) percent of such basic monthly charge shall then be computed and added to said basic monthly charge, and the sum of said basic monthly charge and surcharge shall be the total monthly charge for city sewer service provided to each premises located outside the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 551-80, § 2, 4-2-80)  
Sec. 17-14. - Charges for larger users of service. 
(a)	The city reserves the right to enter into contracts with large users of sewer service for the purpose of setting and determining a monthly charge or rate for the use of such sewer system, computed upon a basis different from that set forth in section 17-12. 
(b)	Such contracts may be entered into by means of resolution duly adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 21-27)  
Sec. 17-15. - Payment; collection of delinquent charges. 
(a)	Bills for monthly sewage disposal charges shall be submitted and shall be paid monthly, along with the monthly water fees and charges where city water is furnished. 
(b)	Any person who shall be delinquent in the payment of sewer service charges for a period of more than thirty (30) days after they shall become due and payable shall be liable to the city for a penalty assessment in the amount of ten (10) percent per month upon the amount which is past due and delinquent, the penalty to be computed from and after the thirtieth day after the charge shall become due. 
(c)	Such penalty shall be charged to the delinquent customer upon the bills for succeeding months, and, in the event the delinquent charge or charges, plus the penalties added thereto, shall not be paid, the same shall be placed in the hands of the city attorney for collection, and the customer shall then be liable for the payment of all costs of collection, including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Code 1964, § 21-28)  
Sec. 17-16. - Collection where owner has private water supply. 
Where sewage service fees are not paid in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and where the owner has his own private water supply, the city shall cut off such water supply to the plumbing system, and the owner shall not reconnect his own private water supply until the sewage disposal fees shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1964, § 21-29)  
Sec. 17-17. - Exemption where owner does not use city's sewer system. 
There shall be no sewer charges levied on the water meter of an ice skating rink in the City of Rockledge where the water usage does not enter the city's sewer system but instead discharges into a retention pond or into the ground. Provided however, that when the reuse system is reasonably and economically available to an ice skating rink within the city it shall connect to the city's reuse system. 
(Ord. No. 1145-97, § 1, 9-3-97)  
Sec. 17-18. - Adjustment of sewer charges based upon extraordinary use. 
The owner or occupant of property may request in writing that the City of Rockledge adjust their sewer charges due to an extraordinary use of water during a specific month's billing cycle. The procedures for obtaining an adjustment are: 
(a)	Residential: Upon receipt of a request for adjustment of sewer charges to a bill for residential property, the city shall: 
(1)	Calculate the average of the last six (6) months sewer charges for the property; 
(2)	Adjust the sewer charges for the property by one-half (½) of the difference between the billed sewer charges and the six (6) month average for the property. 
(3)	The adjustment shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons. 
(4)	This procedure for adjustment of sewer charges may be utilized only once every twelve (12) months. 
(5)	This provision does not include sewer charges that are the result of filling a swimming pool, and does not affect water charges which are the purview of the water utility. 
(b)	Commercial: Upon receipt of a request for adjustment of sewer charges for commercial property, the city shall: 
(1)	Perform the steps set out in subsections (a)(1)—(2) of this section. 
(2)	The adjustment in gallons is unlimited for commercial properties. 
(3)	Subsections (a)(4) and (5) of this section are applicable to commercial properties. 
( Ord. No. 1620-2013, § 1, 5-1-13 )  
Secs. 17-19—17-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RECLAIMED WATER REUSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1409-06, § 2(Exh. A), adopted May 3, 2006, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 17-25—17-56, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1046-93, § 1, 2-3-93; Ord. No. 1084-94, § 1, 8-3-94; Ord. No. 1115-95, § 1, 11-14-95. 
 
Sec. 17-25. - Authority and intent. 
It is the intent of the City of Rockledge, herein referred to as the "city", to make reclaimed water available for irrigation purposes and other authorized uses in certain areas of the city where the city determines that the construction of a reclaimed water distribution system is feasible and economical. The reclaimed water distribution system shall be constructed in sections to provide service to designated areas as determined by the city, pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth herein. It is further the intent of the city to establish a reclaimed water system for irrigation which complies with the rules and regulations set forth by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, which rules appear in Chapter 62-610, Florida Administrative Code or latest version thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-26. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in this section shall apply unless otherwise specifically stated. 
Available shall mean that a functioning reclaimed water distribution main is located within one hundred (100) feet of the property to be serviced. 
Backflow prevention device shall mean a device installed at the customer's potable water meter to prevent the flow of any contaminated fluids into the public water system. 
City shall mean the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
Council shall mean the City Council of Rockledge, Florida. 
County shall mean Brevard County, Florida. 
Cross-connection shall mean any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste, or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as the result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeable devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow could occur are considered to be cross-connections. 
Customer shall mean the owner(s) of the property being served, who may also be referred to as the "user." 
Delivery points shall mean the points of connection of the city's reclaimed water system to the user's irrigation system. 
Department shall mean the City of Rockledge Wastewater Treatment and Water Reclamation Department. 
Director shall mean the director of the city wastewater treatment and water reclamation department or his/her designated representative(s). 
Distribution mains shall mean those conduits used to supply reclaimed water to service lines from the pumping station or treatment plant. 
FDEP shall mean the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
Irrigation system shall mean an underground system with permanently placed sprinkler devices. Below-ground hose bibs contained in a locked valve box will be permitted in conjunction with an underground sprinkler system for specific purpose. Request for lock box must be made in writing to the wastewater treatment and water reclamation director. Lock box and apparatus must be purchased from the wastewater treatment and water reclamation department, and installed in accordance with the department's reclaimed water regulations. Aboveground hose bibs (faucets) with hoses and sprinklers shall not constitute an irrigation system. Irrigation systems also include agricultural ditch and swale type systems and other conventional agricultural systems where applicable and as authorized by the director. 
Reclaimed water shall mean wastewater that has received at least advanced secondary treatment, in accordance with Chapter 62-610, Florida Administrative Code, or latest version thereof, and is reusable after flowing out of a wastewater treatment facility and shall hereinafter be referred to as "reclaimed water." 
Reuse shall mean the deliberate application of reclaimed water, in compliance with Florida Department of Environmental Protection rules, for a beneficial purpose. 
Service line shall mean that conduit for reclaimed water from the distribution main to the property line. 
Setback distances shall mean the setback distances between the wetted site area subject to land application of reclaimed water, and surface waters and potable water supply wells, as required by the provisions of Chapter 62-610.471, Florida Administrative Code, or latest version thereof, and in no instance shall the setback distance be less than seventy-five (75) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-27. - Connection to system. 
(a)	Generally. Customers in designated service areas may connect to the reclaimed water system when service is available and upon submission of a proper application and compliance with all other city requirements, subject to the provisions of section 17-35 of this Code. 
Service to subdivisions and multifamily complexes or other defined areas not served at the time of the application will be considered upon the city's receipt of all of the following: 
A petition signed by at least seventy-five (75) percent of the potential users in said subdivision, complex, or other defined area. A non-refundable fee established by resolution of the city council shall be submitted to the city within sixty (60) days of the approval of the petition by the city council by a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the potential users in said subdivision, complex, or other defined area. 
When the above conditions are met, and it is deemed to be in the best interest of the city, as determined by the city council, the city shall endeavor to construct the necessary reclaimed water system necessary to service the particular area. In the event the city deems it to not be in its best interest, as determined by the city council, to service a particular area requesting service, the established connection fee will be refunded to the applicant. 
The city will endeavor to provide reclaimed water service to approved subdivisions, multifamily complexes, and other defined areas in a timely manner but provides no guarantee that service will be available in a particular time frame. 
(b)	Irrigation with potable water prohibited. It shall be unlawful to use potable water for irrigation purposes after reclaimed water is available to a lot or parcel within the city. Customers with existing irrigation systems using potable water shall be required to disconnect from the potable water system and connect to the reclaimed water system for irrigation purposes within (90) days of written notice of availability. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of reclaimed water shortages or operational problems, the Director shall have the authority to grant temporary variances from the provisions of this subsection and in accordance with any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to law, and any applicable water shortage orders issued by the St. Johns River Water Management District. 
(c)	Irrigation wells. Customers may continue to use existing irrigation wells for irrigation purposes after reclaimed water is available. The city shall prohibit the installation of new irrigation wells or the rehabilitation of existing wells for irrigation purposes where reclaimed water is available. 
(d)	New irrigation system. All new irrigation systems constructed after the effective date of this article shall be required to connect to the city reclaimed water system upon the earlier of the following two (2) dates: 
(1)	When reclaimed water is not available at the time of construction of the irrigation system, then connection shall be required within (90) days after receipt of written notice from the city that reclaimed water is available; or, 
(2)	When reclaimed water is available at the time of construction of the irrigation system, then connection shall be required immediately and such connection shall be a condition to connection of the improvements on said property to the city's wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-28. - Authority to adopt rates, fees and charges. 
The council shall have the authority by resolution or ordinance duly adopted after a public hearing, to establish rates, fees and charges for the reclaimed water system, and to provide terms and conditions for the payment and collection of same. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-29. - Discontinuing service by city. 
The city may discontinue reclaimed water service to any customer due to a violation of the terms of this article or any other city regulation, non-payment of bills, tampering with any service, plumbing of cross-connections with another water source, or the undertaking of any other activity that may be detrimental to the system. The city has the right to cease service until the condition is corrected and all costs due the city are paid. These costs may include delinquent billings, connection charges, and payment for any damage caused to the system. Should discontinued service be restored without authorization, the department shall remove the service and make such additional charges as are established by resolution or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-30. - Interruption of service by city. 
The city reserves the right to temporarily discontinue service to any portion of, or the entire reclaimed water system, as deemed necessary by the director. The director shall have the authority to establish schedules which restrict the use of the reclaimed water system at certain times in order to reduce maximum demands on the system and to regulate usage during periods of limited reclaimed water availability. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-31. - Easement dedications. 
An applicant for reclaimed water service to an irrigation site which does not have public access shall dedicate land or shall grant perpetual easements to the city for reuse transmission and distribution facilities as required to provide reclaimed water service without charge to city. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-32. - Permits. 
The city shall obtain and fulfill, at its expense, all necessary permits and approvals for the construction and operation of the reclaimed water distribution facilities constituting the city's reclaimed water system. Once service is available, any additional permits or approvals required for service to any particular customer, for the customer's benefit, shall be obtained at the sole expense of said customer. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-33. - Priorities for extending reclaimed water service. 
The city council shall determine priorities for reclaimed water line extensions based on technical input from staff and consultants. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-34. - Potable water wells. 
As mandated by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, the city shall not provide reclaimed water service where wells are used as a source of potable water, and where setback requirements cannot be maintained. It shall be unlawful and an offense against the city to install a well intended for use as a potable water supply within FDEP-mandated setback requirements of existing or known proposed reuse sites. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-35. - Right to service. 
No payment of any costs, submittal of any application or petition, or undertaking of any other act to receive reclaimed water service shall guarantee such service. The city shall have the right, at all times, to refuse to extend service on the basis of a use detrimental to the system, inadequate supply of reclaimed water, lack of payment of required fees, or for any other reason which, in the judgment of the city council will cause the extension not to be beneficial to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-36. - Service outside the city. 
Reclaimed water service may be provided to properties located outside the corporate limits of the city within the county. Such service will be extended on an actual cost basis and may include service to a governmental unit. All applications for service outside the city shall be reviewed by the department and such service shall be approved only if an adequate supply of reclaimed water is and will be available to meet all anticipated needs within the incorporated areas of the city. The director shall review and approve all service line sizes and all other necessary design components. In any event, final approval of reclaimed water service outside the corporate limits of the city must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-37. - Service application requirements. 
(a)	Reclaimed water service shall be applied for in the wastewater treatment and water reclamation department by completing and signing an application form, subject to section 17-27 of this article. 
(b)	Applications for all reclaimed water services within any city, county or state maintained right-of-way shall include a dimensional plan showing the location of the requested service line relative to the nearest street intersection, etc., as required by the city, the county or the state department of transportation. 
(c)	Before an application for reclaimed water service will be approved, the customer must have installed a suitable irrigation system. The irrigation system to be provided by the customer will consist of an underground system with permanently placed sprinkler devices. The sprinkler system shall be designed to operate at a maximum of 35 psi at 20 gallons per minute of flow. The city bears no responsibility for any damages to sprinkler systems or property. No system with a cross-connection to the potable water system will be considered for connection to the reclaimed water system. Temporary systems will not be considered for connection to the reclaimed water system. The systems shall not include aboveground faucets or other devices or connections that could permit reclaimed water to be used for any purpose other than irrigation, unless such uses and systems meet City of Rockledge Reclaimed Water Standards and FDEP rules and regulations, and have been approved in writing by the director. 
(d)	All new irrigation systems constructed in areas where the city has determined to make reclaimed water available shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Rockledge Reclaimed Water Standards and the regulations contained in Chapter 62-610, or latest version thereof, Florida Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-38. - Meter requirements. 
All reclaimed water users shall be required to utilize an appropriately sized flow meter. All meters for the reclaimed water system will be installed and owned by the city. No reclaimed water installations will be allowed without the installation of a flow meter. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-39. - Cross-connection control. 
(a)	In all premises where reclaimed water service is provided, the public or private potable water supply shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. All devices and material installed for backflow prevention must comply with FDEP criteria and be approved by the city. Where any cross-connection is found, it shall be immediately disconnected. Before reconnection of that service, the public potable water system shall be protected against the possibility of future cross-connections, and additional devices may be required as specified by the director and installed at the customer's expense. 
(b)	To determine the presence of any potential hazards to the public potable water system and for the purposes of perpetual maintenance and repair of reclaimed water system appurtenances, the city shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any customer receiving reclaimed water. Each customer of reclaimed water service shall, by application, give written consent to such entry upon such customer's premises. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-40. - Construction specifications. 
(a)	Pipe shall meet or exceed standards set by the American Water Works Association, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, and the City of Rockledge Reclaimed Water Standards. 
(b)	Mains in the public rights-of-way shall be located a uniform distance from the curb and the location shall be approved by the director. 
(c)	Vertical and horizontal clearances from potable water lines and sewage collection lines shall be as specified in the applicable Florida Department of Environmental Protection rules. 
(d)	All valves and hose bibs shall be placed in approved tamper-proof boxes. 
(e)	Where irrigation mains are to be turned over to the city, the customer shall submit such documents as are normally required for the dedication of public facilities. 
(f)	"As-built" drawings shall be submitted to the department upon completion of the systems within public right-of-ways and public easements. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-41. - Maintenance by the customer. 
The customer shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of all irrigation lines and appurtenances on the customer's property, unless said facilities are located within land previously dedicated to the city or land in which the city has been issued and has accepted a license or permit to operate said facilities. The city reserves the right to disconnect the service to any property when the irrigation system and appurtenances are not properly maintained or fail to meet the requirements of Chapter 62-610, or latest version thereof, Florida Administrative Code, and the City of Rockledge Reclaimed Water Standards. In addition, should the customer require reclaimed water at different pressures, or different quality, or in any way different from that normally supplied by the city, the customer shall be responsible for the necessary devices to make these adjustments and for obtaining the approval of the director. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-42. - Maintenance by the city. 
(a)	All facilities that have been conveyed, dedicated or transferred to the city and accepted by the city shall become the property of the city and will be operated, maintained and repaired by the city. No person shall perform any work nor be reimbursed for any work on the system unless written authorization from the city is received prior to the work being commenced. 
(b)	The city shall make a reasonable effort to inspect and keep its facilities in good repair, but assumes no liability for any damage caused by the system that is beyond the control of normal maintenance or due to situations not previously reported to the department. This shall include damage due to breaking of the pipes, poor quality of water caused by unauthorized or illegal entry of foreign material into the system, faulty operation of fire protection facilities, or other reasons 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-43. - Common service lines. 
The director shall have the authority to approve one service line to connect or service two (2) or more customers when sufficient capacity is available. In these cases, each customer shall pay the full connection charges. Common service lines will be sized to provide adequate service to each customer serviced. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-44. - Public easement. 
When reuse lines and appurtenances are initially installed by a person or entity other than the city, said lines and appurtenances shall not be accepted by the city for maintenance unless the facilities are within a dedicated public right-of-way or easement and such facilities are determined by the director to be in good working order. Any new easement, or licensed or permitted area, shall be adequately sized to accommodate construction and maintenance of any reuse system component. No obstruction of whatever kind shall be planted, built, or otherwise created within the limits of the easement, right-of-way, or licensed or permitted area, without the written permission of the director. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-45. - Ownership by city. 
All reclaimed water facilities and appurtenances within dedicated public rights-of-way or easements when constructed or accepted by the city shall become and remain the property of the city. No applicant or customer shall by payment of any charges provided herein, or by causing any construction of facilities accepted by the city, acquire any interest or right in any such facilities or any portion thereof, other than the privilege of having his/her/its property connected thereto for reclaimed water service in accordance with this article. The city shall be sole provider of reclaimed water except as approved by city council for permission by another governmental entity. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-46. - Appeals to the council. 
Any refusal by the director to grant service to an applicant, or any other decision made by the director pursuant to this article, may be appealed to the city council for a final and binding decision. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-47. - Adoption of Chapter 62-610, FAC. 
The rules and regulations appearing in Chapter 62-610, or latest version thereof, Florida Administrative Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth within this article. In the event of any variation between the provisions of Chapter 62-610, or latest version thereof, FAC, and the provisions of this article, the more strict provision shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-48. - Transfer of reclaimed water. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense against the city for any person or entity to sell, barter, trade or otherwise transfer reclaimed water to any other person or entity, or to any property other than the authorized irrigation site, after having initially received said reclaimed water from the city, without written authorization from the director. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-49. - Applicability to initial users. 
It is not the legislative intent of the council to, by the enactment of this article, vitiate, invalidate or otherwise render ineffective any term, provision or condition of any reclaimed water supply contract entered into between the city and any initial user herein identified prior to the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-50. - Reclaimed water services rates, connection fees, non-metered usage. 
(a)	A rate shall be charged to the customers of the water reclamation system as follows: 
(1)	Consumption of thirty thousand (30,000) gallons or less per month, a charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per month, which shall be the base rate; 
(2)	Consumption of more than thirty thousand (30,000) gallons to sixty thousand (60,000) gallons per month, an additional surcharge of forty-five cents ($0.45) for each thousand gallons of usage over the base rate; 
(3)	Consumption of more than sixty thousand (60,000) gallons to one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per month, an increase in the additional surcharge to seventy cents ($0.70) for each thousand gallons of usage over sixty thousand (60,000) gallons; 
(4)	Consumption of more than one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per month, an increase in the additional surcharge to one dollar ($1.00) for each thousand gallons of usage over one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons. 
(b)	Connection fees shall be based on the meter size used and are as follows: 
(1)	¾? - $500.00 
(2)	1? - $500.00 
(3)	1½? - $750.00 
(4)	2? - $1,000.00 
(5)	3? - $1,500.00 
(6)	4? - $2,000.00 
(7)	6? - $2,500.00 
(8)	8? - $3,000.00 
(9)	10? - $4,000.00 
(10)	>10? - $5,000.00 
(c)	Non-metered service shall be charged at the following rate: 
(1)	For property of one (1) acre or smaller - Fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month, with an additional fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month for each additional acre serviced. 
(2)	For multi-units of two (2) or more units, a monthly charge of eight dollars ($8.00) per unit. 
(3)	For public property, a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per connection point, but never less than the charge for the tier usage fees per paragraph (a). 
(4)	For services outside of the City of Rockledge the rate established under paragraph (a) plus an additional twenty-five (25) percent charge. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06; Ord. No. 1575-11, § 1, 3-16-11)  
Sec. 17-51. - Connection charges; capital costs, reconnection; violation; non-consent fees. 
(a)	Connection charges. Connection charges to the reclaimed water systems shall be as specified under section 17-50, reclaimed water service rate. The customer shall be responsible for any charges for the installation of required back-flow prevention devices 
(b)	Meter required. Where reclaimed water is for, or determined to be for commercial usage, or the use of reclaimed water is other than for irrigation purposes, the customer shall be required to pay all costs associated with the purchase of the meter. With approval of the city manager, the director of wastewater treatment may waive the requirement for a meter or meters where a suitable alternative method exists for the calculation of the water usage and where the customer agrees to pay the metered rate for the calculated amount of water usage. 
(c)	[Property of city.] All residential connections shall be required to have a meter and shall become the property of the city after it is installed. 
(d)	Re-connection fee. A customer whose service has been voluntarily disconnected or disrupted for non-payment may resume reclaimed water service after paying any past due amounts and a re-connection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for voluntary discontinuance and a re-connection fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for non-payment. 
(e)	Violation. Where service has been disconnected for violation of an ordinance or regulation regarding reclaimed water, such service shall not be reconnected until the director of wastewater treatment or designee, receives adequate assurances and guarantees that such a violation will not recur. 
(f)	Illegal/non-consent fee. When an unauthorized connection is made to the water reclamation system or a connection to the system is made without the prior authorization of the city section 17-54(a) shall prevail and a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-52. - Requirements for developers to provide a water reclamation distribution system. 
(a)	All new developments, including subdivision and platting of residential tracts, shall include reclaimed water distribution systems unless an exemption is granted by the city council due to the likelihood of reclaimed water service not being extended to the area. Plans and specifications for these systems will be processed for project approval in accordance with this and other relevant city ordinances. 
(b)	New commercial developments shall provide irrigation systems for the irrigation of landscaped areas. These irrigation systems will be connected to the reclaimed water distribution systems. Where reclaimed water is not available at the time of completion of the irrigation system, the system is to be constructed to allow connection to the reclaimed water distribution system when such system becomes available. 
(c)	Irrigation systems installed on residential lots in new developments shall be designed for connection to the reclaimed water distribution system in accordance with section 17-37 of this article and with the city's reclaimed water standards. 
(d)	Where trunk mains exist and reclaimed water is available, the connection of distribution mains to the reuse trunks shall be accomplished by the developer at the sole expense of the developer. In the instance that adequate reclaimed water is not available or new developments install distribution systems where no reuse trunk mains exist, the city shall connect the distribution mains to the trunk mains upon the availability of said supply and mains. 
(e)	All taps to the reuse distribution system shall be approved in writing by the director prior to tapping. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-53. - Promulgation/enforcement of water reclamation system and procedures. 
(a)	Promulgation and enforcement. The city manager shall have the authority to promulgate procedures and regulations with respect to the following matters: 
(1)	Application procedures and requirements. 
(2)	Installation requirements and permits, including specification of acceptable materials, devices and regulations to prevent backflow or cross-connection with the city water reclamation system and any other system. 
(3)	Enforcement of the ordinances and regulations pertaining to the water reclamation system including procedures for inspection of the customer's system. 
(4)	Orderly expansion and use of the water reclamation system, public and private. 
(5)	Procedures to insure that all wells located on the property receiving reclaimed water will be completely disconnected from irrigation systems on the property. Wells may be maintained and used for other purposes providing there is not potential physical connection to the water reclamation system. 
(6)	The rendering of bills for service and the collection of charges for all services rendered. 
(7)	Collection of all fees and charges and recording in the public records and liens agreed to by customers of the system. 
(b)	Promulgation and regulations. The city manager may, when necessary for the efficient operation of the water reclamation system or for the health or safety of the general public or the customer, establish regulations regarding the following matters which regulations shall become effective at the time of promulgation without the need for city council approval: 
(1)	The time(s) of day or night and number of days per week during which the reclaimed water may be used by customers. 
(2)	The maximum number and type users of the reclaimed water. 
(c)	Cross connection/non-complying device prohibited. Cross connection of reclaimed water with other sources of water or use for potable purposes is prohibited. Reclaimed water shall not enter a residence or building or within a dwelling unit. No person shall construct, operate, maintain, or allow to remain present on the property owned or controlled, any device or system which is connected to or which controls a device or system connected to the city's water reclamation system and which is not in compliance with all provisions of this Code and the Florida Administrative Code, Chapter 62-610, and with all procedures and regulations promulgated pursuant to this section. The person who owns or controls the property upon which such a non-complying device or system is found shall be liable to the city for the amount by which the cost associated with the securing and/or removal of the non-complying device or system exceeds the cost of a normal discontinuance of service. These excess costs shall constitute a lien against the property upon which the non-complying device or system is located. 
(d)	Device(s) and installation. The required type of device for backflow installation upon the residential and commercial premises to protect the portable water supply where reclaimed water is to be used, shall comply with the potable water supplier's specifications. Installation, testing, and maintenance of the device shall be the responsibility of the customer and the customer shall comply with the potable water supplier's policies, procedures and specifications. Vacuum breakers shall be installed on all outside potable water faucets to prevent back siphonage. 
(e)	Noncompliance liability. Any customer whose water reclamation system is in violation of any city ordinance, regulation, or procedure shall be subject to immediate discontinuance of the customer's reclaimed water service. Such discontinuance of service shall not relieve any person of liability for civil actions of for municipal ordinance violation prosecution. 
(f)	System responsibility. The director will be responsible for the training of city personnel in cross-connection control and inspection to see that the adopted rules are followed. 
(g)	In-ground irrigation and prohibited attachments. All irrigation systems shall be permanently installed and consist of low trajectory water droplet spray heads of inground irrigation design. Hose connections and faucets are prohibited on the water reclamation system. 
(h)	Owners reuse control. A hand control valve must be installed and accessible on the user's side of the city curbside service line. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-54. - Unauthorized work. 
(a)	Unauthorized work prohibited. No person, unless expressly authorized by the director or designee, shall tamper with or in any way alter or damage any city water reclamation facility. This shall include, but is not limited to, opening or closing of city valves, or causing of any water to flow from the system. No unauthorized person shall cut into or make any connections into the system. The offending person(s) or property owner shall be liable for the cost of all charges attributable to the correcting of such tampering, including legal expenses, but payments of or correcting of such damage shall not relieve the offending person from civil penalties the city or a court may impose for a violation of city ordinance. 
(b)	Maintenance required. The owner or controller of the property must maintain the water reclamation system and devices upon the premises. This specifically includes adjustment of heads to avoid excessive overspray onto but not limited to: streets, public sidewalks, canals, swimming pools, hot tubs or wading pools. Also included is maintenance of pipes and valves so as not to cause damage to city streets or utilities. Failure to keep the system in repair shall result in discontinuance of service. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-55. - Inspection rights of the city. 
(a)	City rights. To insure that the provisions of the city ordinances and regulations and procedures are being observed, the city reserves the right and privilege of inspecting and removing devices. 
(1)	Inspections without cause to believe that an ordinance or regulation is being violated shall be at reasonable times and shall not exceed a reasonable frequency. 
(2)	Inspections where there is a reasonable cause to believe that an ordinance or regulation is being violated shall be at such time and shall occur with such frequency as is necessary to establish that an ordinance or regulation is or is not being violated. 
(b)	Consent to inspect. Each customer of the water reclamation system shall, by application, give prior written consent to city personnel to enter upon such premises. Failure of the city to obtain such a written wavier shall not affect the right of the city to proceed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	Refusing inspection, consequences. Refusing to permit an authorized agent or employee to enter onto the premises for the purposes of inspecting the customer's water reclamation system pursuant to this section of the City Code and shall be grounds for immediate discontinuance of the water reclamation system service by the city to the subject premises. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-56. - Conditions of use. 
Each customer of the water reclamation system shall not have any recourse against the city for the loss of reclaimed water supply due to distribution system down times, or for damage to vegetation or any other damages occasioned by use of the reclaimed water. 
(Ord. No. 1409-06, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-06)  
Sec. 17-57. - Schedule for usage, restrictions and limitations. 
The St. Johns River Water Management District (District) summer schedule for potable water and irrigation wells, as may be modified from time to time by the district, are adopted and established as the reclaimed water usage schedules within the city. Failure to comply with the usage schedules shall result in the following: 
(1)	First violation - written notice of violation, setting out date and time of violation; 
(2)	Second violation and all subsequent violations may be referred to the code enforcement board for action; 
(3)	Repeat violations may result in termination of service. 
(Ord. No. 1575-11, § 2, 3-16-11)  
Secs. 17-58—17-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—
 
Sec. 17-61. - Creation. 
Pursuant to the home rule power of Article VII, Section 14, Florida Constitution, and Chapter 403, Florida Statutes, and the powers granted in the Charter of the City of Rockledge, the Rockledge City Council does hereby establish a stormwater drainage utility and declare its intention to be responsible for the operation, construction, maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities; for stormwater system planning; and for lake and river water quality management. 
(Ord. No. 1213-00, § 1, 6-7-00)  
Sec. 17-62. - Findings, determinations and powers. 
It is hereby found, determined, and declared that those elements of the system which provide for the collection, treatment and disposal of stormwater and regulation of groundwater are of benefit and provide services to all property within the incorporated city limits, including property not presently served by the storm elements of the system. The beneficiaries of the system include all real properties within the City of Rockledge which benefit by the provision, operation and improvement of the system. Such benefits may include, but are not limited to, the provision of adequate systems of collection, conveyance, detention, treatment and release of stormwater, the reduction of hazard to property and life resulting from stormwater runoff, improvement in general health and welfare through reduction of undesirable stormwater conditions, and improvement to the water quality in the storm and surface water system and its receiving waters. 
The utility, under the direction of the director thereof, shall have the power to: 
(1)	Prepare regulations as needed to implement this article, and forward the same to the city council for consideration and adoption, and adopt such procedures as are required to implement said regulations or carry out other responsibilities of the utility; 
(2)	Administer the acquisition, design, construction, maintenance and operation of the utility system, including capital improvements designated in the comprehensive drainage plan; 
(3)	Administer and enforce this article and all regulations and procedures adopted relating to the design, construction, maintenance, operation and alteration of the utility system including, but not limited to, the quantity, quality and/or velocity of the stormwater conveyed thereby; 
(4)	Inspect private systems as necessary to determine the compliance of such systems with this article and any regulations adopted under this article; 
(5)	Advise the city council, city manager and other city departments on matters relating to the utility; 
(6)	Prepare and revise a comprehensive drainage plan for adoption by the city council periodically; 
(7)	Review plans, approve or deny, inspect and accept extensions to the system; 
(8)	Establish and enforce regulations to protect and maintain water quality within the system in compliance with water quality standards established by state, regional and/or federal agencies as now adopted or hereafter amended; 
(9)	Analyze the cost of services and benefits provided, and the system and structure of fees, charges, fines and other revenues of the utility annually. 
(Ord. No. 1213-00, § 2, 6-7-00)  
Sec. 17-63. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply; words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural, the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given them by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary. 
Bonds means revenue bonds, notes, loans or other debt obligations issued or incurred to finance the costs of construction. 
Costs of construction means costs reasonably incurred in connection with providing capital improvements to the system or any portion thereof, including but not limited to the costs of (1) acquisition of all property, real or personal, and all interests in connection therewith including all rights-of-way and easements therefor, (2) physical construction, installation and testing, including the costs of labor, services, materials, supplies and utility services used in connection therewith, (3) architectural, engineering, legal and other professional services, (4) insurance premiums taken out and maintained during construction, to the extent not paid for by a contractor for construction and installation, (5) any taxes or other charges which become due during construction, (6) expenses incurred by the city or on its behalf with its approval in seeking to enforce any remedy against any contractor or sub-contractor in respect of any default under a contract relating to construction, (7) principal of and interest of any bonds, and (8) miscellaneous expenses incidental thereto. 
Debt service means, with respect to any particular fiscal year and any particular series of bonds, an amount equal to the sum of (i) all interest payable on such bonds during such fiscal year, plus (ii) any principal installments of such bonds during such fiscal year. 
Developed property means real property other than undisturbed property. 
Director means the director of utilities/public works or his designee. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit or apartment providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Equivalent residential unit or ERU means the average impervious area of residential developed property per dwelling unit located within the city and as established by council resolution as provided herein. 
ERU rate means a utility fee charged on each ERU as established by council resolution as provided herein. 
Exempt property means public rights-of-way, public streets, public alleys and public sidewalks, public parks and conservation areas and easements. 
Extension and replacement means costs of extensions, additions and capital improvements to, or the renewal and replacement of capital assets of, or purchasing and installing new equipment for, the system, or land acquisition for the system and any related costs thereto, or paying extraordinary maintenance and repair, including the costs of construction, or any other expenses which are not costs of operation and maintenance or debt service. 
Fiscal year means a twelve-month period commencing on the first day of October of any year, or such other twelve-month period adopted as the fiscal year of the utility. 
Impervious areas means those hard-surfaced areas which either present or retard the entry of water into soil mantle, as it entered under natural conditions prior to development, and/or cause water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas and other surfaces which similarly impact the natural infiltration or runoff patterns which existed prior to development, including water in ponds or lakes as measured at the normal water level (NWL). 
Non-residential developed property means developed property that is classified by the property appraiser as land use types 10 through 99 using the Florida Department of Revenue Land Use Codes, as amended or supplemented, excluding that portion of land use type 28 to the extent used or usable for residential purposes. 
Operating budget means the annual utility operating budget adopted by the city for the succeeding fiscal year. 
Operations and maintenance means the current expenses, paid or accrued, of operation, maintenance and current repair of the system, as calculated in accordance with sound accounting practice, and includes, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, insurance premiums, administrative expenses, labor, executive compensation, the cost of materials and supplies used for current operations, and charges for the accumulation of appropriate reserves for current expenses not annually incurred, but which are such as may reasonably be expected to be incurred in accordance with sound accounting practice. 
Property appraiser means the office of the county property appraiser. 
Residential developed property means developed property that is classified by the property appraiser as land use types 00 through 09 and 28, to the extent used or usable for residential purposes, using the Florida Department of Revenue Land Use Codes, as amended or supplemented, upon which there is located at least one (1) dwelling unit. 
Revenues means all rates, fees, assessments, rentals or other charges or other income received by the utility, in connection with the management and operation of the system, including amounts received from the investment or deposit of moneys in any fund or account and any amounts contributed by the city, all as calculated in accordance with sound accounting practice. 
Stormwater Management System or System means the existing stormwater management of the city and all improvements thereto which by this ordinance are constituted as the property and responsibility of the utility, to be operated as an enterprise fund to, among other things, conserve water, control discharges necessitated by rainfall events, incorporate methods to collect, convey, store, absorb, inhibit, treat, use or reuse water to prevent or reduce flooding, over-drainage, environmental degradation and water pollution or otherwise affect the quality and quantity of discharge from such system. 
Undisturbed property means real property which has not been altered from its natural state by dredging, filling, removal of trees and vegetation or other activities which have disturbed or altered the topography or soils on the property. 
Undisturbed property rate means the utility fee charged on each acre of undisturbed property, as established by council resolution as provided here. 
Utility Fee means a utility fee authorized by Florida law and this Ordinance which is established to pay operations and maintenance, extension and replacement and debt service. 
Stormwater management utility or utility means the enterprise fund utility created by this Ordinance to operate, maintain and improve the system and for such other purposes as stated in this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1213-00, § 3, 6-7-00; Ord. No. 1639-2013, § 1, 11-20-13 )  
Sec. 17-64. - Operating budget. 
The city shall adopt an operating budget not later than the first day of each fiscal year. The operating budget shall set forth for such fiscal year the estimated revenues and the estimated costs for operations and maintenance extension and replacement and debt service. The initial operating budget shall be for the fiscal year commencing ____________ . 
(Ord. No. 1213-00, § 4, 6-7-00)  
Sec. 17-65. - Stormwater utility fee. 
(a)	Fee established. Subject to the provisions of this article, there is hereby imposed on each and every undisturbed property, residential developed property and non-residential developed property, other than exempt property, and the owners and non-owner users thereof, a stormwater drainage utility fee. In the event the owner and non-owner users of a particular developed property or undisturbed property are not the same, the liability for each owner and non-owner user for the utility fee attributable to that developed property or undisturbed property shall be joint and several. The utility fee shall be a monthly or annual service charge and shall be determined by the provisions of this Section and the ERU and ERU rate and undisturbed property rate which shall be established and changed from time to time by resolution adopted by the Rockledge City Council. 
(b)	Utility fee for residential developed property. 
(1)	Except as provided in subparagraph 2. hereof, the utility fee for residential developed property shall be the ERU rate multiplied by the number of individual dwelling units existing on the property. In the event of a newly constructed dwelling unit, the charge for the utility fee attributable to that dwelling unit shall commence upon the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for that dwelling unit, or if construction is at least fifty (50) percent complete and is halted for a period of three (3) months, then that dwelling unit shall be deemed complete and the utility fee shall commence at the end of said three (3) month period. 
(2)	The utility fee for a single family dwelling unit on residential developed property existing on a lot which is larger than five (5) acres shall be the ERU rate multiplied by one (1) plus the undisturbed property rate multiplied by the amount of acreage in excess of five (5) acres. In the event of a newly constructed dwelling unit, the charge for the utility fee attributable to that dwelling unit shall commence upon the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for that dwelling unit, or if construction is at least fifty (50) percent complete and is halted for a period of three (3) months, then that dwelling unit shall be deemed complete and the utility fee shall commence at the end of said three (3) month period. 
(c)	Utility fee for non-residential developed property: 
(1)	The utility fee for non-residential developed property shall be the ERU rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of a non-residential developed property by the number of square feet in one (1) ERU, increased by an amount, if any, determined by multiplying the undisturbed property rate times the difference between the total undeveloped area minus 1.25 times the total impervious area. The minimum utility fee for any non-residential developed property shall be equal to one (1) ERU rate. In the event of newly developed non-residential development property, the charge for the utility fee attributable to that development shall commence, or increase in the case of additional development to property which is already developed property, upon the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for such additional development, or in the event that no certificate of occupancy will be issued for that development, or in the event development has halted, then on the date that the director or the director's designee determines in reasonable judgement that said development is substantially complete or has been halted for at least three (3) months. 
(2)	In the event of separately metered non-residential developed property with joint users of common impervious areas, the director shall calculate and allocate the pro rata utility fee among the users. Any owner or non-owner user disagreeing with the director's calculation or allocation may appeal such determination to the director as provided in paragraph f. of this section. 
(d)	Utility fee for undisturbed property. The utility fee for undisturbed property shall be based on the acreage of the undisturbed property and determined by multiplying the acreage times the undisturbed property rate set for undisturbed property as established and modified from time to time by council resolution. 
(e)	Dwelling unit and impervious surface calculation. The director or director's designee shall initially, and from time to time, determine the number of dwelling units located on residential developed property in order to establish the utility fee provided by paragraph b of this section. Non-residential real property in the City of Rockledge shall have its square footage impervious area calculated in order to establish the utility fee provided by paragraph c of this section. Undisturbed property shall have its total acreage calculated in order to establish the utility fee provided by paragraph d of this section. The director or the director's designee shall make the initial calculation and may from time to time change this calculation from such information and data deemed pertinent by the director or the director's designee. 
(f)	Appeal of dwelling unit and impervious surface calculation. Any person disagreeing with the calculation of the stormwater utility fee, as provided in this section, may appeal such determination to the director. Any appeal must be filed in writing and shall include a survey prepared by a registered surveyor showing dwelling units, total property area, impervious area or non-residential developed area, as appropriate. The director may request additional information from the appealing party. Based upon the information provided by the utility and appealing party, the director shall make a final calculation of the stormwater utility fee. The director shall notify the parties, in writing, of the director's decision. If still dissatisfied, a party may request, in writing, a review by the city manager of the director's decision. such request must cite specific error by the director and the calculation which the party feels is correct. The city manager shall review the record presented and render a written decision as soon as practical. The city manager may request additional information from either party. If still dissatisfied, a party may appeal the city manager's decision to the city council in the same manner as preceding. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1213-00, § 5, 6-7-00)  
Sec. 17-66. - Stormwater drainage utility fee collection. 
(1)	The utility fee for metered property shall be billed and collected monthly with the monthly utility bill for those properties utilizing city utilities and billed and collected separately as stormwater drainage utility fees for those properties not utilizing other city utilities. All such bills for utility fees shall be rendered monthly by the finance department. The utility fee for those properties utilizing city utilities is part of a consolidated statement for utility customers which is generally paid by a single payment. In the event that a partial payment is received, the payment shall be applied pro-rata to each account billed on the consolidated statement in the proportion that an individual account bears to the total consolidated statement of all current charges for all accounts. The utility fee for unmetered property shall be billed annually. All bills for utility fees shall become due and payable in accordance with rules and regulations of the finance department pertaining to the collection of the utility fees. 
(2)	Utility fees shall be subject to a five (5) percent per month, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent, late fee. The city shall be entitled to recover attorney's fees incurred in collecting delinquent utility fees. Any charge due hereunder which shall not be paid when due may be recovered in an action at law by the City of Rockledge. In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this or any other ordinance of the City of Rockledge, failure of any user of city utilities within the City of Rockledge to pay said charges promptly when due shall subject such user to discontinuance of utility services and the city manager of the city, or the city manager's designee, is hereby empowered and directed to enforce this provision as to any and all delinquent users. The employees of the city shall, at all reasonable times, have access to any premises served by the city for inspection, repair or the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(3)	All utility fees assessed pursuant to this ordinance shall be a lien upon the property to which such fee is associated from the date said fee becomes due until such fee is paid. The owner of every building, premise, lot, or house shall be obligated to pay the fee for all service provided for his premises, which obligation may be enforced by the city by action at law or suit to enforce the lien in the same manner as the foreclosure of mortgages. In the event of such action, the city shall be entitled to recover all court costs and reasonable attorney fees for such collection. In the case that a tenant in possession of any premises or buildings shall pay said charges, it shall relieve the land owner from such obligation and lien; but the city shall not be required to look to any person whatsoever other than the owner for the payment of such charges. No changes of ownership or occupation shall affect the application of this ordinance, and the failure of any owner to learn that he purchased property against which a lien for utility fees exists shall in no way affect his responsibility for such payment. 
(Ord. No. 1213-00, § 6, 6-7-00)  
Sec. 17-67. - Capital contributions for regional stormwater management facilities. 
(1)	Certain city ordinances presently require or may in the future require construction of on-site stormwater management facilities to control stormwater quantity and quality in the event of development. Implementation of regional stormwater management facilities may, in some cases, render construction of on-site facilities unnecessary. For use in these cases, the city shall adopt procedures and standards to require developers of land to provide a one-time capital contribution toward construction of regional stormwater management facilities in lieu of construction of on-site stormwater facilities. Such one-time capital contribution shall not affect the obligation for payment of any utility fee assessed pursuant to this ordinance. 
(2)	The one-time capital contribution may be available to developments which meet the following conditions: 
(a)	An adopted drainage basin study has identified an area within which the stormwater management facilities normally required to be created on-site are unnecessary; 
(b)	The development is located within an area so identified; and 
(c)	Implementation of regional stormwater management facilities required by the adopted drainage basin study is complete or under construction. 
(3)	For developments which meet the conditions specified in paragraph 7.2 hereof, the director, upon review of the development plans, shall prepare a development agreement which shall be presented for final approval to the city council. 
(4)	The amount of the one (1) time capital contribution shall be based upon that percentage of the regional stormwater management facility capacity which is to be allocated to the development. 
(Ord. No. 1213-00, § 7, 6-7-00)  
Sec. 17-68. - Program responsibility. 
It shall be the duty of the department of utilities/public works to administer the stormwater management utility. The department shall keep an accurate record of all persons using the services and facilities of said stormwater management system of the city and to make changes in accordance with the rates and changes established in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1213-00, § 8, 6-7-00)  
Sec. 17-69. - Stormwater management utility enterprise fund. 
(1)	All stormwater drainage utility fees collected by the city shall be paid into an enterprise fund which is hereby created, to be known as the "stormwater management fund". Such fund shall be used for the purpose of paying the costs of operation, administration and maintenance of the stormwater drainage facilities of the city and to carry out all other purposes of the utility. To the extent that the stormwater management utility fees collected are insufficient to construct the needed stormwater drainage facilities, the cost of the same may be paid from such city fund as may be determined by the city council, but the city council may order the reimbursement of such fund if additional fees are thereafter collected. When the fund has surplus dollars on hand in excess of current needs, the surplus dollars will be invested to return the highest yield consistent with proper safeguards. 
(2)	The fees and charges paid shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the City, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting, management and government thereof. Other than as described above, the fees and charges shall be used solely for the purposes stated in paragraph 1 of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1213-00, § 9, 6-7-00)  
Chapter 18 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Special assessments, Subpt. A, Art. VIII; local improvements and special assessments, Subpt. B, Art. 2. 
Cross reference— Drinking alcoholic beverages on streets or sidewalks, § 4-4; community antenna television, Ch. 7; loitering, § 13-7; use of street or right-of-way by peddlers, § 15-26; planning, Ch. 16; taxicab stands on street prohibited, § 20-5; traffic, Ch. 21. 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Obstructing streets. 
No person shall obstruct any public city street by fencing across or into the same, or by willfully causing any other obstruction in or to such street or any part thereof, without permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 23-12)  
Sec. 18-2. - Obstructing railroad street crossings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction of any kind whatever in or across any railroad street crossing within the limits of the city, so as to block or obstruct in any way such railroad street crossing for a longer or greater period of time than five (5) minutes at any one time so that it will prevent the free passing of persons or vehicles over, on and across such crossing; provided that obstructions exceeding five (5) minutes may be permitted in specific cases by the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 23-12.1)  
Sec. 18-3. - Display of goods. 
No person shall display or place upon any public street or sidewalk within the city any goods, wares or merchandise without a permit from the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 23-15) 
Cross reference— Peddlers, § 15-12 et seq.  
Sec. 18-4. - Use for storage or sale of vehicles. 
No person shall use any of the streets or sidewalks within the city for the purpose of storing junk, abandoned or used automobiles or motor vehicles, or for temporary storage of vehicles for the purpose of sale. 
(Code 1964, § 23-16) 
Cross reference— Storage of wrecked or dismantled motor vehicles, § 13-15; leaving inoperable motor vehicle on public street, § 21-32.  
Sec. 18-5. - Gates opening over streets or sidewalks. 
The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land within the city which shall have any gate opening to any street or sidewalk shall have the gate hung so that it swings inward when open and so that it cannot be swung outward over or toward the street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1964, § 23-14)  
Sec. 18-6. - Driving over sidewalks. 
No person shall drive an automobile, motor truck or other motor vehicle on, upon or across any sidewalk except at permanently established driveways, without first taking all precautions reasonably required to prevent injury to and breaking of such sidewalk, by placing boards or other protective covering of sufficient strength to prevent injury or breakage upon the sidewalks before driving on, upon or across the same. 
(Code 1964, § 23-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 316.1995.  
Sec. 18-7. - Depositing injurious substances. 
No person shall throw or deposit on or into the streets any nails, wire, scrap metal, glass, crockery or other substance injurious to the feet of persons or animals or to tires of vehicles. 
(Code 1964, § 23-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 316.2035(1).  
Sec. 18-8. - Vehicle spilling load. 
No person shall operate or permit the operation of a vehicle upon which ashes, fuel, cinders, sand, gravel, paper, trash, rubbish or other materials are so loaded as to permit such articles to be scattered on the streets. 
(Code 1964, § 23-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 316.520(1).  
Sec. 18-9. - Certain trees prohibited along streets. 
No person shall plant or transplant within the area or space between a sidewalk and the adjacent street, in any parkway or right-of-way of any city street or public road, any species of the genus Casuarian, commonly known as Australian Pine and New Zealand Pine; any species of the genus Quercus, commonly known as Oak, Water Oak or Live Oak; any species of the genus Grevillea, commonly known as Silk, Silver or Australian Oak; any species of the genus Schinus terebinthifolius, commonly known as Brazilian Pepper Tree; any species of the genus Melaleuca quinquenervia, commonly known as Melaleuca or Cajeput Tree; any species of the genus Metopium toxiferum, commonly known as Poison Wood; any species of the genus Casuarina glauca, commonly known as Braxilia Oak; or any species of the genus Enterolobium cyclocarpum, commonly known as Ear Tree. 
(Code 1964, § 30-1; Ord. No. 764-85, § 6, 9-4-85)  
Sec. 18-10. - Permit required to plant along streets. 
No person shall plant any tree or shrub within the areas described in section 18-9 without first obtaining a written permit from the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 30-2)  
Chapter 19 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Revenue and taxation, Subpt. A, Art. VII. 
Cross reference— Finances, § 2-171 et seq.; licenses, Ch. 11. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Secs. 19-1—19-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Pensions and retirement, § 2-121 et seq.; retirement trust and retirement plan, App. A. 
 
Sec. 19-11. - Casualty insurors. 
(a)	Levied. There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of insuring with respect to casualty risks, as shown by the records of the insurance commissioner of the state, an excise or license tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city which tax shall be in the amount of one percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies, covering property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)	Due date. The license or excise tax herein levied shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1964, §§ 26-19, 26-20) 
State Law reference— Premium tax on casualty insurors for police retirement, F.S. § 185.08.  
Sec. 19-12. - Property insurors. 
(a)	Levied. There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of property insurance, as shown by the records of the insurance commissioner of the state, an excise or license tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city, which tax shall be in the amount of two (2) percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)	Due date. The license or excise tax herein levied shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of each year hereafter. 
(Code 1964, §§ 26-21, 26-22) 
State Law reference— Premium tax on property insurors for firemen's pensions, F.S. § 175.101.  
Secs. 19-13—19-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal public service tax, F.S. § 166.231. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-23. - Levied; rate. 
(a)	There is hereby imposed and levied on every purchase of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), and local telephone service, a tax based upon the charge made by the seller to the purchaser for such utility service or commodities at the rate of ten (10) percent of such charge. 
(b)	The tax imposed by subsection (a) of this section shall not be applied against any fuel adjustment charge, as provided in F.S. § 166.231. 
(c)	The tax on electricity authorized under subsection (a) of this section shall not be levied and collected on the first fifty (50) kilowatt hours per month purchased for residential use. Such exemption shall apply to each separate residential unit, regardless of whether such unit is on a separate or central meter, and shall be passed on to each individual tenant. This exemption is made pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 166.231(3), and the city shall be reimbursed by the utility for such tax loss in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 166.231. 
(Ord. No. 579-81, § 1, 2-18-81)  
Sec. 19-24. - Applicability of provisions. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to every person selling or purchasing within the limits of the city any electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), or local telephone service, regardless of the place of residence or place of business of any such seller or purchaser, and the tax shall apply to each and every purchase of such utility service or commodities in the city except those specifically exempted by this division. 
(Code 1964, § 26-30)  
Sec. 19-25. - Exemption for public agencies. 
The purchase of electricity, gas or telephone service by the United States, the state, the county, the city, the board of public instruction of the county, and any governmental subdivision of any of such governing bodies shall be exempted from the taxes levied under this division. 
(Code 1964, § 26-31) 
State Law reference— Authority to exempt purchases by public bodies, F.S. § 166.231(4).  
Sec. 19-26. - Exemption for churches. 
The purchase of electricity, gas or telephone service by any recognized church exclusively for church purposes shall be exempted from the taxes levied under this division. 
State Law reference— Exemption for churches required, F.S. § 186.231(4).  
Sec. 19-27. - Exclusion of fuel adjustment charge. 
The tax imposed by this division shall not be applied against any fuel adjustment charge, as provided in F.S. § 166.231. 
(Ord. No. 549-80, § 1, 3-31-80) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 166.231(1)(b).  
Sec. 19-28. - Disposition of proceeds. 
All revenues received, collected, or derived from the taxes levied by this division shall be paid by the sellers to the city treasurer and shall be deposited in the general operating account, and shall be used and are hereby appropriated for the payment of the necessary operating expenses of the city, for the payment of the salaries of the officers, agents and employees of the city, and for the purchase of supplies, property, real estate and other articles required for the operation of the city; and no part of such taxes shall be used for the payment of the bonded debt of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 26-32)  
Sec. 19-29. - Tax declared continuing. 
The tax levied by this division shall be a continuing tax, and the appropriation made of the proceeds of such tax by section 19-28 shall be a continuing appropriation, so long as this division shall remain in effect; and the taxes shall be collected from year to year, and shall be disbursed from year to year in accordance with the city's appropriation ordinances or resolutions. 
(Code 1964, § 26-33)  
Sec. 19-30. - Applicability to telephone and telegraph service. 
(a)	The tax levied on sales of telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local telephone service except local messages which are paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones. 
(b)	The total amount of the guaranteed charge on each bill rendered for semipublic coin telephone service shall be subject to such tax. 
(c)	The tax shall not apply to long distance telephone service or to telegraph service. 
(Code 1964, § 26-34)  
Sec. 19-31. - Payment by consumer. 
The tax imposed in this division shall in every case be paid by the purchaser for the use of the city to the seller of such electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), and local telephone service, at the time of paying the charge therefor to the seller thereof; but not less often than monthly. 
(Code 1964, § 26-35)  
Sec. 19-32. - Duty of seller to collect; reporting, paying to city. 
It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), or local telephone service, to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax levied by this division at the time of collecting the selling price charged for such transaction, and to report and pay over on or before the fifteenth day following the end of the month, either calendar or otherwise at the election of the seller, to the treasurer of the city, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding month. 
(Code 1964, § 26-36) 
State Law reference— Duty of utility to collect and pay to city, F.S. § 166.231(6).  
Sec. 19-33. - Records required; inspection by city. 
It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), or local telephone service, to keep complete records showing all purchases within the city of utility service or commodities, which records shall show the price charged upon each purchase, the date thereof, and the date of payment therefor. The records shall be kept open for inspection by the city treasurer or any duly authorized agent of the city during all business hours on all business days. The treasurer, or any duly authorized agent of the city, shall have the right, power and authority to inspect the records and make transcripts thereof during such times as he may elect; provided, that the right of inspection shall be exercised, as far as possible, so as to not interfere with the orderly arrangement and conduct of the books and records of the seller. 
(Code 1964, § 26-37)  
Sec. 19-34. - Computation where collected monthly or more often. 
In every case where the seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured) or local telephone service, shall collect the price thereof at monthly periods, or periods of less than one month, the tax levied by this division may be computed on the aggregate amount of the sales during such period; provided, that the tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1964, § 26-39)  
Sec. 19-35. - Monthly intervals construed. 
In every case where the seller shall collect the price of service for monthly periods, the monthly periods shall be computed on the basis of the calendar month. Any seller may elect to compute the tax on the basis of a monthly period other than a calendar month, if such seller shall file with the city treasurer a written designation of the monthly period to be used by the seller, and upon such designation the seller may use the monthly period so designated as the basis for the computation of monthly charges. Such period may be changed by the seller from time to time by fixing a different monthly period. 
(Code 1964, § 26-40)  
Sec. 19-36. - Failure of seller to collect. 
(a)	No seller shall collect the price for any purchase of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas, or manufactured), or local telephone service without, at the same time, collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such purchase. 
(b)	Any seller who shall fail to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any such purchase shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same had been actually paid to the seller. 
(Code 1964, § 26-41)  
Sec. 19-37. - Enforcing payment against seller. 
(a)	If any seller shall fail to pay any taxes collected by him within ten (10) days after he shall be required to pay the same to the city, he shall be liable to and shall pay, in addition to such tax, a penalty equal to one percent per day for each day payment shall be in default after the first ten (10) days. 
(b)	If any seller shall be in default for more than ten (10) days, the city treasurer shall certify the fact of such default to the city attorney, and the city attorney shall thereupon enforce payment from such seller by action at law or suit in equity. If the tax and penalties shall be collected by action or suit the seller shall pay, as an additional penalty, such reasonable attorney's fees as may be fixed by the court in which such action or suit is brought to reimburse the city for the expenses incurred for the services of the city attorney in enforcing collection. In no event shall any seller be liable to the city for the payment of any tax upon any uncollected bills. 
(Code 1964, § 26-42)  
Sec. 19-38. - Failure of purchaser to pay. 
If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to the seller the seller's charge for the sale to the purchaser of such electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), or local telephone service, and the tax hereby imposed on account of the purchase for which such charge is made, the seller shall immediately discontinue further sale or furnishing to any such purchaser of any such utility service or commodities until the tax and the seller's charge shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1964, § 26-43)  
Sec. 19-39. - Purchaser paying charges without paying tax. 
No purchaser shall pay to any seller the price charged by such seller for the purchase of such utility service or commodities without, at the same time and in the same transaction, paying to the seller the tax levied by this division on such purchase. 
(Code 1964, § 26-44)  
Sec. 19-40. - Penalty for failure of purchaser to pay tax. 
Any purchaser who shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this division, at the same time and in the same transaction with the payment to the seller for the utility service or commodities purchased, shall be liable to the city for a penalty equal to one percent of the total charge for the utility service or commodities for each day of the default, which penalty shall be collected by the seller and paid over to the city. 
(Code 1964, § 26-45)  
Secs. 19-41—19-51. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FUEL OIL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to tax services competing with those taxed by division 1 hereof, F.S. § 166.231(2). 
 
Sec. 19-52. - Fuel oil defined. 
The term "fuel oil" as used herein shall include fuel oil Grades No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, kerosene and coal oil. 
(Code 1964, § 26-47)  
Sec. 19-53. - Levied. 
There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, on each and every purchase of fuel oil in the corporate limits of the city, except those purchases hereinafter specifically excluded and exempted from the operation of this division, a tax in the amount of four cents ($0.04) per gallon of fuel oil sold by the seller to the purchaser, which tax in every case shall be collected from the purchaser of such fuel oil, and paid by said purchaser for the use of the city to the seller of such fuel oil at the time of paying the charge therefor to the seller thereof; but not less than monthly. 
(Code 1964, § 26-46; Ord. No. 550-80, § 1, 3-31-80; Ord. No. 554-80, § 1, 5-7-80; Ord. No. 580-81, § 1, 2-18-81)  
Sec. 19-54. - Limit on tax. 
The tax imposed by this division shall not exceed the amount authorized by law. 
State Law reference— Limit on tax, F.S. § 166.231(2).  
Sec. 19-55. - Applicability of provisions. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to every person selling or purchasing within the limits of the city any fuel oil as herein defined, regardless of the place of residence or place of business of any such seller or purchaser, and the tax shall apply to each and every purchase of such fuel oil in the city except those specifically exempted by this division. 
(Code 1964, § 26-48)  
Sec. 19-56. - Disposition of proceeds. 
All revenues received, collected or derived from the tax levied by this division shall be paid by the sellers to the city treasurer and shall be deposited in the general operating account, and shall be used and are hereby appropriated for the payment of the necessary operating expenses of the city, for the payment of the salaries of the officers, agents and employees of the city, and for the purchase of supplies, property, real estate and other articles required for the operation of the city; and no part of such taxes shall be used for the payment of the bonded debt of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 26-49)  
Sec. 19-57. - Tax declared continuing. 
The tax levied by this division shall be a continuing tax, and the appropriation made of the proceeds of such tax by section 19-56 shall be a continuing appropriation, so long as this division shall remain in effect; and the taxes shall be collected from year to year, and shall be disbursed from year to year in accordance with the city's appropriation ordinances or resolutions. 
(Code 1964, § 26-50)  
Sec. 19-58. - Exemptions. 
There is excluded from the tax levied and imposed under this division: 
(a)	The purchase of special fuels as defined in F.S. Ch. 209; 
(b)	The purchase of not more than five (5) gallons of fuel oil delivered at the seller's place of business into the purchaser's container of not more than five (5) gallons' capacity; 
(c)	The purchase of fuel oil for use in the propulsion of ships, motor vessels, motorboats, aircraft, railroad trains and other media of transportation; 
(d)	The purchase of fuel oil for use as fuel in the operation of internal combustion engines; 
(e)	The purchase of fuel oil by a public or private utility, including municipal corporations and rural electric cooperative associations, for use as fuel in the generation of electricity; 
(f)	The purchase of fuel oil by the United States, the state, the county, the city, the board of public instruction of the county, and any governmental subdivision of any of such governing bodies; 
(g)	The purchase of fuel oil by any recognized church for use exclusively for church purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 26-51) 
State Law reference— Exemptions from tax on fuel oil, F.S. § 166.231(4), (5).  
Sec. 19-59. - Payment by consumer. 
The tax imposed in this division shall in every case be paid by the purchaser for the use of the city to the seller of such fuel oil at the time of paying the charge therefor to the seller thereof; but not less often than monthly. 
(Code 1964, § 26-52)  
Sec. 19-60. - Duty of seller to collect; reporting, paying to city. 
It shall be the duty of every seller of fuel oil to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax levied by this division, at the time of collecting the selling price charged for such transaction, and to report and pay over on or before the fifteenth day following the end of the month, either calendar or otherwise at the election of the seller, to the treasurer of the city, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding month. 
(Code 1964, § 26-53)  
Sec. 19-61. - Records required; inspection by city. 
It shall be the duty of every seller of fuel oil to keep complete records showing all purchases within the city of fuel oil, which records shall show the price charged upon each purchase, the date thereof and the date of payment therefor. The records shall be kept open for inspection by the city treasurer or any duly authorized agent of the city during all business hours on all business days. The treasurer, or any duly authorized agent of the city, shall have the right, power and authority to inspect the records and make transcripts thereof during such times as he may elect; provided, that the right of inspection shall be exercised, as far as possible, so as to not interfere with the orderly arrangement and conduct of the books and records of the seller. 
(Code 1964, § 26-54)  
Sec. 19-62. - Computation where collected monthly or more often. 
In every case where the seller of fuel oil shall collect the price thereof at monthly periods, or periods of less than one month, the tax levied by this division may be computed on the aggregate amount of the sales during such period; provided, that the tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1964, § 26-55)  
Sec. 19-63. - Monthly intervals construed. 
In every case where the seller shall collect the price of fuel oil for monthly periods, the monthly periods shall be computed on the basis of the calendar month. Any seller may elect to compute the tax on the basis of a monthly period other than a calendar month, if such seller shall file with the city treasurer a written designation of the monthly period to be used by the seller, and upon such designation the seller may use the monthly period so designated as the basis for the computation of monthly charges. Such period may be changed by the seller from time to time by fixing a different monthly period. 
(Code 1964, § 26-56)  
Sec. 19-64. - Failure of seller to collect. 
(a)	No seller shall collect the price for any purchase of fuel oil without, at the same time, collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such purchase. 
(b)	Any seller who shall fail to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any such purchase shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same had been actually paid to the seller. 
(Code 1964, § 26-57)  
Sec. 19-65. - Enforcing payment against seller. 
(a)	If any seller shall fail to pay any taxes collected or assumed by him within ten (10) days after he shall be required to pay the same to the city, he shall be liable to and shall pay, in addition to such tax, a penalty equal to one percent per day for each day payment shall be in default after the first ten (10) days. 
(b)	If any seller shall be in default for more than ten (10) days, the city treasurer shall certify the fact of such default to the city attorney, and the city attorney shall thereupon enforce payment from such seller by action at law or suit in equity. If the tax and penalties shall be collected by action or suit the seller shall pay, as an additional penalty, such reasonable attorney's fees as may be fixed by the court in which such action or suit is brought to reimburse the city for the expenses incurred for the services of the city attorney in enforcing collection. In no event shall any seller be liable to the city for the payment of any tax upon any uncollected bills. 
(Code 1964, § 26-58)  
Sec. 19-66. - Failure of purchaser to pay tax. 
If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to the seller the seller's charge for the sale to the purchaser of such fuel oil, and the tax hereby imposed on account of the purchase for which such charge is made, the seller shall immediately discontinue further sale or furnishing to any such purchaser of any such fuel oil until the tax and the seller's charge shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1964, § 26-59)  
Sec. 19-67. - Purchaser paying charges without paying tax. 
No purchaser shall pay to any seller the price charged by such seller for the purchase of such fuel oil without at the same time, and in the same transaction, paying to the seller the tax levied by this division on such purchase. 
(Code 1964, § 26-60)  
Sec. 19-68. - Penalty for failure of purchaser to pay tax. 
Any purchaser who shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this division, at the same time and in the same transaction with the payment to the seller of the fuel oil purchased, shall be liable to the city for a penalty equal to one percent of the total charge for the fuel oil for each day of the default, which penalty shall be collected by the seller and paid over to the city. 
(Code 1964, § 26-61)  
Sec. 19-69. - Other violations. 
Any purchaser willfully failing or refusing to pay the tax herein imposed and levied and any seller willfully violating the provisions of this division, or any officer, agent or employee of any such seller willfully violating the provisions of such division shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 26-62)  
Chapter 21 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Open containers of alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles, § 4-18 et seq.; authority of officer in charge at fire to direct traffic, § 8-3; sounding of railroad train signals in city, § 12-5; wrecked, abandoned and derelict property, § 13-14; storage of wrecked or dismantled motor vehicles, § 13-15; driving over sidewalk, § 18-6; vehicles spilling load, § 18-8; taxicabs, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Uniform Traffic Control Law, F.S. Ch. 316; municipal legislation on matters covered thereby prohibited unless otherwise provided, F.S. § 316.007; specific powers of local authorities, F.S. § 316.008; establishment of municipal speed zones, F.S. § 316.189. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Rockledge Traffic Ordinance, and may be so cited. 
(Code 1964, § 28-1)  
Sec. 21-2. - One-way streets and alleys. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated below upon the following streets and alleys: 
Name of Street 	Direction of Movement 
Alexander Street 	North 
South Street 	South 
Sweet Street 	West 
Thirty-foot wide unnamed right-of-way which runs along the east boundary of Lot 11 of Block 10, King's Grant, Unit Four, as described in Plat Book 20 at Page 40, of the Public Records of Brevard County, Florida 	North 
 
(Code 1964, § 28-4; Ord. No. 663-83, § 1, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 1260-01, § 1, 9-19-01) 
State Law reference— Local authority to designate one-way streets, F.S. § 316.088(1); obedience to one-way streets, F.S. § 316.088(2).  
Sec. 21-3. - Quiet zones. 
Whenever signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle, except in an emergency. 
(Code 1964, § 28-9) 
Cross reference— Noise, Ch. 12.  
Sec. 21-4. - Entering Geiger Street from U.S. 1. 
When a sign is erected giving notice thereof, no operator of any motor vehicle shall cause such vehicle to enter onto or upon Geiger Street from U. S. Highway No. 1. 
(Code 1964, § 28-10) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit turns, F.S. § 316.008(1)(i).  
Sec. 21-5. - Trucks on through route prohibited on certain streets. 
(a)	Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "through route" means any route of travel over, upon or across any street designated in this section by a truck having a load capacity in excess of one and one-half (1½) tons engaged in the rendition of a service for hire, or en route for the delivery or pickup of tangible personal property, and which route has neither its point of origin nor its point of destination at property abutting upon or adjacent to such street. 
(b)	Prohibited on certain streets. Upon erection of signs giving notice thereof, no person shall operate a truck exceeding one and one-half (1½) tons capacity on a "through route," as said term "through route" is defined in paragraph (a) above, over, across or upon any of the following streets within the city: 
Avondale Road 
Barton Avenue 
Bougainvillea Drive 
Cardinal Avenue between Fiske Boulevard and Cedar Street 
Fiske Boulevard 
Floridelphia Avenue 
Howard Street 
Kings Post Road 
Levitt Parkway 
Little John Lane 
Magruder Avenue 
North Palmway Street 
Orange Avenue 
Park Avenue 
Revilla Lane 
Rockledge Avenue 
Rockledge Drive 
Roy Wall Boulevard 
Santa Rosa Drive 
Seminole Drive 
South Fernwood Drive 
South Palmway Street 
Sweet Street 
Westport Drive 
(c)	Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a traffic infraction in the city and upon conviction thereof shall be required to pay a civil penalty as prescribed by Florida Statutes. 
(Code 1964, § 28-19; Ord. No. 541-80, §§ 1, 2, 1-2-80; Ord. No. 613-82, § 1, 5-5-82; Ord. No. 622-82, § 1, 9-1-82; Ord. No. 652-83, § 1, 7-20-83; Ord. No. 776-86, § 1, 1-8-86; Ord. No. 1151-97, § 1, 11-19-97; Ord. No. 1593-2012, § 1, 4-4-12 )  
Sec. 21-6. - Certain size trucks prohibited on designated streets. 
(a)	Purposes and objectives. This regulation is enacted for the purpose of eliminating or at least alleviating serious traffic problems on Seminole Drive and Orange Avenue caused by trucks making deliveries at the loading dock on the east side of Wuesthoff Memorial Hospital, which problems have, and do now, jeopardize the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by the impeding of normal traffic flow by such trucks, noise pollution, litter, risk of injury or death to pedestrians and schoolchildren, and other detrimental effects. The extent of actual and potential damage to the public welfare is found to be rationally related to the size of trucks using the streets regulated and controlled by this section. The restrictions imposed by this section are established as part of a traffic control study and experimental program designed to provide a reasonable solution to the existent problems herein described. The public is advised of the experimental character of these regulations and that the same are subject to change at any time. This section is enacted as an exercise of the police powers of the city and no person or entity shall obtain any vested right or rights with respect to the use of any size truck upon the streets or portions thereof herein designated by virtue of the enactment of this section. 
(b)	Regulations. Upon erection of signs giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time stop, stand, park or operate a truck exceeding in overall length, from front bumper to rear bumper, the length specified below as the maximum truck length permitted upon the following streets or portions of streets in the city: 
	Street 	Maximum Truck Length 
(1) 	The part of Seminole Drive that lies between Barton Avenue and Orange Avenue 	40 feet 
(2) 	The part of Orange Avenue that lies between U.S. Highway No. 1 and the westerly line of the right-of-way of Maple Street extended northerly across Orange Avenue 	40 feet 
 
(Ord. No. 786-86, § 2, 5-21-86; Ord. No. 796-86, § 1, 7-2-86; Ord. No. 825-87, § 1, 3-18-87)  
Sec. 21-7. - Golf carts. 
(a)	Pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 316.212, and subject to the terms and conditions stated in this section, golf carts may be operated upon the following designated city streets, or parts of streets, which lie in the city. 
(1)	The following designated city streets, or parts of streets, which lie west of Fiske Boulevard: 
Fairlawn Drive; 
Gleneagles Circle; 
Gleneagles Court; 
Gleneagles Way; 
Groves Drive 
Hoy Lake Court; 
Marlin Place 
Martin Drive 
Royal Birkdale Circle; 
Royal Birkdale Court; 
St. Andrews Court; 
St. Andrews Drive; 
Troon Way; 
Walton Heath Court; 
Wentworth Circle; 
(2)	The following designated city streets, or parts of streets, which lie east of Fiske Boulevard: 
Demaret Drive; 
Hagen Drive; 
Nicklaus Drive; 
Palmer Street; 
(3)	The following designated city streets, or parts of streets, which lie west of Murrell Road: 
Aberdeen Circle 
Adelaide Drive 
Admiralty Boulevard 
Ashton Way 
Bentley Court 
Blackheath Court 
Branford Court 
Braywick Court 
Byrd Court 
Carswell Court 
Cavendish Court 
Collingtreet Drive 
Dewey Court 
Golf Vista Boulevard 
Halsey Avenue 
Nelson Court 
Nimitz Court 
Parkstone Drive 
Weatherwood Drive 
Woodhall Circle 
Worthington Circle 
(4)	The following designated city streets, or parts of streets, which lie east of Murrell Road: 
LaFlor Drive 
Montesino Drive 
Orion Way 
San Miguel Lane 
Upmann Drive 
Ventana Boulevard 
San Ysidro Way 
Las Cruces Way 
Henley Drive 
Costa Mesa Lane 
(5)	The following designated city streets which lie east of Highway U.S. 1: 
Barton Avenue—Between U.S. 1 and Seminole Drive 
Beverly Drive 
Geiger Street 
Longwood Avenue 
provided that this designation of the streets, or parts of streets, that lie east of Fiske Boulevard in subsection 21-7(a)(2) herein above, shall be valid and effective only during such periods of time that the portion of Fiske Boulevard lying westerly of Palmer Street westerly across Fiske Boulevard is designated and approved for use by golf carts by either the county or the state department of transportation, whichever of said governmental agencies has jurisdiction of said portion of Fiske Boulevard under the state functional classification of roads program administered by the state department of transportation. 
(6)	The following sidewalks and crosswalks which lie west of Fiske Boulevard: 
a.	Sidewalk on the south side of Pluckebaum Road from the intersection of Marlin Place west to the crosswalk crossing Pluckebaum Road at Robert A. Anderson Stormwater Park. 
b.	Crosswalk crossing Pluckebaum Road at Robert A. Anderson Stormwater Park from the south right-of-way line to the north right-of-way line. 
(b)	A golf cart may be operated on the above-named city streets only within a one-mile radius of an exterior property line of the golf course of The Country Club of Brevard, and only when being used to transport the owner or operator between his residence and said golf course. 
(c)	A golf cart may be operated on the city streets herein designated only during the hours between sunrise and sunset. 
(d)	When being operated on any city street herein designated, the golf cart must be equipped with efficient brakes, reliable steering apparatus, safe tires, a rearview mirror, and red reflectorized warning devices in both the front and rear. 
(Ord. No. 899-89, § 2, 1-4-89; Ord. No. 968-90, § 1, 8-15-90; Ord. No. 1250-01, § 1, 7-11-01; Ord. No. 1263-01, § 1, 12-19-01; Ord. No. 1618-2013, §§ 1, 2, 4-3-13 ; Ord. No. 1637-2013, § 1, 9-18-13 ; Ord. No. 1648-2014 , §§ 1, 2, 5-7-14; Ord. No. 1666-2014 , § 1, 12-3-14)  
Sec. 21-8. - Designation of stop or yield intersections. 
(a)	Every street, road or highway intersection in the city where an official stop sign, of the design prescribed by the state department of transportation, is now posted is hereby designated to be a stop intersection by the city council pursuant to the power vested in such council by F.S. § 316.008(1)(f); and the official stop sign now posted at every intersection aforesaid is, pursuant to F.S. § 316.006(2), hereby expressly authorized to be located in its existing position, and shall hereafter be maintained at such location until otherwise directed by motion, resolution or ordinance duly passed by the city council. 
(b)	Every street, road or highway intersection in the city where an official yield sign, of the design prescribed by the state department of transportation, is now posted is hereby designated to be a yield intersection by the city council pursuant to the power vested in such council by F.S. § 316.08(1)(f); and the official yield sign now posted at every intersection aforesaid is, pursuant to F.S. § 316.006(2), hereby expressly authorized to be located in its existing position, and shall hereafter be maintained at such location until otherwise directed by motion, resolution or ordinance duly passed by the city council. 
(c)	The city council may, by motion, resolution or ordinance duly passed, revoke the designation of any intersection as a stop or yield intersection and revoke the authorization for the placement and maintenance of stop or yield signs at such intersections; and such city council may, by motion, resolution or ordinance duly passed, designate additional stop or yield intersections within the city and authorize the placement and maintenance of stop or yield signs at such intersections. 
(Code 1964, § 28-20; Ord. No. 786-86, § 2, 5-21-86; Ord. No. 899-89, § 1, 1-4-89) 
State Law reference— Duties when approaching stop or yield intersections, F.S. § 316.123.  
Sec. 21-9. - Specific stop or yield intersections. 
(a)	All-way stops. Each street intersection in the city described in this subsection is hereby designated as an all-way stop intersection for all vehicles entering said intersection on any street: 
(1)	The intersection of Rockledge Drive (former State Road 515) and Little John Lane. 
(2)	The intersection of Rockledge Drive (former State Road 515) and Bougainvillea Drive. 
(3)	The intersection of Rockledge Drive (former State Road 515) and Rockledge Avenue. 
(4)	The intersection of Rockledge Drive (former State Road 515) and Park Avenue. 
(5)	The intersection of Rockledge Drive (former State Road 515) and River Groves Drive. 
(6)	The intersection of Seminole Drive and Bougainvillea Drive. 
(7)	The intersection of Seminole Drive and Rockledge Avenue. 
(8)	The intersection of Pineland Drive and Revere Court. 
(9)	The intersection of Eyster Boulevard and Huntington Lane. 
(10)	The intersection of Southern Pine Trail and Hamilton Avenue. 
(11)	The intersection of Three Meadows Drive and Walnut Grove Way. 
(12)	The intersection of Rolling Meadows Drive and Sleepy Hollow Lane. 
(13)	The intersection of Barton Boulevard West and Fairlawn Drive. 
(14)	The intersection of Honeysuckle Drive and Raintree Avenue. 
(15)	The intersection of Ventana Boulevard and Las Cruces Way. 
(16)	The intersection of Dove Avenue and Elm Street. 
(17)	The intersection of Kingfisher Way and Pelican Lane. 
(18)	The intersection of Cobblewood Drive where Wenthrop Circle and Heathrow Circle Meet. 
(19)	The intersection of Cobblewood Drive where Heathrow Circle and Glenbrook Circle meet. 
(20)	The intersection of Brookcrest Circle and Cobblewood Drive. 
(21)	The intersection of Knollwood Drive and Scott Lane. 
(b)	Stops. Each street intersection in the city described in this subsection is hereby designated as a stop intersection for all vehicles entering said intersection on the street or streets indicated below: 
(1)	The intersection of Orange Avenue and Maple Street is hereby designated as a stop intersection for all vehicles approaching said intersection on Maple Street. 
(2)	The intersection of Seminole Drive and Barton Boulevard is hereby designated as a stop intersection for all vehicles approaching said intersection from the north on Seminole Drive, and for all vehicles approaching said intersection from the east on Barton Boulevard. 
(c)	Duties. When a stop sign conforming in design to the official stop sign described and approved in the manual of uniform traffic control devices adopted by the State Department of Transportation has been erected giving notice thereof, every driver of a vehicle approaching any of the above-described intersections on a street where such a stop sign is posted, shall, before entering said intersection, cause said vehicle to come to a complete stop in the manner required by the state uniform traffic control law for vehicles entering a stop intersection, and shall not proceed into said intersection until same can be done with safety in the manner described in the state uniform traffic control law for vehicles entering a stop intersection. 
(Code 1964, § 28-21; Ord. No. 518-79, § 1, 6-6-79; Ord. No. 784-86, § 1, 5-7-86; Ord. No. 786-86, § 2, 5-21-86; Ord. No. 841-87, § 1, 7-15-87; Ord. No. 843-87, § 1, 8-19-87; Ord. No. 899-89, § 1, 1-4-89; Ord. No. 942-90, § 1, 1-17-90; Ord. No. 946-90, § 1, 2-21-90l Ord. No. 1011-91, § 1, 9-18-91; Ord. No. 1150-97, § 1, 11-19-97; Ord. No. 1177-98, § 1, 12-16-98; Ord. No. 1199-99, § 1, 1-5-00; Ord. No. 1233-00, § 1, 9-6-00; Ord. No. 1279-02, § 1, 8-7-02; Ord. No. 1296-02, § 1, 11-20-02; Ord. No. 1314-03, § 1, 8-20-03; Ord. No. 1368-05, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-05; Ord. No. 1490-08, § 1, 4-16-08) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate through streets, stop and yield intersections, F.S. § 316.008(1)(f); duties when entering stop or yield intersections, F.S. § 316.123.  
Sec. 21-10. - Left turn required from Barton to Fiske. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, the driver of every vehicle proceeding in an easterly direction in the northernmost traffic lane of West Barton Boulevard shall, upon entering the intersection of West Barton Boulevard and Fiske Boulevard from said northernmost traffic lane of West Barton Boulevard, execute a lefthand turn on to Fiske Boulevard into the northbound traffic lanes of Fiske Boulevard, complying in all respects with all official traffic control devices installed and in operation at said intersection. 
(Code 1964, § 28-21; Ord. No. 467-78, § 1, 1-18-78; Ord. No. 786-86, § 2, 5-21-86; Ord. No. 899-89, § 1, 1-14-89) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate turns, F.S. § 316.008(1)(a), (i).  
Secs. 21-11—21-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SPEED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Speed generally, F.S. § 316.183 et seq.; establishment by municipalities, F.S. § 316.189. 
 
Sec. 21-19. - Generally. 
The maximum speed upon all streets within the city is thirty (30) miles per hour in the daytime or nighttime, as prescribed by state law, except on those particular streets or portions of streets described in this article. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street in the city at a speed in excess of the maximum speed limit applicable to such street as established by this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 28-16) 
State Law reference— Thirty miles per hour speed limits established in municipalities, F.S. § 316.189(1).  
Sec. 21-20. - Limit on state highways, connecting links. 
The speed limits on all state highways or connecting links or extensions thereof shall be as provided by state law. 
(Code 1964, § 28-18) 
State Law reference— State speed limits generally, F.S. § 316.183; modification by DOT, F.S. § 316.187.  
Sec. 21-21. - Declaration of increase in limits. 
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the maximum speed limit established by the state uniform traffic control law upon streets within municipalities is less than necessary for reasonable or safe operation of vehicles upon the streets or parts of streets specifically described in section 21-23, and that the maximum speed limit on the streets or parts thereof described on such schedule should be increased to the speed indicated in such section. It is also hereby determined that the maximum speeds indicated in section 21-23 are reasonable and in conformity to criteria promulgated by the department of transportation as regards the streets or parts of streets specified on such schedule; therefore, it is hereby declared that the maximum speed limit on those streets or parts of streets specified in section 21-23 is as designated on such schedule, such speed limits to take effect when the zones or streets involved are posted with clearly legible signs indicating the established speed limits, such signs to be so placed and so painted as to be plainly visible and legible in daylight or in darkness when illuminated by headlights. 
(Code 1964, § 28-17)  
Sec. 21-22. - Declaration of decrease in limits. 
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the maximum speed limit established by the state uniform traffic control law upon streets within municipalities is greater than is reasonable for the safe operation of vehicles upon the streets or parts of streets specifically described in section 21-24, and that the maximum speed limit on the streets or parts thereof described in such section should be decreased to the speed indicated in such section. It is also hereby determined that the maximum speeds indicated in section 21-24 of this Code are reasonable and in conformity to criteria promulgated by the department of transportation as regards the streets or parts of streets specified in such section; therefore, it is hereby declared that the maximum speed limit on those streets or parts of streets specified in section 21-24 is as designated in such section, such speed limits to take effect when the zones or streets involved are posted with clearly legible signs indicating the established speed limits, such signs to be so placed and so painted as to be plainly visible and legible in daylight or in darkness when illuminated by headlights. 
(Code 1964, § 28-17)  
Sec. 21-23. - Specific increased limits. 
In accordance with section 21-21, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the speed limit shall be as set forth in the following schedule upon those streets or portions thereof described therein and at the times specified therein: 
Name of Street 	Speed Limit 
(miles per hour) 	Specified Time 
Barnes Boulevard 	40 	All times 
Barton Boulevard 	35 	All times 
Barton Boulevard West between the intersection with Fairlawn Drive and the west city limit 	35 	All times 
Eyster Boulevard between Fiske Boulevard and Huntington Lane 	35 	All times 
Eyster Boulevard between Huntington Lane and U.S. Highway No. 1 	35 	All times 
Fiske Boulevard 	40 	All times 
Florida Avenue 	35 	All times 
Gus Hipp Boulevard 	40 	All times 
Huntington Lane between Barton Boulevard and Eyster Boulevard 	35 	All times 
Murrell Road south of Barton Boulevard and north of Eyster Boulevard 	35 	All times 
Murrell Road south of Eyster Boulevard 	40 	All times 
Pluckebaum Road 	35 	All times 
 
(Code 1964, § 28-18; Ord. No. 499-78, § 1, 11-15-78; Ord. No. 617-82, § 1, 7-21-82; Ord. No. 761-85, § 1, 9-4-85; Ord. No. 851-87, § 1, 10-7-87; Ord. No. 887-88, § 1, 9-21-88; Ord. No. 1150-97, § 1, 11-19-97; Ord. No. 1505-08, § 1, 9-17-08)  
Sec. 21-24. - Specific decreased limits. 
In accordance with section 21-22, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the maximum speed limit shall be as set forth in the following Schedules A and B upon those streets or portions thereof described in said schedules and at the times specified therein: 
SCHEDULE A 
Name of Street 	Speed Limit 
(miles per hour) 	Specified Time 
Longwood Avenue 	10 	All times 
 
SCHEDULE B 
Name of Street 	Speed Limit 
(miles per hour) 	Specified Time 
Barton Boulevard West between Fiske Boulevard and Fairlawn Drive 	25 	All times 
Rockledge Drive 	20 	All times 
All other streets and portions thereof in the city except those excluded below 	20 	All times 
Exclusions: 		
Streets and portions thereof described in Schedule A of this section 		
Streets and portions thereof described in section 21-23 		
Poinsett Drive 		
Huntington Lane between Barton Boulevard and Forest Drive 		
 
(Code 1964, § 28-18; Ord. No. 628-82, § 1, 9-15-82; Ord. No. 633-82, § 1, 11-3-82; Ord. No. 889-88, § 1, 9-21-88; Ord. No. 1179-99, § 1, 2-17-99)  
Sec. 21-25. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of sections 21-1 through 21-24, inclusive, of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a traffic infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be required to pay a civil penalty as prescribed by Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 617-82, § 2, 7-21-82)  
Secs. 21-26—21-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Parking near fires, § 8-11. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, F.S. § 316.008(1)(a). 
 
Sec. 21-31. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context otherwise requires: 
(a)	City council means the city council of the City of Rockledge. 
(b)	Clerk means the clerk of the circuit and county courts of Brevard County, Florida. 
(c)	Crosswalk means: 
(1)	That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway, measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; 
(2)	Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
(d)	County means Brevard County, Florida. 
(e)	City means the City of Rockledge. 
(f)	Designated parking space means any parking space posted with a sign bearing the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol and the caption "parking by disabled permit only." 
(g)	Chief of police means the chief of the city police department or his designee. 
(h)	Handicapped person means any person with permanent mobility problems who has been issued an exemption entitlement parking permit pursuant to F.S. § 320.0844. 
(i)	Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle the condition of which is such that the same is incapable of being immediately and lawfully operated by its own power upon the public streets and highways of the state in full compliance with all legal requirements applicable to the operation of such motor vehicle in the state. A motor vehicle which does not bear a current license plate issued for such vehicle, and a current motor vehicle inspection sticker on such vehicle, shall, for the purposes of this article, be deemed an inoperable motor vehicle. 
(j)	Intersection means: 
(1)	The area embraced with the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines; or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles; or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict; 
(2)	Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty (20) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
(k)	Motor vehicle or vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled by any means whatsoever. 
(l)	Official signs means any sign which is placed or erected by the authority of a public body having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating traffic or parking. 
(m)	Official traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with the provisions of F.S. Ch. 316, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purposes of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
(n)	Owner means a person who holds the legal title to a vehicle, or, in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof, with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee, or lessee, or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner, for the purpose of this article. 
(o)	Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers as may be permitted under this article. 
(p)	Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
(q)	Person means any natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. 
(r)	Police officer means a police officer of the city police department. 
(s)	Private road or driveway means any privately owned way or place used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express [or] implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
(t)	Public parking space means any parking space on private property which the owner, lessee or person in control of such property provides for use by members of the public other than employees of such owner, lessee or person, including but not limited to parking spaces at shopping centers, stores, offices, motels, malls, restaurants and marinas. 
(u)	Public works department means the city public works department. 
(v)	Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and protected or so marked by adequate signs or authorized pavement markings as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
(w)	Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbline or the lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
(x)	Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers, as may be permitted by this article. 
(y)	Stop or stopping, when prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a law enforcement officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
(z)	Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
(aa)	Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, and vehicles, and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street or highway for purposes of travel. 
(Code 1964, § 28-30; Ord. No. 562-80, § 1, 9-3-80; Ord. No. 586-81, § 1, 5-20-81)  
Sec. 21-32. - Prohibition against parking, leaving, storing, keeping or abandoning of inoperable motor vehicles on public streets. 
(a)	No person shall park, leave, store, keep, or abandon any inoperable motor vehicle upon any street, highway or public property within the city. 
(b)	The prohibition of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to an unavoidable situation where a motor vehicle accidentally and fortuitously becomes disabled and inoperative while in the process of being operated upon a public street or highway, or while the same is lawfully parked on a public street or public property, and, as a result of such unavoidable circumstance, said vehicle is parked in a lawful parking area on a public street or public property of the city while repairs are being made; provided, however, that in the event of such unavoidable parking of an inoperable motor vehicle pending repairs, said vehicle shall not be left, parked, stored or permitted to remain on the public street or public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours, and shall be removed from the public street or public property within forty-eight (48) hours of the time said vehicle becomes inoperable, by wrecker towing if necessary, regardless of the nature of the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 586-81, § 2, 5-20-81) 
Cross reference— Wrecked, abandoned and derelict property, § 13-14; storage of wrecked or dismantled motor vehicles, § 13-15; use of streets for storage of vehicles, § 18-4.  
Sec. 21-33. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in certain areas or spaces; manner of parking. 
(A)	Prohibitions. Within the incorporated areas of the city, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law, or the directions of a city police officer, parking enforcement specialist, other law enforcement officer or official traffic control device, no person shall: 
(1)	Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
(a)	On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(b)	On a sidewalk, bikepath or bike lane. 
(c)	Within an intersection. 
(d)	On a crosswalk. 
(e)	Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the public works department or the state department of transportation indicates a different length by signs or markings. 
(f)	Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(g)	Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
(h)	On any railroad tracks. 
(i)	At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(j)	In such manner as to block a traffic lane or to interfere with the orderly flow of traffic so as to constitute a hazard to the passage of emergency vehicles. 
(k)	Upon any street, highway or public property within the city so as to constitute a safety hazard. 
(l)	Upon any street, highway or public property in the city for a period exceeding ten (10) days when the vehicle is inoperative because of being wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or lacking a valid license plate for the current year. 
(2)	Stop, stand or park a truck having a load capacity greater than one and one-half (1½) tons: 
(a)	Upon any part or portion of the west one hundred (100) feet of Burlington Avenue in the city. 
(3)	Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
(a)	In front of a public or private driveway. 
(b)	Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(c)	Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(d)	Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(e)	Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance. 
(f)	At any place where official signs prohibit standing. 
(g)	Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing unless the public works department or the state department of transportation establishes a different distance due to unusual circumstances. 
(h)	At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict parking, or in excess of time periods authorized by such signs. 
(i)	Along or adjacent to any curb painted red or yellow, or across the delineated boundaries of a public parking place. 
(4)	Park a vehicle, at any time, on or upon any part of the road right-of-way of Fiske Boulevard, Gus Hipp Boulevard, Murrell Road or Barton Boulevard in the city. A new, separate and independent violation of this section shall be deemed to have been committed in each instance or occasion wherein a vehicle remains parked in, on, or upon any of the herein described road rights-of-way continuously for more than six (6) hours after a parking citation has been issued and posted on said vehicle for a previously violation of this section. 
(5)	Park, or cause to be parked, any truck or commercial vehicle having a greater load capacity than one and one-half (1½) tons, or any boat, boat trailer, horse trailer, utility trailer, flatbed trailer, van trailer, house trailer, mobile home, semitrailer, truck tractor or recreational vehicle type unit on any public street, avenue, alley, thoroughfare or right-of-way within the city limits of the city for more than one hour in any twenty-four-hour period. The term "recreational vehicle type unit," as used herein, shall have the meaning ascribed to that term by Florida Statutes, and shall include the entities known as travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, motor home, private motor coach, van conversion and park trailer as defined by Florida Statutes. 
The chief of police of the city, or his duly authorized designee, may issue, upon proper application therefor to the police department, a permit extending the parking time limit set forth above up to, but not exceeding, twenty-four (24) hours if it is first demonstrated by the applicant that the requested extension of parking time is reasonably necessary for one or more of the following reasons: 
(a)	For the purpose of loading or unloading, or both, of goods, wares, merchandise, materials or tangible personal property at premises directly abutting the place where the extended parking is to occur, when such extended parking is necessary in the ordinary course of business of a moving, hauling, transport, delivery or similar operation. 
(b)	To make such repairs to the vehicle, boat, trailer, van or other entity as are necessary for the removal thereof. 
(c)	Such other reason or cause as is comparable in nature, character and necessity to those reasons hereinabove described. 
Any permit issued by the city police department extending the parking time limitation herein imposed shall grant the extension for only such period of time, not exceeding twenty-four (24) hours, as is necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the permit is granted. 
(B)	Manner. Within the incorporated areas of the city: 
(1)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way street or highway shall be so stopped or parked with the righthand wheels parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the righthand curb or edge of the street or highway. 
(2)	Except when otherwise provided by city ordinance, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its righthand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the righthand curb or edge of the roadway, or its left wheels within twelve (12) inches of the lefthand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(Code 1964, § 28-31; Ord. No. 562-80, § 1, 9-3-80; Ord. No. 676-84, § 1, 2-1-84; Ord. No. 678-84, § 1, 3-7-84; Ord. No. 693-84, § 1, 6-20-84; Ord. No. 786-86, § 4, 5-21-86; Ord. No. 964-90, § 1, 6-20-90)  
Sec. 21-34. - Public parking spaces designated for certain handicapped persons. 
No person shall park any vehicle or bicycle in any designated parking space located on city owned or leased property or private property within the incorporated areas of the city, unless such person is a handicapped person as defined in this article or unless such person is momentarily parking in such parking place for the purpose of unloading or loading a handicapped person as defined herein. 
(Code 1964, § 28-32; Ord. No. 562-80, § 1, 9-3-80)  
Sec. 21-35. - Penalties for violation of sections 21-32, 21-33 and 21-34. 
(a)	Pursuant to Chapters 316 and 318, Florida Statutes, any person cited for a violation of section 21-32, 21-33, or 21-34 of this Code shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal violation and shall be assessed a civil penalty according to the following schedule: 
(1)	Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a violation of subsections (a)(1) (a) through (e) of section 21-33, subsection (a)(3)(e) of section 21-33, or section 21-32 of this Code. 
(2)	Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a violation of subsections (a)(3)(a) through (d) and (f) through (i) of section 21-33; or subsection (b) of section 21-33. 
(3)	One hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation of the provisions of section 21-34 of this Code. 
(b)	Each day any violation occurs or continues shall be a separate offense. For parking in excess of the time authorized in a public parking space, each succeeding equal time period beyond that authorized as the maximum time period for the parking place shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)	The amount of any penalty specified in this section shall be doubled if payment is not received by the clerk of the circuit court prior to notice being mailed to the registered owner by certified mail pursuant to subsection (e) of section 21-42 of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 28-33; Ord. No. 562-80, § 1, 9-3-80; Ord. No. 586-81, § 3, 5-20-81; Ord. No. 733-85, § 1, 2-20-85; Ord. No. 1107-95, § 1, 7-19-95)  
Sec. 21-36. - Towing and removal of vehicles authorized. 
(a)	Any city police officer finding a vehicle stopped, standing, parked, stored or left upon any street, highway or public property within the city in violation of paragraph (j), (k) or (l) of subsection (A)(1) of section 21-33 of this Code is hereby authorized to have such vehicle removed and towed away in accordance with the procedures set forth in F.S. § 715.07, unless the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle voluntarily removes the same. 
(b)	Any party lawfully towing or removing a vehicle pursuant to instructions from a city police officer, and who complies with the minimum standards set forth in F.S. § 715.07, shall have a lien on such vehicle for a reasonable towing fee and storage fee to the extent permitted and allowed by the provisions of F.S. § 713.78. 
(Ord. No. 676-84, § 2, 2-1-84)  
Sec. 21-37. - Prohibited near river pumping stations. 
No vehicle shall at any time be parked within ten (10) feet of any river pumping station. 
(Code 1964, § 28-5)  
Sec. 21-38. - On residential streets. 
No person other than an owner or occupant of a residence on such street shall park a motor vehicle on any of the following named streets in Rockledge Homes Subdivision in the city: 
Park Street 
Shady Lane 
Patrick Lane 
(Code 1964, § 28-11; Ord. No. 82-16, § 1, 8-18-82)  
Sec. 21-39. - Prohibited between street and sidewalk on Orange Avenue, Valencia Drive. 
No person shall park a motor vehicle between the hard surface portion of the street and the sidewalk lying along and adjacent thereto on Orange Avenue or Valencia Drive. 
(Code 1964, § 28-6)  
Sec. 21-40. - Prohibited on specific streets or parts of streets. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a motor vehicle on the following streets. Unless such prohibition is limited hereby to particular times, it shall be effective at all times: 
(a)	Barton Avenue, south side, parking of any motor vehicle is limited to a maximum period of two (2) hours in the same parking space on any one occasion on the south side of that portion of Barton Avenue which lies between a point three hundred (300) feet east of the east line of the right-of-way of Seminole Drive projected northerly and southerly across Barton Avenue, and the east line of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway No. 1, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday of each week. 
(b)	Barton Avenue, north side, no person shall park a motor vehicle on the north side of Barton Avenue between a point three hundred (300) feet east of the east line of the right-of-way of Seminole Drive projected northerly and southerly across Barton Avenue, and the east line of the right-of-way of U.S. No. 1, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday of each week. 
(c)	Barton Boulevard East, north and south sides, between the east right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 1 and River Ridge Subdivision. 
(d)	Beverly Drive, parking of any motor vehicle is limited to a maximum period of two (2) hours in the same parking space on any one occasion on the west side of Beverly Drive between Orange Avenue and Longwood Drive, from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday of each week. 
(e)	Brevard Avenue, on the west side, that portion which lies between the north City limits and the intersection with Florida Avenue. 
(f)	Burlington Avenue, north and south sides, no person shall park a motor vehicle for more than two (2) continuous hours in the same parking space on any one occasion, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday of each week, on the part of Burlington Avenue that lies between the east right-of-way line of West Street projected northerly across Burlington Avenue, and the westerly right-of-way line of Maple Street projected southerly across Burlington Avenue. 
(g)	Burlington Avenue, north and south sides, between Seminole Drive and the westerly line of the right-of-way of West Street projected northerly across Burlington Avenue. 
(h)	Eyster Boulevard, south side, between Murrell Road and Cedar Street. 
(i)	Cogswell Street, east side, that portion which lies within a distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet south of the south line of the right-of-way of Barton Boulevard. 
(j)	Fernwood Drive South, north and south sides, that portion of South Fernwood Drive which lies within a distance of forty (40) feet east of the east line of Seminole Drive, and the east line of Seminole Drive projected across South Fernwood Drive. 
(k)	Geiger Street, west side, that portion which lies between the south right-of-way line of Barton Avenue and the east line of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway No. 1 (State Road No. 5). 
(l)	Hamilton Avenue, east and west sides, between the north right-of-way line of Gardener Road and the south right-of-way of Eyster Boulevard. 
(m)	Hawk Street, north side, starting at its intersection with Cogswell Street and continuing to the east to its intersection with Baldwin Street. 
(n)	La Flor Drive, a portion of said street, commencing at a point 58 feet north of the southwest corner of Lot 218 of Ashwood Lakes Phase One as recorded at Plat Book 44, Page 3, of the Public Records of Brevard County, Florida, proceeding north therefrom, following the curve and then heading east to a point 60 feet from the northeast corner of said lot, which shall end the no parking zone, which shall be no parking at anytime. 
(o)	Levitt Parkway, south side, that portion which lies between the east line of the right-of-way of Fiske Boulevard extended across Levitt Parkway, and the west line of the right-of-way of Bayward Lane extended northerly across Levitt Parkway. 
(p)	Longwood Avenue, from Seminole Drive on the east to Beverly Drive on the west, except that, when signs are erected giving notice thereof, trucks waiting to make deliveries to Wuesthoff Memorial Hospital may park in the truck holding zone on the north side of Longwood Avenue, said zone being between a point fifty (50) feet west of Seminole Drive and a point two hundred (200) feet west of Seminole Drive. 
(q)	Magruder Avenue, both sides, that portion which lies within a distance of one hundred eighty (180) feet east of the east line of the right-of-way of Highway U.S. 1 at any time. 
(r)	North Palmway, south side. 
(s)	Orange Avenue: 
(1)	North side: 
a.	From the east right-of-way line of Highway U.S. 1 to the west right-of-way line of Osceola Drive: No parking at any time; 
b.	From the east right-of-way line of Osceola Drive to the west boundary of Lot 61, Block 3, of the Valencia Subdivision with a street address of 124 Orange Avenue: No parking at any time; 
c.	From the west boundary of Lot 61, Block 3, of the Valencia Subdivision with a street address of 124 Orange Avenue to the west right-of-way line of Seminole Drive: Two-hour parking from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, with no restrictions on Saturday and Sunday; 
d.	From the east right-of-way line of Seminole Drive to the west right-of-way line of Shares Drive: Two-hour parking from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, with no restrictions on Saturday and Sunday. 
(2)	South side: 
a.	From the east right-of-way line of Highway U.S. 1 to the west right-of-way line of Seminole Drive: No parking at any time; 
b.	From the east right-of-way line of Seminole Drive to the east boundary of Lot 7, Block A, of Rockledge Villas with a street address of 41 Orange Avenue: No restrictions; 
c.	From the east boundary of Lot 7, Block A, of Rockledge Villas with a street address of 41 Orange Avenue to the east boundary of Lot 4, Block A, of Rockledge Villas: One-hour parking at all times; 
d.	From the east boundary of Lot 4, Block A, of Rockledge Villas to the west right-of-way line of Shares Drive: Two-2 hour parking from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, no restrictions on Saturday and Sunday. 
(t)	Orange Court, north side, that portion which lies within a distance of one hundred eighty (180) feet east of the east line of the right-of-way of Seminole Drive projected across Orange Court, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday of each week. 
(u)	Orange Court, south side, that portion which lies within a distance of one hundred ninety (190) feet east of the east line of the right-of-way of Seminole Drive projected across Orange Court, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday of each week. 
(v)	Osceola Drive, west side, within a distance of twenty (20) feet north of the north line of the right-of-way of Orange Avenue projected across the intersection of Orange Avenue and Osceola Drive. 
(w)	Parkstone Drive, all sides of the street between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for each day of the week. 
(x)	Osceola Drive, parking of any motor vehicle is limited to a maximum period of two (2) hours in the same parking space on any one occasion on the east and west sides of that portion of Osceola Drive which lies north of Valencia Road, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday of each week. 
(y)	Park Street, west side, between North Palmway and South Palmway. 
(z)	River Groves Drive, north and south sides, between the Indian River on the east and Jennings Lane on the west. 
(aa)	Rockledge Avenue, north side, within a distance of fifteen (15) feet on either side (east and west) of the centerline, projected northerly across Rockledge Avenue, of the easternmost curb cut driveway as presently located on the north side of the property now owned and occupied as a place of residence by Wilson and Alta Amburgey, known as 703 Rockledge Drive, which said driveway affords a means of vehicular ingress and egress to and from said Amburgey property from and to Rockledge Avenue. 
(bb)	Rockledge Avenue, north side, between Florida Avenue and Seminole Drive. 
(cc)	Rockledge Drive. 
(1)	Both sides of that portion which lies within the distance of one hundred and eighty (180) feet of the parcel of property designated as tax appraisal parcel number 25-36-14-00-00511, at all times. 
(2)	Both sides of that portion which lies within a distance of one hundred and ninety (190) feet south from the south right-of-way line of Barton Avenue, at all times. 
(dd)	Sabal Groves Drive, north and south sides, that portion which lies within a distance of two hundred (200) feet west of the west line of the right-of-way of Murrell Road. 
(ee)	Seminole Drive, east and west sides, between Barton Boulevard East and Orange Avenue. 
(ff)	Seminole Drive, between Valencia Road and Orange Avenue between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(gg)	Seminole Drive , east and west sides, between the north right-of-way line of Dudley Drive, and the south right-of-way line of Rockledge Avenue, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday of each week. 
(hh)	Shares Drive, that a part of Shares Drive which is south of the south line of Vermont Avenue extended easterly across Shares Drive. 
(ii)	South Palmway, north side, between Park Street and Florida Avenue. 
(jj)	South Street, east side, that portion which lies within a distance of one hundred thirty-two (132) feet north of the north line of the right-of-way of Sutton Street projected across South Street. 
(kk)	St. Andrews Drive , north side, starting at the west right-of-way line of Fiske Boulevard, and continuing to the east right-of-way line of Wentworth Circle. 
(ll)	Sutton Street, south side, between Rockledge Drive and South Street. 
(mm)	Sweet Street, north side, between Rockledge Drive and Brevard Avenue. 
(nn)	Valencia Road, parking of any motor vehicle is limited to a maximum period of two (2) hours in the same parking space on any one occasion on the north or south side of that portion of Valencia Road which lies within a distance of three hundred (300) feet east of the east line of the right-of-way of Seminole Drive projected across Valencia Road or within a distance of three hundred (300) feet west of the west line of the right-of-way of Seminole Drive projected across Valencia Road, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday of each week. 
(oo)	Vermont Avenue, north and south sides, parking of any motor vehicle is limited to a maximum period of two (2) continuous hours in the same parking space on any one occasion, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday of each week. 
(pp)	West Street, parking of any motor vehicle is limited to a maximum period of two (2) hours in the same parking space on any one occasion on the east or west side, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday of each week. 
(Code 1964, § 28-6; Ord. No. 478-78, § 1, 4-19-78; Ord. No. 482-78, § 5, 6-21-78; Ord. No. 501-78, § 1, 11-15-78; Ord. No. 513-79, § 1, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 618-82, § 1, 8-4-82; Ord. No. 663-83, § 2, 9-21-83; Ord. No. 687-84, § 1, 4-18-84; Ord. No. 713-84, § 1, 11-21-84; Ord. No. 722-85, § 1, 1-16-85; Ord. No. 726-85, § 1, 2-6-85; Ord. No. 735-85, § 1, 3-6-85; Ord. No. 737-85 §§ 1, 2, 3-20-85; Ord. No. 741-85, § 1, 4-3-85; Ord. No. 743-85, § 1, 5-1-85; Ord. No. 744-85, § 1, 5-1-85; Ord. No. 745-85, § 1, 5-1-85; Ord. No. 774-85, § 1, 12-18-85; Ord. No. 775-86, § 1, 1-8-86; Ord. No. 786-86, §§ 3, 5, 5-21-86; Ord. No. 795-86, § 1, 7-2-86; Ord. No. 813-86, § 1, 11-5-86; Ord. No. 836-87, § 1, 6-17-87; Ord. No. 862-88, §§ 1, 2, 1-6-88; Ord. No. 888-88, §§ 1—3, 9-21-88; Ord. No. 900-89, §§ 1, 2, 1-4-89; Ord. No. 936-89, §§ 1, 2, 12-6-89; Ord. No. 1035-92, §§ 1, 2, 6-3-92; Ord. No. 1131-96, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-96; Ord. No. 1157-98, § 1, 3-25-98; Ord. No. 1173-98, § 1, 10-21-98; Ord. No. 1185-99, § 1, 7-7-99; Ord. No. 1252-01, § 1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 1284-02, §§ 1, 2, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 1305-03, § 1, 5-21-03; Ord. No. 1338-04, § 1, 1-7-04; Ord. No. 1401-05, §§ 1, 2, 11-9-05; Ord. No. 1412-06, § 1, 6-21-06; Ord. No. 1468-07, § 1, 10-3-07; Ord. No. 1474-08, § 1, 2-6-08; Ord. No. 1518-09, § 1, 2-18-09; Ord. No. 1535-09, § 1, 11-4-09; Ord. No. 1553-10, § 1, 7-7-10; Ord. No. 1591-2012, § 1, 1-4-12 ; Ord. No. 1671-2015 , § 1, 7-15-15)  
Sec. 21-41. - Issuance of city parking citations. 
(a)	When any city police officer or parking enforcement specialist employed by the police department finds a vehicle in violation of the provisions of this article or in violation of signs erected pursuant to the provisions of this article, he shall issue a parking citation to the vehicle by placing said citation in a conspicuous place on the vehicle. Said parking citation form shall be on prenumbered forms as required and approved by the clerk and shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Date, time and location of violation. 
(2)	Vehicle tag number, decal number, model and color. 
(3)	Name and address of registered owner or owners. 
(4)	Owner or owners date(s) of birth. 
(5)	Name and signature of issuing officer or parking enforcement specialist. 
(6)	Descriptions of violations and amounts of penalties. 
(7)	Directions as to payment of penalty or request for hearing. 
(8)	Statement as to effect of election to request hearing and failure to comply with citation pursuant to F.S. § 316.1967, as amended by Chapter 79-403, Laws of Florida. 
(9)	Blanks for name and mailing address of person receiving citation. 
(b)	The police officer or parking enforcement specialist shall determine the registered owner of the vehicle for which a citation was issued and shall complete the citation form. The original copy of the citation form shall be forwarded to the clerk when completed for processing pursuant to section 21-42 of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 28-34; Ord. No. 562-80, § 1, 9-3-80; Ord. No. 1107-95, § 2, 7-19-95)  
Sec. 21-42. - Procedures governing payment of civil penalties and proceedings to enforce payment for city parking violations. 
(a)	The clerk shall process parking violations issued by municipal police officers or parking enforcement specialists within the boundaries of a chartered municipality in accordance with the procedures contained in subsections (d), (e) and (f) of this section, which provide for: 
(1)	The adoption of the appropriate regulations in sections 21-31 through 21-40 of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances. 
(2)	That violations of such regulations are a noncriminal violation enforceable, pursuant to the provisions of Florida Statutes § 316.1967, as implemented by subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. 
(3)	That the issuance and completion of prenumbered parking citations by municipal police officers and parking enforcement specialists be on forms and in such format as required and approved by the clerk and contain the information set forth in section 21-41 of this Code. 
(4)	That payment or request for hearings in response to municipal citations shall be received and processed by the clerk. 
(5)	In no event shall the clerk process a parking citation issued by a municipality which has adopted an ordinance, and which, in the opinion of the clerk, does not meet the requirements of this section. The clerk shall not process a citation which, in his opinion, does not comply with the provisions of the ordinance adopted by the issuing municipality or this article. 
(b)	Any person issued a city parking citation, pursuant to section 21-41 of this article, shall answer the citation by either of the following procedures within ten (10) days after the date of issuance of the citation: 
(1)	Payment of the penalty indicated on the citation may be remitted to the clerk, pursuant to the directions on such citation. 
(2)	A hearing may be requested by the person receiving such citation or the cited vehicle's registered owner for the purpose of presenting evidence before a county judge concerning a parking violation. Any person requesting a hearing shall execute a statement on a form prepared by the clerk indicating his or her willingness to appear at such hearing at a time and place specified thereon. Any person who requests a hearing and does not appear in accordance with the said statement shall be subject to contempt proceedings or to other such penalties as the court may, in its discretion, impose to require compliance with this article. 
(c)	Pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 316.1967(4), an election to request a hearing constitutes a waiver of the right to pay the penalty indicated on the parking citation, and a county judge after said hearing may impose a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs for each parking violation. 
(d)	Upon receipt of a completed parking citation submitted by a city police officer or parking enforcement specialist, pursuant to section 21-41(b) of this article, the clerk shall notify the registered owner first listed on such citation of its issuance if there has been no response to the citation pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. Such notice shall be sent by regular mail and shall inform the registered owner concerning the nature and location of the parking violation and direct compliance with either of the alternatives specified in subsection (b) of this section within fourteen (14) days after the date the notice is mailed according to the records maintained by the clerk. The notice shall also contain a statement informing the registered owner of the increased penalty required pursuant to section 21-35 (c). 
(e)	If payment of the penalty is not received or if a hearing is not requested within the fourteen (14) day period after the notice described in subsection (d) of this section is mailed and such notice is not returned as undeliverable by the U.S. Postal service, the clerk shall send a similar notice to said owner by certified mail requesting compliance with either of the alternatives specified in subsection (b) of this section within fourteen (14) days after the date said notice is mailed, according to the records maintained by the clerk. The notice shall also contain a statement informing the registered owner of the increased penalty required pursuant to section 21-35(c) of this Code. 
(f)	If the clerk receives proof of delivery of the notice mailed by certified mail, pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, and payment of the penalty is not received or a hearing is not requested within the fourteen-day period specified therein, the clerk shall cause the registered owner first listed on the parking citation to be served in accordance with the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure with a court order requiring attendance at a hearing at a time and place specified in such court order. Pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 316.1963, a county judge, after the hearing, shall make a determination as to whether a parking violation has been committed and may impose a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus court costs. Any person upon whom service is obtained pursuant to this section who does not appear at a hearing as directed by a court order shall be subject to contempt proceedings or to such other penalties as the court may, in its discretion, impose to require compliance with the court order. 
(Code 1964, § 28-35; Ord. No. 562-80, § 1, 9-3-80; Ord. No. 1107-95, § 3, 7-19-95)  
Sec. 21-43. - Owner's liability for parking violation. 
(a)	The owner of a vehicle is responsible and liable for payment of any parking ticket violation unless the owner can furnish evidence that the vehicle was, at the time of the parking violation, in the care, custody or control of another person. In such instances, the owner of the vehicle is required, within a reasonable time after notification of the parking violation, to furnish to the appropriate law enforcement authorities the name and address of the person or company who leased, rented or otherwise has the care, custody or control of the vehicle. The owner of a vehicle is not responsible for parking ticket violations if the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care, custody or control of some person who did not have permission of the owner to use the vehicle. 
(b)	At any hearing of the case involving illegal parking in which the owner of said vehicle is being tried under this article, it shall be sufficient evidence upon which the court may rely to establish the name of the registered owner of such vehicle if a police officer or parking enforcement specialist shall state under oath that he has made inquiry of the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles or office of the county tax collector and has been advised by them of the identity of such registered owner. Otherwise, the court may defer the final determination of such case until a certified record or appropriate certificate can be obtained from the office of the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles or county tax collector's office indicating the registered owner of the vehicle on the date in question. 
(Code 1964, § 28-36; Ord. No. 562-80, § 1, 9-3-80)  
Sec. 21-44. - Disposition of fines and forfeitures for parking violations; authorized costs. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, all monies received by the chief of police as a result of the parking citations issued by the city shall be paid to the city. 
(b)	In those instances where payment is not remitted to the clerk for a city parking citation prior to notice being mailed to the registered owner by certified mail, pursuant to subsection (e) of section 21-42, the clerk shall deduct his costs of five dollars ($5.00) from the penalty imposed. In those instances where hearing is held, court costs up to ten dollars ($10.00) may be assessed in addition to the penalty imposed. 
(Code 1964, § 28-37; Ord. No. 562-80, § 1, 9-3-80)  
Sec. 21-45. - Motor vehicle liens; towing. 
The provisions of this article shall be supplementary to and shall not in any way preclude the city from utilizing the procedures specified in F.S. Chs. 713 and 715, as amended by Chapters 79-206 and 79-410, Laws of Florida, governing the towing, storage and liens for the removal and storage of motor vehicles when such vehicles are parked on real property without the property owner's consent. 
(Code 1964, § 28-38; Ord. No. 562-80, § 1, 9-3-80)  
APPENDIX A - RETIREMENT TRUST AND RETIREMENT PLAN[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix A is derived from Ord. No. 611-82, adopted May 5, 1982. Since this ordinance did not provide for the specific manner of inclusion of its provisions into the Code, it has been codified as App. A at the discretion of the editor. Only minor, nonsubstantive additions and deletions have been made, for purposes of clarity and uniformity of style. Absence of a history note following a particular section of this appendix indicates that such section derives unchanged from Ord. No. 611-82; conversely, a history note enclosed in parentheses following a particular section indicates amendment by the ordinance or ordinances shown in such history note. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, adopted May 6, 1998, amended App. A to read as herein set out. See the Ordinance Disposition Table. 
Cross reference— Pensions and retirement, § 2-121 et seq.; insurance premium taxes for police and fire department retirement, § 19-11 et seq. 
 
PART I. - RETIREMENT PLAN FOR EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY OF ROCKLEDGE 
As Amended and Restated Effective April 1, 1998  
[SECTION 1.] - INTRODUCTION [AND GENERAL PROVISIONS] 
The Retirement Plan for Employees of the City of Rockledge and the Retirement Trust for Employees of the City of Rockledge was effective November 1, 1969. This plan and trust agreement, as originally adopted and subsequently amended embodied within said documents the provisions of the city's retirement plan, which provided certain benefits, including retirement income, to employees who were eligible to participate thereunder. This retirement plan and trust, as in effect on December 31, 1981, is hereinafter referred to as the "superseded plan." 
Effective January 1, 1982 the superseded plan was amended and restated. This plan and the accompanying trust agreement, as originally adopted and subsequently amended embodied within said documents the city's retirement plan, which provided certain benefits, including retirement income, to employees who were eligible to participate thereunder. This retirement plan and trust agreement, as in effect on September 30, 1991, is hereinafter referred to as the "prior plan." 
Effective October 1, 1991 the prior plan was amended and restated. This plan and the accompanying trust agreement, as originally adopted and subsequently amended embodied within said documents the city's retirement plan, which provided certain benefits, including retirement income, to employees who were eligible to participate thereunder. This retirement plan and trust agreement, as in effect on March 31, 1998, is hereinafter referred to as the "prior plan two." 
Effective April 1, 1998, the above described prior plan two has been amended and restated as set forth in a trust agreement entered into by the City of Rockledge (hereinafter referred to as the "city") and the retirement committee, as trustee (hereinafter referred to as the "Trustee"), entitled Retirement Trust for Employees of the City of Rockledge, (hereinafter referred to as the "trust agreement"), to which this document is attached and forms a part thereof. The amended and restated retirement plan, as set forth herein, shall be known as the Retirement Plan for Employees of the City of Rockledge, (hereinafter referred to as the "plan"). The trust agreement, and any future amendments thereto, shall form a part of the plan and any amendments hereto, in the same manner as if all terms and provisions were copied herein in detail; the terms and provisions of the plan, and any future amendments hereto, shall form a part of said trust agreement, as from time to time it may be amended, in the same manner as if the same were copied in said trust agreement in detail. Words and phrases are used interchangeably in the plan and said trust agreement, as amended and restated effective April 1, 1998, and a word, term, or phrase, defined in either, is similarly defined for the purposes of the other. 
The plan as set forth herein is an amendment, restatement and continuation of the prior plan as in effect on March 31, 1998, and it is intended that there be no lapse either in time or effect between this plan and such prior plan. 
Under the prior plan two, all benefits provided thereunder were funded through the medium of a trust fund established and maintained for the purposes of the prior plan two; under the plan all benefits will be funded through the medium of a trust fund established and maintained for the purposes of the plan, for the exclusive benefit of the employees covered under the plan and their beneficiaries. 
All covered employees will be treated alike under the plan; however, it is the desire and intention of the city to preserve for the benefit of the employees covered under the prior plan two all benefits accrued to their credit thereunder as of March 31, 1998. The benefits provided under the plan for such employees are at least equal to or greater than the benefits being provided under the prior plan two as in effect on March 31, 1998. Furthermore, no rights under the prior plan two as heretofore vested have been diminished. 
The plan is applicable to each employee of the city who becomes a participant thereunder upon meeting the applicable eligibility requirements adopted by the city. Each such employee who becomes a participant and retires from service with the city on or after April 1, 1998, in accordance with the terms of the plan, will be entitled to a retirement benefit determined in accordance with the provisions of the plan. Each participant whose service is terminated on or after April 1, 1998, but prior to his retirement hereunder, will be entitled to the benefits described in section 2.5 hereof. Any employee of the city who was a participant in the prior plan two and who had reached his normal retirement date, retired due to normal retirement, early retirement, disability, death, or terminated with a vested benefit under such prior plan two on, or prior to March 31, 1998 and who was no longer in the active full-time service of the city as of such date, shall be eligible to receive the vested retirement income to which he was entitled under the prior plan two and shall not receive any additional benefits under the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98) 
 
1.1. - Definitions. 
(A)	The following words and phrases shall have the meanings stated below unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context: 
(1)	Accrued benefit: As of a given date (on or before the participant's termination of service for any reason), accrued benefit shall mean, subject to the limitations of section 2.1, the monthly retirement income computed in accordance with section 2.2(A)(1) or section 2.2(A)(2)(b) based on the participant's average monthly compensation as of such given date multiplied by the participant's number of years of credited service (subject to the limitations set forth in sections 2.2(A)(1) or 2.2(A)(2)(b), whichever is applicable) which he or she has accrued to such given date. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section 1.1(A)(1), a participant who has satisfied the requirements for early retirement as specified in section 1.1(A)(11) herein, shall have an accrued benefit not less than his largest accrued benefit after satisfying the early retirement requirements. 
A participant's accrued benefit at any moment in time on or before his normal retirement date shall be considered as payable to him commencing on his normal retirement date in the normal form of payment unless elsewhere herein modified as to right of payment, timing of payment, amount of payment, or form of payment. 
(2)	Actuarial equivalent: The equality in value of aggregate amounts expected to be received under different forms of payment. The assumptions as to interest and mortality used in such calculations shall be those in effect on the specified date. 
(3)	Anticipated average monthly compensation: The average monthly compensation determined on the assumption that the basic compensation paid the participant in the last plan year (in which he was paid for twelve (12) months of service) next preceding his date of death, termination of service, or disability, whichever is applicable, would have been paid each plan year, without change, to his normal retirement date. 
(4)	Anticipated credited service: The sum of the credited service actually earned by the participant as of the end of the plan year next preceding the date of termination of service for any reason plus the additional years and fractions thereof, from the end of the plan year next preceding such date until his normal retirement date. 
(5)	Anticipated monthly retirement income at normal retirement date: The participant's retirement income calculated as for normal retirement as set forth in section 2.2, but based on his anticipated credited service and anticipated average monthly compensation. 
(6)	Average monthly compensation: The participant's average monthly rate of basic compensation from the city for the five (5) successive plan years out of the ten (10) plan years immediately preceding the date on which his service terminates for any reason, which give the highest average monthly rate of basic compensation for the participant. The participant's average monthly rate of basic compensation will be determined by dividing the total of the basic compensation received during the five (5) plan year period by sixty (60). If there are less than five (5) plan years in total, the total basic compensation received during those plan years will be divided by the product of twelve (12) times the number of plan years. 
(7)	Basic compensation: The total compensation actually paid to a participant in a plan year by the city, excluding overtime pay in excess of three hundred (300) hours of overtime, payment for accrued annual leave, payment for accrued sick leave, payment for accrued compensatory leave, commissions, bonus payments, expense allowances, educational incentive money received by a participant and all other forms of extraordinary compensation, plus all tax deferred or tax exempt items of compensation. 
(8)	Beneficiary: If a participant is married then his spouse shall be his beneficiary for any death benefit payable under the plan. The participant may designate someone other than his spouse as his beneficiary providing the spouse has consented in writing and such consent is witnessed by the retirement committee or a notary public to waive his or her rights to any death benefit payable under the plan. Also the spouse must acknowledge on the consent form who the non-spouse designated beneficiary is and the relationship to the participant. Notwithstanding this consent requirement, if the participant establishes to the satisfaction of the retirement committee that such written consent may not be obtained because there is no spouse or the spouse cannot be located, a waiver will be deemed a qualified election. 
If a participant is not married then he may designate the beneficiary of his choice. 
(9)	City: City of Rockledge. 
(10)	Credited service: 
Employees employed prior to May 1, 1987: The total period of an employee's service computed in years and completed calendar months, from his last date of employment until his normal retirement date or, if earlier, his date of actual retirement or termination of service, except as provided in section 2.4 and the last paragraph below. 
Employees employed on or after May 1, 1987 but prior to October 1, 1991: The total period of an employee's service computed in years and completed calendar months, from his last date of participation in the plan until his normal retirement date, or, if earlier, his date of actual retirement or termination of service, except as provided in section 2.4 and the last paragraph below. 
Employees employed on or after October 1, 1991: The total period of an employee's service computed in years and completed calendar months, from his last date of employment until his normal retirement date or, if earlier, his date of actual retirement or termination of service, except as provided in section 2.4 and the following paragraph. 
The period of any absence of thirty-one (31) days or more will be excluded from an employee's credited service unless he receives regular compensation from the city during such absence and except as otherwise provided in this paragraph. The first two (2) years of any absence after the effective date of the plan due to the employee's engagement in military service will be included in his credited service if such absence is covered by a leave of absence granted by the city or is by reason of compulsory military service. An employee who was absent prior to the effective date of the plan because of his engagement in military service will be credited for the full period of such absence if such absence was covered by a leave of absence granted by the city or was by reason of compulsory military service, provided such period would otherwise have been included as credited service if the employee had been in the active service of the city. 
(11)	Early retirement date: 
General and wastewater employees: The first day of the month coincident with or next following the date an employee retires after he has both attained the age of fifty-five (55) and his credited service equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) years or he has both attained age fifty-five (55) and his credited service equals or exceeds ten (10) years, but prior to his normal retirement date. 
Police officers: The first day of the month coincident with or next following the date an employee retires after he has both attained the age of forty-four (44) and his credited service equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) years or he has both attained age fifty (50) and his credited service equals or exceeds ten (10) years, but prior to his normal retirement date. 
Firefighters: The first day of the month coincident with or next following the date an employee retires after he has both attained the age of forty-five (45) and his credited service equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) years or he has both attained age fifty (50) and his credited service equals or exceeds ten (10) years, but prior to his normal retirement date. 
(12)	Early retirement reduction factor: The factor specified in the schedule below: 
Months by Which the Early Retirement 
Date Precedes the Normal Retirement Date 
No. of 
Months 	Factor 	No. of 
Months 	Factor 	No. of 
Months 	Factor 
120 	.7000 	79 	.8025 	38 	.9050 
119 	.7025 	78 	.8050 	37 	.9075 
118 	.7050 	77 	.8075 	36 	.9100 
117 	.7075 	76 	.8100 	35 	.9125 
116 	.7100 	75 	.8125 	34 	.9150 
115 	.7125 	74 	.8150 	33 	.9175 
114 	.7150 	73 	.8175 	32 	.9200 
113 	.7175 	72 	.8200 	31 	.9225 
112 	.7200 	71 	.8225 	30 	.9250 
111 	.7225 	70 	.8250 	29 	.9275 
110 	.7250 	69 	.8275 	28 	.9300 
109 	.7275 	68 	.8300 	27 	.9325 
108 	.7300 	67 	.8325 	26 	.9350 
107 	.7325 	66 	.8350 	25 	.9375 
106 	.7350 	65 	.8375 	24 	.9400 
105 	.7375 	64 	.8400 	23 	.9425 
104 	.7400 	63 	.8425 	22 	.9450 
103 	.7425 	62 	.8450 	21 	.9475 
102 	.7450 	61 	.8475 	20 	.9500 
101 	.7475 	60 	.8500 	19 	.9525 
100 	.7500 	59 	.8525 	18 	.9550 
99 	.7525 	58 	.8550 	17 	.9575 
98 	.7550 	57 	.8575 	16 	.9600 
97 	.7575 	56 	.8600 	15 	.9625 
96 	.7600 	55 	.8625 	14 	.9650 
95 	.7625 	54 	.8650 	13 	.9675 
94 	.7650 	53 	.8675 	12 	.9700 
93 	.7675 	52 	.8700 	11 	.9725 
92 	.7700 	51 	.8725 	10 	.9750 
91 	.7725 	50 	.8750 	9 	.9775 
90 	.7750 	49 	.8775 	8 	.9800 
89 	.7775 	48 	.8800 	7 	.9825 
88 	.7800 	47 	.8825 	6 	.9850 
87 	.7825 	46 	.8850 	5 	.9875 
86 	.7850 	45 	.8875 	4 	.9900 
85 	.7875 	44 	.8900 	3 	.9925 
84 	.7900 	43 	.8925 	2 	.9950 
83 	.7925 	42 	.8950 	1 	.9975 
82 	.7950 	41 	.8975 	0 	1.0000 
81 	.7975 	40 	.9000 		
80 	.8000 	39 	.9025 		
 
(13)	Effective date of the plan: November 1, 1969. 
(14)	Employee: Any person in the regular full-time service of the city; provided, however, that such term shall not include elected officials, the city attorney, prosecutor (and assistants) or any person employed for a temporary period or for a temporary job. 
(15)	Employer: City of Rockledge. 
(16)	Firefighter: Any duly employed fire department employee in the regular full-time service of the city as defined in Florida Statute 175.032(1)(a), who within one year of employment meets the required standards of the Florida Firefighters Standards Council, as defined in Florida Statute 163.470; provided, however, that such term shall not include the mayor, city council members, the city manager, the city attorney and assistants, dispatchers, clerk typists, or any person employed for a temporary period or for a temporary job. 
(17)	Leave of absence: An absence from the active service of the city because of: sickness, disability, jury duty, compulsory military duty, a temporary layoff by the city, or any other reason on the basis of uniform policy applied by the city without discrimination. Such a leave of absence will not terminate an employee's service provided he or she returns to the active employment of the city at or prior to the expiration of the leave of absence or, if not specified therein, within the period of time which accords with the city's policy with respect to permitted absences. If the employee does not return to the active service of the city at or prior to the expiration of the leave of absence as above defined, his or her service will be considered terminated as of the date on which the leave of absence began. 
A maternity or paternity leave of absence shall mean an absence from work for any period by reason of the employee's pregnancy, birth of the employee's child, placement of a child with the employee in connection with the adoption of such child, or any absence for the purpose of caring for such child for a period immediately following such birth or placement. Such a leave of absence will not terminate an employee's service provided he or she returns to the active employment of the city at or prior to the expiration of the leave of absence or, if not specified therein, within the period of time which accords with the city's policy with respect to permitted absences. If the employee does not return to the active service of the city at or prior to the expiration of the leave of absence as above defined, his or her service will be considered terminated as of the date on which the leave of absence began. 
(18)	Normal form of payment: A monthly income payable on the first day of each month. The first payment will be made on the participant's actual retirement date and the last payment will be the payment due next preceding the retired participant's death; except that, in the event the participant dies before he has received retirement income payments for a period of 10 years, the same monthly benefit will be paid for the remainder of such 10-year period to the beneficiary designated by the participant, or if no designated beneficiary is surviving, the same monthly benefit shall be payable for the remainder of such 10-year period as provided in sections 4.2 and 4.3 hereof. Furthermore, the participant is guaranteed to receive benefits equaling his total contributions with interest. 
Any participant with a spouse shall receive retirement income in the form of a qualified joint and contingent annuity unless the participant and his spouse elect otherwise in writing. The amount of annuity payable to a participant under the qualified joint and contingent annuity shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of payment payable under the provisions of the plan. 
Any participant that is not married shall receive retirement income on a life only basis unless the participant elects otherwise in writing. 
(19)	Normal retirement date: The first day of the month coincident with or next following both the attainment of age 53 and the completion of 25 years of credited service or both the attainment of age 55 and completion of ten years of service. 
(20)	Participant: Any employee who has met the requirements of section 1.2 hereof and any retired, disabled or terminated person who has rights to benefits under the provisions of the plan. 
(21)	Participant contribution account: A separate account which will consist of mandatory participant contributions as required by section 1.3 of the plan plus credited interest. 
(22)	Plan: The retirement plan for employees of the City of Rockledge, effective November 1, 1969, as amended and restated effective January 1, 1982 and subsequently amended, and as amended and restated effective as of October 1, 1991, and subsequently amended, and as amended and restated effective April 1, 1998, as set forth in this document and as it may hereafter be amended from time to time. 
(23)	Plan year: Prior to October 1, 1984 a plan year was the twelve-month period beginning on a January 1st and ending on the next December 31st, except for the period January 1, 1984 through September 30, 1984 (nine (9) months) which shall be a short plan year. 
Effective October 1, 1984 a plan year is the twelve-month period beginning on October 1st and ending on the next September 30th. 
(24)	Police officer: Any duly employed police department employee in the regular full-time service of the city as defined in Florida Statute 185.02(1); provided, however, that such term shall not include the mayor, city council members, the city manager, the city attorney and assistants, dispatchers, clerk typists, or any person employed for a temporary period or for a temporary job. 
(25)	Prior plan: Retirement plan for employees of the City of Rockledge, as amended and restated effective January 1, 1982, and subsequently amended. 
Prior plan two: Retirement plan for employees of the City of Rockledge, as amended and restated effective October 1, 1991, and subsequently amended. 
(26)	Qualified joint and contingent annuity: An annuity for the life of the participant with a survivor annuity for the life of the participant's surviving spouse which is fifty (50) percent of the amount of the annuity payable during the joint lives of the participant and spouse. A qualified joint and contingent annuity shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of payment payable under the provisions of the plan. 
(27)	Retirement committee: The committee appointed by the city council from time to time to administer the plan pursuant to the provisions of section 6.2 hereof. 
(28)	Service: The period of an employee's employment with the city from the employee's last date of employment to the date of his or her termination of service for any reason. Any absence from the active service of the city, including but not limited to absences by reason of discharge or resignation, which is not deemed a leave of absence will be considered a termination of service. 
(29)	Single-sum value: The present value, as of a specified date, of a series of defined payments, where each payment is multiplied by the probability of survival to the time of that payment and then discounted back to the specified date at an assumed rate of interest. All computations shall be on the basis of the interest and mortality assumptions in effect on the specified date. 
(30)	Superseded plan: The retirement plan for employees of the City of Rockledge effective November 1, 1969 and subsequently amended and amended and restated effective January 1, 1982. 
(31)	Supplement: Any supplement which is attached to and made a part of the plan and shall apply only to the eligible employees described therein. 
(32)	Termination of service: The interruption of an employee's service because of any absence from the active service of the city, including, but not limited to, absences by reason of discharge or resignation, which is not deemed a leave of absence. 
(33)	Total and permanent disability: A disability which is, in the opinion of the retirement committee, due to sickness or injury and which disability is likely to be continuous and permanent from a cause other than specified in section 2.4(B) hereof. 
(34)	Trust agreement: The retirement trust for employees of the City of Rockledge, as in effect on October 1, 1991, as set forth in that trust agreement to which this plan is attached and as such trust agreement may thereafter be amended from time to time. 
(35)	Trustee: The individual trustee(s) and/or the corporate trustee(s), as the case may be, appointed from time to time pursuant to the provisions of the trust agreement to administer the trust fund maintained for the purposes of the plan. 
(36)	Trust fund: The trust fund established pursuant to the terms of the trust agreement. 
(37)	Vested percentage: The percentage determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Vesting Service 	Vested Percentage 
Less than 10 years 	0% 
10 years or more 	100% 
 
Provided, however, a participant who is also an employee who meets the early retirement provisions of section 2.3 shall be one hundred (100) percent vested regardless of the above schedule. 
(B)	The terms "herein" and "hereunder" and similar terms refer to this document, including the trust agreement which this document is a part, unless otherwise qualified by the context. 
(C)	The pronouns "he", "him" and "his" used in the plan shall also refer to similar pronouns of the feminine gender unless otherwise qualified by the context. 
(D)	The retirement committee shall provide each person receiving payment of a benefit hereunder with an officially approved notice supplied by the secretary of the treasury which specifies certain information regarding the income tax treatment of certain plan benefits. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98; Ord. No. 1175-98, § 1, 12-16-98; Ord. No. 1222-00, § 1, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 1223-00, § 1, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 1262-01, § 1, 12-19-01; Ord. No. 1366-05, § 1, 2-2-05)  
1.2. - Participation. 
The date of participation for each employee employed prior to May 1, 1985, shall be as follows: 
(A)	Each employee in the service of the city on January 1, 1982, who was a participant in the superseded plan shall participate in the plan on that date. 
(B)	Each employee in the service of the city on January 1, 1982, who had completed two (2) years of credited service and who had not attained the age of sixty (60) years as of his date of employment, shall be eligible to participate in the plan on January 1, 1982. 
(C)	Each other such employee shall participate in the plan on the date such employee completes two (2) years of credited service, provided, however, that he had not attained the age of sixty (60) years as of his date of employment. 
Employees employed on or after May 1, 1985 but prior to May 1, 1987, shall have the opportunity to elect to participate in the Plan on May 1, 1987. If an employee does not elect to participate on May 1, 1987, then he will participate upon the completion of two (2) years of credited service, provided, however, that he has not attained the age of sixty (60) years as of the date of employment. 
Any employee employed on or after May 1, 1987, who has not attained the age of sixty (60) years (age fifty-five (55) for police and fire department employees) as of the date of employment, may on the date of employment elect to participate in the plan. If the employee does not elect to participate in the plan on the date of employment he shall be given the opportunity to participate in the plan on the date of his first anniversary of employment. If the employee does not elect to participate on the date of his first anniversary of employment then the employee shall participate in the plan on the date of his second anniversary of employment. 
Effective October 1, 1991, any employee employed on or after that date shall participate in the plan on the date of employment. 
Each such employee who meets the eligibility requirements as set forth above shall, as a condition of continued employment, become a participant in the plan, make contributions to the plan as required in section 1.3 hereof, and will be subject to all other provisions in the plan beginning on such date of participation. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
1.3. - Participant's contribution account. 
Each participant will contribute toward the cost of the plan an amount equal to five (5) percent of the participant's basic compensation. Effective October 1, 1994 each general employee participant and wastewater participant shall contribute six (6) percent of the participant's basic compensation and each police department and fire department participant shall contribute seven (7) percent of the participant's basic compensation. 
Each participant shall continue to contribute to the plan until the applicable following date: 
(a)	The date the participant retires under the early, normal or late retirement provisions of the plan; 
(b)	The date of death of the participant; 
(c)	The date of disability of the participant; or 
(d)	The date of termination of service. 
Throughout the plan, where reference is made to a participant's contributions, such contributions shall include the contributions credited to his account which he has made under the superseded plan, the prior plan and the plan unless otherwise specifically indicated. 
The participant's contributions made prior to October 1, 1984 shall be credited with interest at the rate of three (3) percent, compounded annually, from the January 1st next following the date on which such contributions were made to January 1, 1982 and five (5) percent, compounded annually on a plan year basis; thereafter, from January 1, 1882 to September 30, 1984. Beginning October 1, 1984 such contributions shall be credited with interest at the rate of five (5) percent, compounded annually on a plan year basis, thereafter to the first of the month in which the date of his termination of service occurs. 
The participant's contributions made on or after October 1, 1984 shall be credited with interest at the rate of five (5) percent, compounded annually on a plan year basis, from the October 1st next following the date on which such contributions were made to the first of the month in which the date of his termination of service occurs. 
If a terminated participant who is vested elects to withdraw his contributions prior to the participant's normal retirement date, the participant will be entitled only to a return of his participant contribution account, in lieu of all other benefits payable under the plan. Contributions cannot be withdrawn while a participant remains in the service of the city or after the payment of benefits under the plan has commenced. 
Effective October 1, 1994 or at such date determined in the future, whichever is applicable, the contributions made by all participants shall be designated as city contributions pursuant to Section 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto. The "pick up" by the city of a participant's contribution which meets the requirements of Section 414(h) shall be considered Employee contributions for the purposes of Section 175.152 and Section 185.14. For all other purposes of the plan, such "pick up" contributions shall be considered employee contributions. Also, such "pick up" contributions shall not be used to reduce the city's obligation to maintain the plan on a sound actuarial basis, as specified in the actuary's valuation reports for the applicable periods of time. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
SECTION 2. - RETIREMENT AND RETIREMENT INCOME 
 
2.1. - Special provisions regarding amount of retirement income. 
The normal retirement benefit payable to a participant who becomes a participant in the plan on or after January 1, 1980 and who has not previously participated in the plan shall be limited according to the provisions of Section 112.65 of Chapter 112 of the Florida Statutes. 
The normal retirement benefit payable to a participant shall be subject to a maximum retirement income according to the following limitations: 
1.	Basic limitation. Subject to the adjustments hereinafter set forth, the maximum amount of annual retirement income payable with respect to an employee under this plan shall not exceed the lesser of: 
(a)	Ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00) (or such lesser dollar amount as may be allowable for any calendar year pursuant to Section 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto, as adjusted in such calendar year for increases in the cost of living in accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury under Section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto), or 
(b)	One hundred (100) percent of the employee's average compensation for the three (3) consecutive calendar years during which he was an active participant and had his highest aggregate compensation. "Compensation" in this case shall mean the employee's total annual compensation paid by the city in a calendar year. 
For purposes of applying the above limitation, benefits payable in any form other than a straight life annuity with no ancillary benefits shall be adjusted, as provided by treasury regulations, so that such benefits are the actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity. For purposes of this section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account: 
(a)	Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; and 
(b)	Any other benefit not required under Section 415(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of Section 415(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto. 
2.	Adjustments to limitations. In the event the employee's retirements benefits become payable before age sixty-two (62), the ninety thousand dollar ($90,000.00) limitation prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with regulations issued by the secretary of the treasury pursuant to the provisions of Section 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto, buy [but] not less than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00). 
In the event the employee's retirement benefit becomes payable before age fifty-five (55), the seventy-five thousand dollar ($75,000.00) limitation shall be reduced from age fifty-five (55) in accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the provisions of Section 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto. 
If the employee's retirement benefit becomes payable after age sixty-five (65), for purposes of determining whether this benefit meets the limitation set forth in paragraph 1.A. above, such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the benefit beginning at age sixty-five (65). This adjustment shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the secretary of the treasury or his delegate. 
The special maximum retirement income benefit limitation applicable only to police officers and firefighters at the normal retirement date shall be as set forth in Section 415(G) and (H) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto and such amount shall be adjusted in accordance with regulations promulgated by the secretary of the treasury or his delegate. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
2.2. - Normal retirement and retirement income. 
(A)	Normal retirement: Normal retirement under the plan is retirement from the service of the city, on or after the participant's normal retirement date. A participant may continue in the service of the city beyond his normal retirement date, for such period as is mutually agreeable between the city and the participant but not beyond the attainment of age seventy (70). A participant who is an employee and who has attained his normal retirement date shall be entitled to a vested percentage of one hundred (100) percent. The monthly amount of retirement income payable to a participant who retires on his normal retirement date shall be the largest of the amount computed under section 2.1(B)(1), the accrued benefit and shall be subject to the provisions of section 2.1. 
(B)	Amount of retirement income: 
(1)	To a participant who retires on his normal retirement date: The monthly amount of retirement income payable to a participant who retires on his normal retirement date shall be equal to (i) multiplied by (ii), where: 
(i)	Is 2.75 percent (.0275) of the participant's average monthly compensation; and 
(ii)	Is credited service (maximum of thirty (30) such years). 
(2)	To participant who retires after his normal retirement date: The monthly amount of retirement income payable to a participant who retires after his normal retirement date shall be the larger of (a) or (b), where: 
(a)	Is the monthly retirement income which can be provided on an actuarial equivalent basis by the sum of (i) and (ii), where: 
(i)	Is the single-sum value as of his normal retirement date of the normal monthly retirement income which would have been payable to the participant in accordance with the provisions of section 2.2(B)(1) above if he had retired on his normal retirement date, and 
(ii)	Is the amount of interest on such single-sum value in (i) above, where the interest shall be compounded annually from the participant's normal retirement date to his actual retirement date, where all computations shall be on the basis of the interest and mortality assumptions in effect on the participant's normal retirement date; and 
(b)	Is the monthly retirement income computed according to section 2.2(A)(1) above using credited service and average monthly compensation as defined herein prior to the participant's actual retirement date. 
(C)	Payment of retirement income: The monthly retirement income payable in the event of normal or late retirement will be payable in the normal form of payment unless the participant elects an optional form of payment as set forth in section 3.1. The participant is guaranteed to receive benefits equaling his total contributions with interest. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98; Ord. No. 1243-01, § 1, 4-4-01)  
2.3. - Early retirement and retirement income. 
(A)	Early retirement: Early retirement under the plan is retirement from the service of the city as of the first day of the month prior to the participant's normal retirement date but subsequent to the date as of which the participant meets the age and credited service requirements set forth in section 1.1(A)(11). In the event of early retirement, payment of retirement income will be governed by the following provisions of this section, subject to the provisions of section 2.1. 
(B)	Amount of retirement income: The monthly amount of retirement income payable to a participant who retires prior to his normal retirement date under the provisions of this section shall be an amount (subject to the provisions of section 2.1) equal to (a) multiplied by (b), where: 
(a)	Is the accrued benefit computed in accordance with 2.2(B)(1); and 
(b)	Is the applicable early retirement reduction factor set forth in section 1.1(A)(12). 
The minimum monthly retirement income for a participant who retires before his normal retirement date with twenty-five (25) years of credited service shall be sixty (60) percent of his average monthly compensation. 
(C)	Payment of retirement income: The monthly retirement income payable in the event of early retirement will be payable in the normal form of payment unless the participant elects an optional form of payment as set forth in section 3.1. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98; Ord. No. 1243-01, § 1, 4-4-01)  
2.4. - Disability retirement and retirement income. 
(A)	Disability retirement: A participant may retire from the service of the city under the plan if his service is terminated by reason of his total and permanent disability as defined in section 2.4(B) below and on or after October 1, 1987, but prior to his normal retirement date. Such retirement from the service of the city shall herein be referred to a disability retirement. In the event of disability retirement, uniformly and consistently applied rules shall be used with respect to all participants in similar circumstances and payment of retirement income will be governed by the following provisions of this section 2.4. 
(B)	Total and permanent disability: A participant may be considered disabled by the retirement committee if, in the opinion of two (2) of the three (3) following: 
(1)	A duly licensed physician selected by the retirement committee, 
(2)	A duly licensed physician selected by the participant, and 
(3)	A duly licensed physician mutually agreeable to the physicians selected in (1) and (2) above, 
such participant is so disabled as to be permanently unable to execute the regular duties of his usual course of employment with the city. 
A participant may be deemed to be partially disabled if he is able to perform the duties of such other position or job which the city makes available to him and for which such employee is qualified by reason of his training, education or experience. 
A participant will not be deemed disabled if his disability is from a cause specified in section 2.4(C) below. In any event, a participant who is disabled for non-line of duty disability must be disabled for at lease a period of five (5) months. 
(C)	Nonadmissible causes of disability: A participant will not be entitled to receive any disability retirement income if, in the opinion of the retirement committee, the disability is a result of: 
(1)	Excessive use by the participant of drugs, intoxicants or narcotics; 
(2)	Injury or disease sustained by the participant while willfully and illegally participating fights, riots, civil insurrections or while committing a felony; 
(3)	Injury or disease sustained by the participant diagnosed or discovered subsequent to the date his employment has terminated; 
(4)	Injury or disease sustained by the participant after commencing employment with the city and while working for anyone other than the city and arising out of such employment; 
(5)	Injury or disease sustained by the participant while serving in any armed forces; 
(6)	Injury or disease sustained by the participant as a result of an act of war, whether or not such act arises from a formally declared state of war; 
(7)	A condition pre-existing the employee's employment by the city. No employee shall be entitled to a disability benefit because of or due to the aggravation of a specific impairment or other medical condition pre-existing at the date of employment, provided that such pre-existing condition and its relationship to a later injury, impairment or other medical condition be established by competent substantial evidence. Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude a disability benefit to an employee who, after employment by the city suffers an injury, impairment or other medical condition different from some other injury, impairment or other medical condition existing at or prior to said date of employment. 
(D)	Proof of disability: The retirement committee before approving the payment of any disability retirement income shall require satisfactory proof, in the form of a certificate from the duly licensed physicians selected as set forth in section 2.4(B), that the participant has become disabled as provided herein. Every six (6) months after commencement of disability retirement income, or more frequently, the retirement committee may similarly require proof of the continued disability of the participant. 
(E)	Disability retirement income: 
(1)	Non-line of duty disability: 
(a)	Less than ten (10) years of service: The benefit which is payable to a participant who retires from the service of the city under the provisions of this section 2.4(E)(1)(a), due to total and permanent disability, is the monthly retirement income payable for ten (10) years certain and life thereafter which can be provided by (i) or (ii), whichever is greater, where: 
(i)	Is the single-sum value of the participant's accrued benefit, which has accrued to the date of his termination of service due to disability; and 
(ii)	Is two (2) times the basic compensation paid in the plan year immediately preceding the participant's date of termination of service due to disability; provided, however, the monthly retirement income provided by this section 2.4(E)(1)(a)(ii) shall be limited to sixty (60) percent of the participant's anticipated monthly retirement income at the normal retirement date. 
(b)	Ten (10) years of credited service or more: The monthly amount of retirement income which is payable for ten (10) years certain and life thereafter to a participant who retires from the service of the city under the provisions of this section 2.4(E)(1)(b) due to total and permanent disability, shall be the larger of the monthly retirement income determined under (i) or (ii), where: 
(i)	Is the monthly retirement income which can be provided by the single-sum value of the participant's accrued benefit, which he has accrued to the date of his termination of service due to disability; and 
(ii)	Is thirty (30) percent of the participant's basic compensation paid in the plan year immediately preceding the date of termination of service due to disability; provided, however, the single-sum value of the monthly amount so computed shall not exceed one hundred (100) times the participant's anticipated monthly retirement income at the normal retirement date. 
(2)	Line of duty disability: The benefit which is payable for ten (10) years certain and life thereafter to a participant who retires from the service of the city under the provisions of this section 2.4(E)(2), due to total and permanent disability shall be an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the participant's basic compensation paid in the plan year immediately preceding the date of termination of service due to disability; provided, however, the single-sum value of the monthly amount so computed shall not exceed one hundred (100) times the participant's anticipated monthly retirement income at the normal retirement date. 
(F)	Payment of disability retirement income: The monthly retirement income to which a participant is entitled in the event of his disability retirement will be payable on the first day of the each month. The first payment will be made on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date the retirement committee approves the participant's disability retirement. The last payment will be as follows: 
(1)	If the participant recovers from the disability prior to his normal retirement date, the last payment will be the payment due next preceding the date of such recovery; 
(2)	If the participant dies prior to his normal retirement date without recovering from his disability, the last payment will be the payment due next preceding the date of his death or the 120th payment, whichever is later. 
(3)	If the participant attains his normal retirement date while still disabled, the last payment will be the payment due next preceding the disabled participant's death or the 120th payment, whichever is later. 
Any monthly retirement income payments due after the death of a disabled participant shall be paid to the participant's designated beneficiary as provided in sections 4.2 and 4.3. 
(G)	Benefit payable in the event of death of disabled participant prior to commencement of disability income: In the event that the death of a disabled participant occurs prior to the date on which his retirement income payments are to commence in accordance with section 2.4(E) above, his designated beneficiary will receive a monthly retirement income, payable for ten (10) years certain and life thereafter. The monthly retirement income shall be payable beginning on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date of the disabled participant's death. The amount of retirement income shall be that which can be provided on an actuarial equivalent basis by (a) or (b), whichever is greater, where: 
(a)	Is the single-sum value, as of the date of the participant's death, of the participant's accrued benefit as of the date of his termination of service due to disability, and 
(b)	Is (i) or (ii), whichever is smaller, where (i) is two (2) times his basic compensation paid in the plan year immediately preceding the date of termination of service due to disability, and (ii) is one hundred (100) times the participant's anticipated monthly retirement income at the normal retirement date. 
Provided, however, in lieu of payment of such benefit in the form of the monthly income described above, the single-sum value of such benefit may be paid on an actuarial equivalent basis to the participant's designated beneficiary in such other manner and form as the participant may elect and the retirement committee may approve or, in the event no election is made by the participant prior to his death, as the beneficiary may elect and the retirement committee may approve. 
(H)	Recovery from disability: If the retirement committee finds that a participant who is receiving a disability retirement income is, at any time prior to his normal retirement date, no longer disabled, as provided herein, the retirement committee shall direct that the retirement income payments be discontinued. However, any such participant who recovers from disability and whose retirement income is discontinued by the retirement committee and who, as of the date of termination of service due to disability, had met the early retirement eligibility requirements set forth in section 1.1(A)(11) or had a vested percentage greater than zero (0) percent, shall, if he does not re-enter the service of the city, be entitled to the early retirement income or the vested deferred retirement income as provided in sections 2.3 and 2.5(A) hereof, respectively, based on his average monthly compensation and his credited service as of the date of termination of service due to disability and upon his attained age as of the date of his recovery from disability, but early retirement will be subject to consent of the city, and the amount of the retirement income upon early retirement will be reduced to take into account the participant's younger age and earlier commencement of retirement income payments as provided in section 2.3. hereof. 
(I)	Re-employment by the city: If the participant recovers from disability and re-enters the service of the city within thirty (30) days after the date of his recovery, his service will be deemed to have been continuous but the period beginning with the first month for which he received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date he re-entered the service of the city will not be considered as credited service for the purpose of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
2.5. - Benefit other than on retirement. 
(A)	Benefit on termination of service and on death after termination of service: 
(1)	In the event that a participant's service is terminated prior to his normal retirement date and on or after the time his vested percentage is more than zero (0) percent for any reason other than death, early retirement as described in section 2.3 hereof or disability retirement as described in section 2.4 hereof, he will be entitled to a monthly retirement income to commence on his normal retirement date, provided, his employee contributions remain in the plan. If the participant meets the requirements for early retirement as set forth in section 1.1(A)(11) after the date of his termination of service, the participant, if he so requests in writing and filed with the retirement committee, will be entitled to a monthly retirement income to commence on the first day of any month which is prior to the participant's normal retirement date and on or after the date on which he satisfies these requirements. Such monthly retirement income payable to a participant under the provisions of this section 2.5(A) shall be equal to: 
(a)	The product of his vested percentage at the date of his termination of service and his accrued benefit which he has accrued to the date of his termination of service. If the monthly retirement income is to commence prior to the participant's normal retirement date, the benefit in this section 2.5(A)(1)(a) shall be multiplied by the applicable early retirement reduction factory, provided, however, 
(b)	If the participant had met the requirements for early retirement as set forth in section 2.3 hereof as of the date of his termination of service, the benefit computed in (a) above will not be less than the monthly retirement income which can be provided by the single-sum value of the monthly early retirement income which would have been payable to the participant in accordance with the provisions of section 2.3 hereof if he had retired on the date of his termination of service, accumulated with interest from the date of his termination of service to the date as of which his monthly retirement income payments are to commence in accordance the provisions above. 
All computations under this section 2.5(A)(1), and also under section 2.5(A)(3) below, shall be on the basis of the interest and mortality assumptions in effect on the date of the participant's termination of service. 
(2)	The retirement income payable under section 2.5(A)(1) above will be payable on the first day of each month. The first payment will be made, if the participant shall then be living, on the date as of which the participant's retirement income payments are to commence as described in section 2.5(A)(1) above, in the normal form of payment, subject to the provisions of section 3.1 and further provided, the total payments made under this section shall not be less than the total contributions with interest. 
(3)	In the event that the terminated participant dies prior to the date as of which retirement income payments are to commence as described above (without having received, in accordance with section 3.2, the value of the benefit in section 2.5(A)(1) above), his spouse or designated beneficiary, if there is no spouse or the spouse so approves said designated beneficiary in writing, will receive the monthly retirement income, payable for ten (10) years certain and life thereafter and beginning on the first day of the month coincident with, or next following, the date of the terminated participant's death, which can be provided by the single-sum value of the benefit determined in accordance with section 2.5(A)(1) above as of the date of the participant's death, provided, however, in lieu of payment of such benefit in the form of the monthly income described above, the single-sum value of such benefit may be paid on an actuarial equivalent basis to the participant's spouse or designated beneficiary in such other manner and form as the participant may elect and the retirement committee may approve. If the payment is made to a designated beneficiary other than the spouse then payment shall be made according to section 2.5(D). 
(4)	The provisions of sections 2.1, 3.1, and 3.2 hereof are applicable to the benefits provided under this section 2.5(A) hereof. 
(5)	Except as provided in section 2.2 with respect to normal retirement, section 2.3 with respect to early retirement, section 2.4 with respect to disability retirement and section 2.5(B) with respect to death, the participant whose service is terminated prior to the date as of which he has completed ten (10) years of credited service shall be entitled only to the return of his contributions with interest at five (5) percent compounded annually to the first day of the month in which the date of termination of service occurs. 
(6)	If a participant's service with the city is terminated while he is entitled to a retirement income described in section 2.5(A)(1) above and he subsequently re-enters the service of the city, he will be entitled, upon such re-entry to the credited service he had on the date of his termination of service in lieu of the benefits to which he was entitled on such date under section 2.5(A)(1); provided, however, that the monthly retirement income payable to such participant commencing at his normal retirement date shall not be less than the amount to which he was entitled under section 2.5(A)(1) prior to his re-entry into the service of the city. Except as provided on section 2.4 hereof with respect to disability retirement and the following paragraph, any other participant will, on re-entry into the service of the city (unless he has been on leave of absence), be treated as if he then first entered the service of the city. 
A police officer or firefighter may voluntarily leave his contributions in the trust fund for a period of five (5) years after leaving the employment of the police department or fire department pending the possibility of his being re-employed by his respective department without losing his credited service prior to the date of termination of service. If the participant is not re-employed by the respective department within five (5) years of the date of termination of service, his contributions shall be returned to him with interest. 
(B)	Benefit payable in the event of death while in service on or prior to normal retirement date: If the service of the participant is terminated by reason of his death on or prior to his normal retirement date, there shall be payable to his spouse or his designated beneficiary if there is no spouse or if the spouse so approves said designated beneficiary in writing, as provided in section 1.1(A)(8) hereof, a monthly income beginning on the first day of the month coincident with or next following, the date of his death, which can be provided by (1) or (2), whichever is greater, where: 
(1)	Is the single-sum value of the participant's accrued benefit which he has accrued to the date of his death; provided, however, if the participant had met the requirements for early retirement as set forth in section 2.3 hereof, the single-sum value as used in this section shall not be less than the single-sum value of the early retirement benefit as set forth in section 2.3, which would have been payable if the participant had retired early on the date of his death; and 
(2)	Is (i) or (ii), whichever, is smaller, where (i) is two (2) times the basic compensation paid in the plan year preceding the date of death, and (ii) is one hundred (100) times the participant's anticipated monthly retirement income at the normal retirement date. 
All computations shall be on the basis of the interest and mortality assumptions in effect on the date of the participant's death. 
(C)	Benefit payable in event of death while in service after normal retirement date: If the service of a participant is terminated by reason of his death after his normal retirement date, there shall be payable to his spouse or his designated beneficiary if there is no spouse or if the spouse so approves such designated beneficiary in writing, as provided in section 1.1(A)(8) hereof, a monthly income beginning on the first day of the month coincident with, or next following, the date of his death, which can be provided on an actuarial equivalent basis by the single-sum value of the late retirement income computed as of the participant's date of death in accordance with section 2.2(B)(2). 
(D)	Manner of payment of death benefits: The normal form of payment of the death benefit provided in sections 2.5(B) and 2.5(C) is a monthly income payable for 10 years certain and life thereafter which provides monthly income payments payable for the life of the beneficiary and further provides that, in the event of such beneficiary's death within a period of ten (10) years after the participant's death, the same monthly amount shall be continued for the remainder of such ten-year period. 
In lieu of payment of such benefit in the form of monthly income described above, the single-sum value of such benefit may be paid on an actuarial equivalent basis to the participant's designated beneficiary in such other manner and form as the participant may elect and the retirement committee may approve; provided, however, the death benefit payable to a designated beneficiary other than the spouse shall be paid as set forth below. 
A participant is eligible for the death benefit upon becoming eligible to participate in the plan. Under the terms of section 2.5(B) there is no election to be made on the part of a participant to receive the death benefit. Also the death benefit payable under the terms of the plan is always greater than the pre-retirement survivor annuity benefit. The single-sum value of the death benefit computed under section 2.5(B) at the date of death is converted into a monthly income payable to the spouse or the designated beneficiary. For terminated participants the vested accrued benefit at the date of termination is converted into the single-sum value of such benefit at the date of death an this amount is converted into a monthly income payable to the spouse or the designated beneficiary. 
The term "pre-retirement survivor annuity" shall mean an annuity payable to the participant's spouse or designated beneficiary as set forth in this section 2.5 herein. 
The payment of the death benefit under the plan on behalf of any participant will: 
(1)	(a) Be distributed to him not later than the required distribution date (as defined in paragraph (3) below; 
(b)	Be distributed to him commencing not later than the required distribution date in accordance with regulations prescribed by the secretary of the treasury (i) over the life of the participant or over the lives of the participant and his designated beneficiary, or (ii) over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the participant or the life expectancy of the participant and his designated beneficiary. 
(2)	(a) If the participant dies after distribution to him has commenced but before his entire interest in the plan has been distributed to him, then the remaining portion of that interest will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used under the plan at the date of his death. 
(b)	If the participant dies before distribution to him has commenced, then, except as provided in paragraphs (2)(c) and (2)(d), his entire interest in the plan shall be distributed within five (5) years after his death. 
(c)	Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (2)(b), if the participant dies before distribution to him has commenced and if any portion of his interest in the plan is payable, (i) to or for the benefit of a designated beneficiary, (ii) in accordance with regulations prescribed by the secretary of the treasury over the life of the designated beneficiary or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary, and (iii) beginning not later than one (1) year after the date of the participant's death or such later date as the secretary of the treasury may prescribe by regulations, then the portion of his interest referred to in this paragraph (2)(c) shall be treated as distributed on the date on which such distributions begin. 
(d)	Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (2)(b) and (2)(c), if the designated beneficiary referred to in paragraph (2)(c) is the spouse of the participant, then: 
(i)	The date on which the distributions are required to begin under paragraph (2)(c)(iii) shall not be earlier than the date on which the participant would have attained age seventy and one-half (70-½); and 
(ii)	If the spouse dies before the distributions to that spouse begin, then this paragraph (2)(d) shall be applied as if the spouse were the participant. 
(3)	For purposes of this paragraph, the required distribution date means April 1 of the calendar year following the later of (i) the calendar year in which the participant attains age seventy and one-half (70-½), or (ii) the calendar year in which he leaves the employ of the city, unless he is a five (5) percent owner (as defined in section 416 (i)(1)(B) of the Code) of the city at any time during the five (5) plan year period ending in the calendar year in which he attains age seventy and one-half (70-½), in which case clause (ii) shall not apply. In the case of a participant who becomes a five (5) percent owner during any subsequent plan year, the required distribution date shall be April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the subsequent plan year ends. 
(4)	For purposes of this paragraph, the term designated "beneficiary" shall have the same meaning as the term has with respect to Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto, and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(5)	For purposes of this paragraph, the life expectancy of a participant and his spouse may be redetermined, but not more frequently than annually, provided, however, that this subparagraph (5) shall not apply in the case of a life annuity. 
(6)	No participant shall receive a distribution under circumstances that would impose an additional tax on such distribution pursuant to Section 72(t) of the Code unless and until that individual is notified, in writing, by the retirement committee of the tax and the individual, in writing delivered to the retirement committee, acknowledges receipt of the notification and nevertheless requests the distribution. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
SECTION 3. 
 
3.1. - Optional forms of retirement income. 
In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable in the event of normal retirement, early retirement, disability retirement, or termination of service as specified in sections 2.2, 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5(A) hereof, a participant, upon written request to the retirement committee, may elect to receive a retirement income or benefit commencing on the date specified in sections 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, or 2.5(A), whichever is applicable, of an actuarial equivalent value payable in accordance with one of the following options: 
Option 1: A retirement income of a larger monthly amount, payable to the participant for his or her lifetime only. 
Option 2: A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the participant during the joint lifetime of the participant and a joint pensioner designated by him, and following the death of the participant, fifty (50) percent of such monthly amount payable to the joint pensioner for the lifetime of the joint pensioner. In the event the joint pensioner predeceases the participant, the participant shall continue to receive the same monthly amount as payable during their joint lifetime. 
Option 3: Such other amount and form of retirement income payments or benefits as, in the opinion of the Retirement Committee, will best meet the circumstances of a Participant and not substantially affect the actuarial soundness of the plan. If the Participant is one of the 25-Highest Paid Participants as provided in Section 3.5, his or her election of a lump-sum form of payment shall be limited by the terms thereof. If a Participant is married and he or she elects a lump-sum payment that has a value of $3,500.00 or more and the Retirement Committee approves a lump-sum payment, then such election form shall provide for the spouse to approve, in writing, the receipt of a lump-sum payment by the Participant. 
Option 4: Deferred retirement option program. A Participant may enter into the deferred retirement option program (DROP), which program is to be created and administered by the respective board of trustees of the retirement trust fund, on the first day of any month following the attainment of Normal Retirement Age as defined herein. The maximum duration of participation in the DROP shall not exceed five (5) years and participation will end if the employee resigns, dies or is terminated for just cause prior to completion of said five (5) years. 
A Participant may participate in the DROP only once and after commencement in the DROP he or she shall not be eligible to be a contributing Participant of the retirement trust fund during such participation in the DROP. 
Upon the effective date of the commencement of participation in the DROP, membership in the retirement trust fund shall terminate and neither employee nor employer contributions shall be payable. The employee contributions to the retirement trust fund, including those picked up by the City, shall cease. For purposes of this section, average monthly earnings and creditable service shall remain as they existed on the effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP. The monthly retirement benefits that would have been payable, had the Participant elected to cease employment and receive a service retirement allowance, shall be credited to a DROP account. 
The DROP account shall earn interest at a rate equal to the Trust Fund's net rate of investment return for the year and shall be credited to each individual DROP account on a quarterly basis, unless the DROP participant, as a one time irrevocable option, elects a self-directed DROP as approved by the board of trustees. 
The DROP account shall be subject to an annual administrative fee of one (1) percent of the account balance charged quarterly (one-quarter of one percent (.25%) each quarter) calculated on the balance at the end of each calendar quarter. Such administrative fee shall be reviewed by the respective Board of Trustees annually. In the event a DROP Participant elects a self-directed DROP, then the investments, any returns thereon, and the fees for administering the self-directed DROP shall be in accordance with the self-directed DROP options selected by the DROP participant. Neither the City, the Trust Fund nor the respective Board of Trustees shall have any responsibility or liability for any of the option selected by the DROP participant. 
Participants electing a self-directed DROP must do so no later than sixty (60) days after the effective date of DROP participation. 
Upon termination of employment, a participant in the DROP shall receive, at his or her option, a lump sum payment from the account equal to the payments to the account, plus earned interest, or an annuity based upon his or her account, or the participant may elect any other method of payment if approved by the respective board of trustees to include direct trustee to trustee roll over to another qualified fund. The monthly benefits that were being paid into the fund during the period of DROP participation shall begin being paid to the retiree. 
If a participant dies during the period of participation in the DROP, a lump sum payment equal to his or her account balance shall be paid to the participant's named beneficiary, or, if none, to his or her estate; in addition, any survivor benefits selected by the participant shall be payable. 
If employment is not terminated at the end of the period specified for participation in the DROP, payments into the account shall cease and no further interest shall be earned or credited to the individual account for the duration of employment. The amount in the DROP account shall be not payable to the individual until he or she terminates employment. 
If a DROP Participant dies after the maximum period of participation in the plan but is still an employee, a lump sum payment equal to his or her account balance shall be paid to the employee's named beneficiary or, if none, to his or her estate, in addition, any survivor benefits selected by the participant shall be payable. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this section 3.1 to the contrary, any option, which provides a joint and survivor form of retirement payments or benefits pursuant to the forgoing provisions and which includes a joint pensioner who is not the spouse of the participant, will not be available hereunder unless the actuarial value of the benefits expected to be paid under such option to the participant during the remainder of his lifetime is a least equal to fifty (50) percent of the actuarial value of the benefits which would be payable under the plan in the absence of such option; and further provided that if any option is a monthly income other than a joint and survivor form of retirement payments or benefits, the monthly income payable to a participant under such form shall not be less than the monthly income payable under a payments certain and life thereafter option for the earlier of twenty (20) years or age eighty-five (85). 
The participant upon electing any option of this section will designate the joint pensioner or beneficiary to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the plan in the event of his death and will have the power to change such designation from time to time, but any such change shall be deemed a new election and will be subject to approval by the retirement committee. If a participant has elected an option with a joint pensioner and his retirement income payments have commenced, he may not change his designated joint pensioner. 
Retirement income payments will be made under the option elected in accordance with the provisions of this section and will be subject to the following limitations: 
(A)	If a participant or terminated participant dies prior to the date that his retirement income commences under the plan, no benefits will be payable under the option to any person, but benefits will be payable only as provided in sections 2.5(A)(3), 2.5(B) and 2.5(C). 
(B)	If the designated beneficiary or joint pensioner dies before the date that the participant's retirement income commences under the plan, the option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the participant as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with the provisions of this section or unless a new beneficiary or joint pensioner is designated by the participant prior to the date that his retirement income commences under the plan and within ninety (90) days after the death of the prior beneficiary or joint pensioner. 
(C)	If both the participant and the beneficiary designated by him die after the date that the participant's retirement income commences under the plan but before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period certain and life thereafter, made pursuant to the provisions of this section 3.1, the retirement committee may, in its discretion, direct that the single-sum value of the remaining payments be paid in a lump-sum and in accordance with section 4.3 hereof. 
(D)	Once retirement income payments have commenced a participant may not request a change of the amount or form of payment elected. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98; Ord. No. 1222-00, § 1, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 1223-00, § 1, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 1336-04, § 1, 1-7-04; Ord. No. 1366-05, § 2, 2-2-05)  
3.2. - Lump-sum payment of small retirement income. 
In addition to any other provision of the plan, if the single-sum value of the vested accrued retirement income is less than three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) as of the date of retirement or termination of service, whichever is applicable, the retirement committee may, in the exercise of its discretion, specify that the actuarial equivalent value of such retirement income be paid in a lump-sum or in monthly installments for a period certain of not more than sixty (60) months, where such actuarial equivalent value is based upon the mortality and interest assumptions in effect on such date. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
3.3. - Limitation on payment of retirement income. 
Notwithstanding the fact that a monthly retirement income is payable for life, if any person (other than a beneficiary) receiving a monthly retirement income should receive or become entitled to receive any compensation for personal services currently performed under substantially full-time continuous employment by the city at regular compensation, the monthly retirement income shall cease during the period for which such compensation is payable. Such monthly retirement income shall, however, be resumed again at the same rate when such compensation thereafter ceases to be payable. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
3.4. - Funding of benefits through purchase of insurance contract or contracts. 
In lieu of paying benefits from the trust fund to a participant or the participant's beneficiary, upon direction of the retirement committee, with specific prior authorization by the city, the trustee may purchase with funds in the trust fund, an individual retirement income or retirement annuity contract from an insurance company which, as far as possible, provides benefits equal to (or the actuarial equivalent of) those provided in the plan for such participant or beneficiary, whereupon such contract shall thereafter govern the payment of the amount of benefit, if any, represented by such contract which is payable under the plan upon the participant's normal retirement, early retirement, death or termination of service, and the liability of the trust fund and of the plan will cease and terminate with respect to such benefits that are purchased and for which the premiums are duly paid. Such individual retirement income or retirement annuity contract may be purchased by the trustee on a single-premium basis or on the basis of annual premiums payable over a period of years, as directed by the retirement committee and as agreed upon by the insurance company; and such individual retirement income or retirement annuity contract may be purchased, as directed by the retirement committee, at any time, on or after the participant's date of retirement to provide the benefits due under the plan to the participant or the participant's beneficiary, on or after the date of such purchase. 
No insurance company which may issue any contract upon the application of the trustee shall be required to take or permit any action contrary to the provisions of such contract; or be bound to allow any benefit or privilege to any person interested in any contract it has issued which is not provided in such contract; or be deemed to be a party to this plan for any purpose; or be responsible for the validity of this plan; or be required to look into the terms of this plan; or question any act of the retirement committee or the trustee hereunder; or be required to see that any action of the trustee is authorized by this plan. Any such issuing company shall be fully discharged from any and all liability for any amount paid to the trustee; or in accordance with its direction; and no issuing company shall be obligated to see to the application of any monies so paid by it. Any such issuing company shall be fully protected in taking or permitting any action on the faith of any instrument executed by the trustee in its name as trustee and shall incur no liability for so doing. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
3.5. - Temporary limitations on benefits required by the Internal Revenue Service. 
This section 3.5 is applicable only to those of the twenty-five (25) highest-paid employees of the city, determined as of the applicable dates specified below, whose monthly retirement income upon normal retirement would exceed one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). The term "employee" as used in this section 3.5 shall include all employees in the employment of the city who are participants in the plan on such applicable dates and all other persons in the employment of the city on such dates who may later become participants in the plan. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of any other section of the plan to the contrary, the amount of city contributions (or funds attributable thereto) which may be used to provide the benefits for any participant to who this section 3.5 is applicable, who is within the applicable group of the twenty-five (25) highest paid employees as hereinafter described, shall not exceed an amount which is equal in value to (or which is the actuarial equivalent of) the amount specified below with respect to the period for which the limitations described herein shall be applicable. 
(A)	This subsection 3.5(A) is applicable to any employee who is in the group of the twenty-five (25) highest-paid employees of the city, determined as of the effective date of the plan applicable to the city, except that the provisions of subsection 3.5(B) below shall apply to any such employee of such city who is also in the group of its twenty-five (25) highest-paid employees determined as any date that the provisions of subsection 3.5(B) are applicable. 
The amount of city contributions (or funds attributable thereto) which may be used to provide benefits for any such participant to who this subsection 3.5(A) is applicable, which may be received prior to the end of the ten-year period that next follows the effective date of the plan, shall not exceed an amount which is equal in value to (or which is the actuarial equivalent of) the larger of the following amounts: 
(1)	Twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); or 
(2)	An amount computed by multiplying the number of years elapsed since the effective date of the plan, for which the full current costs of the plan have been met, by the smaller of the following amounts: 
(i)	Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); or 
(ii)	An amount equal to twenty (20) percent of the participant's average regular annual compensation received from the city for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of such determination or, if earlier, the date of termination of service of a terminated participant, the date of retirement of a participant who has retired prior to his normal retirement date or the normal retirement date of a participant who has attained his normal retirement age whether or not he has retired under the plan; provided, however, if the full current costs of the plan have not been met at the end of the ten-year period that next follows the effective date of the plan, the above limitation will continue to apply until the full current costs have been funded for the first time. 
(B)	This subsection 3.5(B) is applicable to any employee who is in the group of the twenty-five (25) highest-paid employees of the city determined as of the date after the effective date of the plan that the plan is amended so as to produce an increase in benefits actually payable. The amount of city contributions (or funds attributable thereto) which may be used to provide the benefits for any such participant to who this subsection 3.5(B) is applicable, which may be received prior to the end of the ten-year period that next follows the effective date of such amendment, shall not exceed an amount which is equal in value to (or which is the actuarial equivalent of) the largest of the following amounts: 
(1)	The amount, if any, of city contributions (or funds attributable thereto) which would have been applied to provide the benefits for such participant if the plan as in effect immediately prior to such amendment had been continued without change; 
(2)	Twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); or 
(3)	The sum of: 
(a)	The amount, if any, of city contributions (or funds attributable thereto) which would have been applied to provide the benefits accrued to the participant on the day immediately preceding the effective date of such amendment under the provisions of the plan as in effect immediately prior to such amendment; and 
(b)	An amount computed by multiplying the number of years elapsed since the effective date of such amendment, for which the full current costs of the plan have been met, by the smaller of the following amounts: 
(i)	Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); or 
(ii)	An amount equal to twenty (20) percent of the participant's average regular annual compensation received from the city for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of such determination or, if earlier, the date of termination of service of a terminated participant, the date of retirement of a participant who has retired prior to his normal retirement date or the normal retirement date of a participant who has attained his normal retirement age whether or not he has retired under the plan; provided, however, if the full current costs of the plan have not been met at the end of the ten-year period that next follows the effective date of such amendment to the plan, the above limitations will continue to apply until the full current costs have been funded for the first time. 
The foregoing conditions will not restrict the payment of the full benefits to a beneficiary after the death of a participant whose benefits are subject to the provisions of this section 3.5 if, at the time of such death, the plan is in full effect and the full current costs thereof have been met. 
The provisions of this section 3.5 will not apply to the retirement income payable in the normal form of payment or under any optional form which does not provide a larger monthly income than a life only income to any participant retiring or receiving benefits during any period in which the plan is in full effect and the full current costs thereof have been met. 
The limitations will not apply to the payment of any survivorship income with respect to any deceased participant or retired participant who dies prior to the termination of the plan and while the full current costs thereof have been met. 
The provisions of this section 3.5 will not prevent the payment of a benefit larger than the monthly income in the normal form of payment to a participant whose benefits are restricted under this section 3.5 if the participant enters into an agreement with the trustee, adequately secured, in conformity with the requirements of the Internal Revenue Service, that should the plan terminate or should the full current costs of the plan not be met at any time prior to the end of the ten-year period that next follows the effective date of the plan or any amendment thereto applicable to the city, the participant will repay any part of the distribution which is restricted under this section 3.5. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
3.6. - Forfeitures and dividends. 
Forfeitures shall not be used to increase the benefits that any participant would otherwise receive under the plan at any time prior to the termination of the plan or the complete discontinuance of contributions to the plan but shall be anticipated in determining the costs under the plan. Likewise, any dividends under any contract issued in accordance with section 3.4 shall not be used to increase the benefits that any participant would otherwise receive under the plan but shall be anticipated in determining the costs under the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
3.7. - Benefits nonforfeitable if plan is terminated or contributions completely discontinued 
In the event that the plan is partially terminated, or contributions to the trust fund are completely discontinued, the rights of each participant in the plan to benefits accrued to such date of termination or discontinuance, shall be nonforfeitable, and such benefits shall be determined and distributed as provided in section 7.4 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
3.8. - Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions. 
This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed in the plan, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
Definitions: 
(a)	Eligible rollover distribution: An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specific period of ten (10) years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Section 401(a)(9) of the IR Code; and the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income. 
(b)	Eligible retirement plan: An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the IR Code, an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of the IR Code, an annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the IR Code, or a qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the IR Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. 
(c)	Distributee: A distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse. 
(d)	Direct rollover: A direct rollover is a payment by this plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
SECTION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS REGARDING PARTICIPANTS 
 
4.1. - Participants to furnish required information. 
Each participant, his beneficiary and joint pensioner will furnish to the retirement committee such information as the retirement committee considers necessary or desirable for purposes of administering the plan, and the provisions of the plan respecting any payments thereunder are conditional upon the participant, beneficiary or joint pensioner furnishing promptly such true, full and complete information as the retirement committee may request. 
Each participant will submit proof of his age and proof of the age of each beneficiary and joint pensioner designated or selected by him to the retirement committee at such time as required by the retirement committee. If such proof of age is not submitted as required, the retirement committee will use as conclusive evidence thereof, such information as is deemed by it to be reliable, regardless of the source of such information. Any adjustment required by reason of lack of proof or the misstatement of the age of persons entitled to benefits hereunder, by the participant or otherwise, will be in such manner as the retirement committee deems equitable. 
Any notice of information which, according to the terms of the plan or the rules of the retirement committee, must be filed with the retirement committee, shall be deemed so filed at the time that it is actually received by the retirement committee. 
The city, the retirement committee, and any person or persons involved in the administration of the plan shall be entitled to rely upon any certification, statement, or representation made or evidence furnished by an employee, participant, beneficiary or joint pensioner with respect to his age or other facts required to be determined under any of the provisions of the plan, and shall not be liable on account of the payment of any monies or the doing of any act or failure to act in reliance thereon. Any such certification, statement, representation, or evidence, upon being duly made or furnished, shall be conclusively binding upon the person furnishing same; but it shall not be binding upon the city, the retirement committee, or any other person or persons involved in the administration of the plan, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any of such parties from contesting any such certification, statement, representation, or evidence or to relieve the employee, participant, beneficiary or joint pensioner from the duty of submitting satisfactory proof of any such fact. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
4.2. - Beneficiaries. 
Each participant, on a form shall designate a beneficiary as set forth in section 1.1(A)(8) to receive the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the plan in the event of his death. Each designation may be revoked by the participant according to the provisions set forth elsewhere in the plan and by signing and filing with the retirement committee a new "designation of beneficiary" form. If a deceased participant failed to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in the plan or if a beneficiary named by a deceased participant predeceases the participant, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the plan with respect to such deceased participant may be paid, in the discretion of the retirement committee, to any one or more of the persons comprising the group consisting of the participant's spouse, the participant's descendants, the participant's parents, or the participant's heirs-at-law. The retirement committee may pay the entire benefit to any member of such group or apportion such benefit among any two or more of them in such shares as the retirement committee, in its sole discretion, shall determine, or to the estate of such deceased participant; provided, however, that in any of such cases the single-sum value of the remaining monthly income payments be paid in a lump-sum. Any payment made to any person pursuant to the power and discretion conferred upon the retirement committee by the provisions of this section 4.2 shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the plan with respect to such deceased participant and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
4.3. - Contingent beneficiaries. 
In the event of the death of a beneficiary who is receiving benefits pursuant to the provisions of the plan within any certain period specified under the plan after the participant's death, the same amount of monthly retirement income which the beneficiary was receiving shall be payable for the remainder of such specified certain period to a person designated by the participant (in the manner provided in section 4.2) to receive the remaining death benefits, if any, payable in the event of such contingency; provided, however, that if no person so designated be living upon the occurrence of such contingency, then the remaining death benefits, if any, shall be payable for the remainder specified certain period, in the discretion of the retirement committee, either to (a) all or any one or more of the persons comprising the group consisting of the participant's spouse, the beneficiary's spouse, the participant's descendants, the beneficiary's descendants, the participant's parents, the beneficiary's parents, the participant's heirs-at-law, or (b) the estate of such deceased beneficiary; provided, further, that in any of such cases the retirement committee may, in its discretion, direct the single-sum value of the monthly retirement income payments due for the remainder of the specified certain period to be paid in a lump-sum. Any payments made to any person pursuant to the power and discretion conferred upon the retirement committee by the provisions of this section 4.3 shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the plan with respect to such deceased beneficiary and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
4.4. - Participant's rights in trust fund. 
No participant or other person shall have any interest in or any right in, to or under the trust fund, or any part of the assets thereof, except as and to the extent expressly provided in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
4.5. - Benefits not assignable. 
No benefits, rights or accounts shall exist under the plan which are subject in any manner to voluntary or involuntary anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, encumbrance or charge, and any attempt to so anticipate, alienate, sell, transfer, assign, pledge, encumber or charge the same shall be null and void; nor shall any such benefit, right or account under the plan be in any manner liable for, or subject to, the debts, contracts, liabilities, engagements, torts or other obligations of the person entitled to such benefit or account; nor shall any benefit, right, or account under the plan constitute an asset in case of the bankruptcy or receivership and any such benefit, right or account under the plan shall be payable only directly to the participant or beneficiary, as the case may be; except, effective and retroactive to April 27, 2004, the recipient of any monthly benefit may authorize the board of trustees to withhold from the monthly benefit those funds necessary to pay for the benefits being received through the city, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the city, and to make any payments for child support or alimony. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraph, the retirement committee shall make payments pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order as defined in Section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto or any other applicable statute. The retirement committee shall establish procedures consistent with Section 414(p) of such Code to determine if any order received by the retirement committee, or any other fiduciary of the plan, is a qualified domestic relations order. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98; Ord. No. 1366-05, § 3, 2-2-05)  
4.6. - Benefits payable to minors and incompetents. 
Whenever, any person entitled to payments under the plan shall be a minor or under legal disability or in the sole judgement of the retirement committee shall otherwise be unable to apply such payments to his own best interest and advantage (as in the case of illness, whether mental or physical, or where the person not under legal disability is unable to preserve his estate for his own best interest), the retirement committee may in the exercise of its discretion direct all or any portion of such payments to be made in any one (1) or more of the following ways unless claim shall have been made therefor by an existing and duly appointed guardian, tutor, conservator, committee or other duly appointed legal representative, in such event payment shall be made to such representative: 
(a)	Directly to such person unless such person shall be an infant or shall have been legally adjudicated incompetent at the time of the payment; 
(b)	To the spouse, child, parent or other blood relative to be expended on behalf of the person entitled or on behalf of those dependents as to whom the person entitled has the duty of support; 
(c)	To a recognized charity or governmental institution to be expended for the benefit of the person entitled or for the benefit of those dependents as to whom the person entitled has the duty of support; or 
(d)	By the retirement committee itself receiving and expending or directing the expenditure of the same for the benefit of those dependents as to whom the person entitled had the duty of support. 
The decision of the retirement committee, in each case, will be final and binding upon all persons and, except in the case of (d) above, the retirement committee shall not be obliged to see to the proper application or expenditure of any payments so made. Any payment made pursuant to the power herein conferred upon the retirement committee shall operate as a complete discharge of the obligations of the trustee and of the retirement committee. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
4.7. - Conditions of employment not affected by plan. 
The establishment and maintenance of the plan will not be construed as conferring any legal rights upon any participant to the continuation of his employment with the city, nor will the plan interfere with the right of the city to discipline, lay-off or discharge any participant. The adoption and maintenance of the plan shall not be deemed to constitute a contract between the city and any employee or to be considered for, inducement to, or condition of employment of any person. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
4.8. - Notification of mailing address. 
Each participant and other person entitled to benefits hereunder shall file with the retirement committee from time to time, in writing, his post office address and each change of post office address, and any check representing payment hereunder and any communication addressed to a participant, a former participant, a beneficiary or a pensioner hereunder at his last address filed with the retirement committee (or, if no such address has been filed, then at his last address as indicated on the records of the city) shall be binding on such person for all purposes of the plan, and neither the retirement committee nor the trustee shall be obliged to search for or ascertain the location of any such person. 
If the retirement committee, for any reason, is in doubt as to whether retirement income payments are being received by the person entitled thereto, it may, by certified or registered mail addressed to the person concerned at his address last known to the retirement committee, notify such person that all unmailed and future retirement income payments shall be henceforth withheld until he provides the retirement committee with evidence of his continued life and his proper mailing address or his beneficiary provides the retirement committee with evidence of his death. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
4.9. - Written communication required. 
Any notice, request, instruction, or other communication to be given or made hereunder shall be in writing and either personally delivered to the addressee or deposited in the United States mail fully postpaid and properly addressed to such addressee at his last address for notice shown on the retirement committee's records. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
4.10. - Benefits payable at office of trustee. 
All benefits hereunder, and installments thereof, shall be payable at the office of the trustee. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
4.11. - Claims procedure. 
A participant or beneficiary who feels he is being denied any benefit or right provided under the plan shall have the right to file a written claim with the retirement committee. All such claims shall be submitted on a form provided by the retirement committee which shall be signed by the claimant and shall be considered filed on the date the claim is received by the retirement committee. 
Upon the receipt of such a claim and in the event the claim is denied, the retirement committee shall, within a reasonable period of time, provide such claimant a written statement which shall be delivered or mailed to the claimant by certified or registered mail to his last known address, which statement shall contain the following: 
(a)	The specified reason or reasons for the denial of benefits; 
(b)	A specific reference to the pertinent provisions of the plan upon which the denial is based; 
(c)	A description of any additional material or information which is necessary; and 
(d)	An explanation of the review procedure provided below. 
Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a notice of denial of benefits as provided above, the claimant or his authorized representative may request, in writing, to appear before the retirement committee for a review of his claim. In conducting its review, the retirement committee shall consider any written statement or other evidence presented by the claimant or his authorized representative in support of his claim. The retirement committee shall give the claimant and his authorized representative reasonable access to all pertinent documents necessary for the preparation of his claim. 
Within sixty (60) days after receipt by the retirement committee of a written request for review of his claim, or in the event of special circumstances which require an extension of time for processing such application for review, but not later than one hundred twenty (120) days after receipt of such application, the retirement committee shall notify the claimant of its decision by delivery or by certified or registered mail to his last known address. The decision of the retirement committee shall be in writing and shall include the specific reasons for the decision presented in a manner calculated to be understood by the claimant and shall contain references to all relevant plan provisions on which the decision was based. The decision of the retirement committee shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
SECTION 5. 
 
5.1. - Contributions. 
The city shall make such contributions as are required, together with contributions of the participants and other sources, to maintain the trust fund established for the purposes of the plan on a sound actuarial basis, as specified in the actuary's valuation reports for the applicable periods of time. 
Employee contributions shall be deposited to the trust fund on at least a monthly basis. The city's contributions shall be deposited on at least a quarterly basis. Monies receive under Chapters 175 and 185 shall be deposited in the trust fund within five (5) days of receipt by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
5.2. - City's contributions irrevocable. 
The city shall have no right, title or interest in the trust fund or in any part thereof, and no contributions made thereto shall revert to the city except such part of the trust fund, if any, which remains therein after the satisfaction of all liabilities to persons entitled to benefits under the plan, as described in section 7.4 hereof with respect to termination of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
5.3. - Expenses of administration. 
The city may pay all expenses incurred in the administration of the plan, including expenses and fees of the trustee, but it shall not be obligated to do so, and any such expenses and fees not so paid by the city shall be paid from the trust fund. 
Notwithstanding the above, in no event shall the city pay a fee to an individual trustee appointed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
5.4. - Amendment of plan. 
The plan may be amended from time to time in any respect whatever by ordinance of the city council specifying such amendment, subject only to the following limitations: 
(a)	Under no condition shall such amendment result in or permit the return or repayment to any city of any property held or acquired by the trustee hereunder or the proceeds thereof or result in or permit the distribution of any such property for the benefit of anyone other than the participants and their beneficiaries or joint pensioners, except to the extent provided by sections 5.3 and 7.4 hereof with respect to expenses of administration and termination of the plan, respectively. 
(b)	Under no condition shall such amendment change the duties or responsibilities of the trustee hereunder without the trustee's written consent. 
Subject to the foregoing limitations, any amendment may be made retroactively which, in the judgement of the retirement committee, is necessary or advisable provided that such retroactive amendment does not deprive a participant, without his consent, of a right to receive benefits hereunder which have already vested and matured in such participant, except such modification or amendment as shall be necessary to comply with any laws or regulations of the United States or of any state to qualify this as a tax-exempt plan and trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
5.5. - Termination of plan. 
The plan may be terminated by the city at any time by delivering to the retirement committee and the trustee, in writing, an ordinance of the city council, duly certified by an official of the city, specifying that (a) the plan is being terminated, or (b) contributions thereunder are being permanently discontinued. The plan shall automatically terminate only upon adjudication by a court of competent jurisdiction that the city is bankrupt or insolvent (whether such proceedings be voluntary or involuntary), upon dissolution of the city or upon its liquidation, merger or consolidation without provisions being made by its successor, if any, for the continuation of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
SECTION 6. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
6.1. - General fiduciary responsibilities. 
The city council, the members of the retirement committee, the trustee, any investment advisor appointed by the retirement committee, and any other person, who exercises by discretionary authority or control respecting management or administration of the plan or trust agreement or who exercises any authority or control respecting management or disposition of the assets of the trust fund, shall be deemed to be a fiduciary for the purposes of the plan and trust agreement. 
Each fiduciary may, but need not, be a council member, officer, or employee of any city and may serve in more than one fiduciary capacity. 
In implementing the procedures and purposes of the plan, each fiduciary shall act in the interest of the participants and their beneficiaries and in so doing shall endeavor to exercise the judgement and care in the circumstances then prevailing which men of prudence, discretion, and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs. 
Each fiduciary shall assume no obligation or responsibility with respect to any act or action required under the provisions of the plan or the trust agreement on the part of any other fiduciary unless such fiduciary knowingly participates in or undertakes to conceal a breach of duty committed by any such other fiduciary, it must take reasonable steps under the circumstances prevailing to remedy such breach. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
6.2. - Duties and responsibilities of the city council. 
The following list of express duties and responsibilities with regard to the city council is not intended to be either complete or conclusive, and such list shall in no manner limit the fiduciary responsibilities of the city council. 
(A)	Appointment of the retirement committee: The plan shall be administered by a retirement committee consisting of the city manager, as chairman, the fire chief, the police chief, one (1) employee member elected by the vote of the firefighters participating in the plan, one (1) employee member elected by the vote of the police officers participating in the plan, and two (2) lay members recommended by majority vote of all of the other members of the retirement committee and as a ministerial duty approved by the city council. The term of office for the firefighter member, the police officer member and each lay member shall be two (2) years. Each lay member shall be a resident of the City of Rockledge. Any member of the retirement committee except the city manager, fire chief and police chief may resign by delivering his written resignation to the city council of the City of Rockledge and to the other members of the retirement committee. In the event of resignation, or an unreasonable number of unexcused absences, or in the event of death, of the elected firefighter or police officer member, the firefighters participating in the plan or police officers participating in the plan, whichever, is applicable, shall by a majority vote elect a new firefighter or police officer member to serve the balance of the applicable term of office. In the event of resignation, or an unreasonable number of unexcused absences, or in the event of death, of a lay member of the retirement committee, all other members of the retirement committee shall by majority recommend for approval of the city council a new lay member to serve the balance of the applicable term of office. 
The retirement committee shall have the authority to control and manage the operation and administration of the plan pursuant to the provisions of section 6.3 hereof. 
(B)	Appointment of the trustee: The trust fund, established pursuant to the trust agreement, shall be managed, invested, and administered by a trustee as appointed from time to time by the city council and pursuant to the authorities and limitations for it as trustee in the trust agreement. A trustee may be one or more corporate entities, one or more individuals, or a combination of corporate and individual entities. A trustee may resign at any time upon giving written advance notice of such resignation to the city council at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such removal. A trustee shall accept and acknowledge in writing his appointment as trustee before acting in such capacity. 
(C)	Appointment of the plan administrator and the agent for service of legal process: The city council shall designate the retirement committee as the "plan administrator" and the "agent for service of legal process" within the meaning of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
6.3. - Authority, duties and responsibilities of the retirement committee. 
(A)	Action by the retirement committee: A majority of the members of the retirement committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and shall have full power to act hereunder. Any written memorandum signed by the secretary or any member of the retirement committee who has been authorized to act on behalf of the retirement committee shall have the same force and effect as a formal resolution adopted in open meeting. Minutes of all meetings of the retirement committee and a record of any action taken by the retirement committee shall be kept in written form by the secretary appointed by the retirement committee. The retirement committee shall give to the trustee any order, direction, consent, or advise required under the terms of the trust agreement, and the trustee shall be entitled to rely on any instrument delivered to it and signed by the secretary or any authorized member of the retirement committee, as evidencing the action of the retirement committee. 
A member of the retirement committee may not vote or decide upon any matter relating solely to himself or vote in any case in which his individual right or claim to any benefit under the plan is particularly involved. If, in any case in which any retirement committee member is so disqualified to act, the remaining members cannot agree, the city council shall appoint a temporary substitute member to exercise all of the powers of the qualified member concerning the matter in which the disqualified member is not qualified to act. 
(B)	Authority of the retirement committee: 
(1)	The retirement committee shall have the authority to make such rules and regulations and to take such action as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the plan and will, subject to the provisions of the plan, decide any questions arising in the administration, interpretation and application of the plan, which decisions shall be conclusive and binding on all parties. The retirement committee may delegate any part of its authority and duties as it deems expedient. 
(2)	In order to effectuate the purposes of the plan, the retirement committee shall have the power to construe the plan and to make equitable adjustments for any mistakes or errors made in the administration of the plan, and all such actions or determinations made by the retirement committee in good faith shall not be subject to review by anyone. 
(3)	The retirement committee, with approval of the city council, shall have the authority to appoint from time to time an actuary to do such actuarial, technical, and advisory work as the retirement committee may request including analysis of the experience of the plan from time to time, the preparation of actuarial tables for the making of computations thereunder, and the submission of an actuarial report each year to the city and the retirement committee which report shall contain an actuarial valuation showing the financial condition of the plan, a statement of the contributions to be made by the city for the ensuing plan year, and such other information as may be required by the retirement committee. The actuary as appointed by the retirement committee shall serve as long as it is mutually agreeable to the retirement committee and the actuary. In computing benefits to which a participant may be entitled upon early retirement, upon the exercise of optional forms of retirement benefits or upon termination of the plan, and in all other instances in which actuarial computations are required, the actuary shall use such assumptions of mortality and interest rates as were employed in the most recent actuarial valuation of the plan or, at the option of the actuary and the retirement committee as being reasonable at the time such calculations are made. The actuarial assumptions and the computation made therefrom adopted by the retirement committee shall be conclusive and binding on all persons whomsoever. 
(4)	The retirement committee, with the approval of the city council, shall have the authority to appoint from time to time one (1) or more investment advisors, upon receipt of written authorization from the city council. Each investment advisor so appointed shall have full discretion to direct the trustee with respect to the acquisition, retention, management, and disposition of the portion of the assets of the trust fund for which such investment advisor has been given the authority to administer, subject to the provisions of the trust agreement, with respect to permissible investments and subject to the provisions of the trust agreement with respect to an investment advisor. 
(5)	The retirement committee shall appoint a secretary who may, but need not be a member of the retirement committee and the retirement committee may employ such agents, clerical and other services, legal counsel and accountants as may be required from time to time for the purpose of administering the plan. 
(6)	The retirement committee shall have such other power and authority not listed above as enumerated under any other provision of the plan and trust agreement. 
(C)	Duties and responsibilities of the retirement committee: The retirement committee shall, as part of its general duty to supervise and administer the plan as the "plan administrator": 
(a)	Appoint an actuary for purposes of the plan, 
(b)	Supervise and direct the distribution of the assets of the trust fund upon termination of the plan, 
(c)	Maintain the records of the credited service and accrued benefit, if any, for each employee, terminated employee and retired employee, 
(d)	Give the trustee specific written directions with respect to: 
(i)	The payment of benefits from the trust fund, giving the names of the payees, the amounts to be paid, and the time or times when payments shall be made, 
(ii)	The making of any other payments from the trust fund which the trustee is not authorized to make without written direction from the retirement committee, 
(e)	Inform the trustee of the annual estimates of future benefits to be paid from the trust fund and furnish the trustee with such other information as is necessary for the trustee to carry out the purposes of the trust agreement, 
(f)	Prepare and furnish to each participant such forms as are required to be completed by each participant for the receipt of benefits, and 
(g)	Prepare and submit such reports as are required to be filed with the State of Florida with regard to the plan. 
The above list of express duties and responsibilities with regard to the retirement committee is not intended to be either complete or conclusive, and such list shall in no manner limit the fiduciary responsibilities of the retirement committee as to the "plan administrator." 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
6.4. - Applicable law. 
The plan will be construed and enforced according to the laws of the State of Florida and all provisions of the plan will be administered according to the laws of the said state. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
SECTION 7. - TRUST FUND 
 
7.1. - Purpose of trust fund. 
A trust fund has been created and will be maintained for the purposes of the plan, and the monies thereof will be invested in accordance with the terms of the trust agreement which forms a part of the plan. All contributions will be paid into the trust fund, and all benefits under the plan will be paid from the trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
7.2. - Benefits supported only by trust fund. 
Any person having any claim under the plan will look solely to the assets of the trust fund for satisfaction. In no event will the city or any of its officials, employees, members of its city council or agents, be liable in their individual capacities to any person whomsoever, under the provisions of the plan or of the trust agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
7.3. - Trust fund applicable only to payment of benefits. 
The trust fund will be used and applied only in accordance with the provisions of the plan, to provide the benefits thereof, and no part of the corpus or income of the trust fund will be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of participants and other persons thereunder entitled to benefits, except to the extent provided in sections 5.3 and 7.4 hereof with respect to expenses of administration and termination of the plan, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
7.4. - Termination of plan and distribution of trust fund. 
Upon termination of the plan for any reason, or upon written notice to the trustee that contributions thereunder are being permanently discontinued, the trust fund shall be apportioned and distributed in accordance with the following procedure. 
(A)	The retirement committee, under the direction of the city council, shall determine the date of distribution and the asset value to be distributed, after taking into account the expenses of such distribution. 
(B)	The retirement committee, under the direction of the city council, shall determine the method of distribution of the asset value - that is, whether distribution shall be by payment in cash, by transfer to individual retirement accounts established under Section 408 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto, by the maintenance of another or substitute trust fund, by the purchase of insured annuities, or in kind based on the then market value - for each class of participants and other persons entitled to benefits under the plan, as specified in (C) below. 
(C)	The retirement committee, under the direction of the city council, shall apportion the asset value as of the date of termination of the plan in the manner set forth below, on the basis that the amount required to provide any given retirement income shall mean the actuarially computed single-sum value of such retirement income; except that if the method of distribution determined under (B) above involves the purchase of an insured annuity, the amount required to provide the given retirement income shall mean the single-premium payable for such annuity: 
(1)	An amount equal to the participant contribution account less the aggregate of any retirement income payments made with respect to such participant will be determined, and such amount will be apportioned from the asset value. Such asset value, if insufficient to provide such amount in full, will be apportioned among such participants in proportion to the amounts determined with respect to them. 
(2)	If there be any asset value remaining after apportionment under (1), apportionment shall next be made with respect to each retired participant receiving a retirement income hereunder on such date, each person receiving a retirement income on such date on account of a deceased participant or a retired (but since deceased) participant and each participant who has, by such date, become eligible for normal retirement but has not yet retired, in the amount to provide such retirement income less any apportionment in (1) above; provided, however, that if the asset value be less than the aggregate of such amounts, such amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to the asset value. 
(3)	If there be any asset value remaining after the apportionment under (1) and (2) above, apportionment shall next be made with respect to each participant in the service of the city on such date who is not entitled to an apportionment under (2) above but who has satisfied the requirements for early retirement in the amount required to provide the actuarial equivalent single-sum value of the participant's accrued benefit as of the date of termination of the plan, (i.e., the actuarial equivalent single-sum value of the retirement income which the participant would have been entitled to receive had the participant retired early on the date of termination of the plan) less any apportionment made under (1) above, and to each former participant then entitled to a benefit under the provisions of section 2.5(A) hereof who has not, by such date, reached his normal retirement date, in the amount required to provide the actuarial equivalent single-sum value of the accrued benefit to which the participant is entitled under section 2.5(A) hereof less any apportionment made in (1) above; provided, however, that if such remaining asset value be less than the aggregate of the amounts thus apportioned hereunder, such latter amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to the remaining asset value. 
(4)	If there be asset value remaining after the apportionment under (1), (2) and (3) above, apportionment shall lastly be made with respect to each participant in the service of the city on such date who is not entitled to an apportionment under (2) or (3) above, in the amount required to provide the actuarial equivalent single-sum value of the participant's accrued benefit as of the date of termination of the plan, less any apportionment made under (1) above; provided, however, that if such remaining asset value be less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned hereunder, such latter amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(5)	In the event that there be asset value remaining after the full apportionments specified in (1), (2), (3) and (4) above, such excess shall be returned to the city. 
(D)	The retirement committee, under the direction of the city council shall direct the trustee to distribute, in accordance with the manner of distribution determined under (B) above, the amounts apportioned under (C) above. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
SECTION 8. 
 
8.1. - Signature page. 
In witness whereof, the City of Rockledge, as employer, has caused these presents to be executed by its duly authorized officers on this the 7th day of May, 1998, effective as April 1, 1998. 
ATTEST: 	CITY OF ROCKLEDGE, 
as Employer 
/s/  Betsi Beatty Moist 
City Clerk 	
	By:/s/  John J. Oates 
Mayor 
  
PART II. - RETIREMENT TRUST FOR EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY OF ROCKLEDGE 
As Amended and Restated Effective April 1, 1998 
RETIREMENT TRUST FOR EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY OF ROCKLEDGE 
As amended and restated effective April 1, 1998 
This agreement is made and entered into this 7th day of May, 1998 by and between the City of Rockledge, (hereinafter referred to as the "city"), and the retirement committee, as trustee (hereinafter referred as the "trustee"); and shall be effective April 1, 1998; 
Witnesseth: 
Whereas, the City of Rockledge entered into the retirement plan for Employees of the City of Rockledge and the retirement trust for employees of the City of Rockledge by enactment of Ordinance No. 261-70, effective November 1969 and said documents were subsequently amended and then amended and restated effective January 1, 1982 by Ordinance No. 611-82. The amended and restated plan and trust agreement were subsequently amended; and 
Whereas, effective October 1, 1991 the city deemed it desirable to amend and restate its retirement program to incorporate all amendments made since January 1, 1982 plus make other administrative changes deemed desirable and such changes are permitted under the documents which embodied the provisions of the plan and trust agreement; and 
Whereas, in order to amend and restate such retirement program it was desirable to restate in its entirety the aforesaid instrument, as heretofore in effect, in amended form and in two parts; one part, as set forth in the document attached hereto and which shall hereafter be known as the Retirement Plan for Employees of the City of Rockledge, (hereinafter referred to as the "plan"), containing a description of the plan as it shall hereafter be in effect, and the other part, as set forth in this document, which shall hereafter be known as the Retirement Trust for Employees of the City of Rockledge (hereinafter referred to as the "trust agreement"), containing only those provisions which pertain to the trust agreement, the trust fund, and the powers, duties and responsibilities of the trustee in connection therewith; and 
Whereas, effective October 1, 1994 the city removed Barnett Banks Trust Company, N.A. as trustee and appointed the retirement committee as trustee of the trust fund already created and the trustee was willing to so act pursuant to the terms of the trust agreement; 
Now therefore, for the purposes of consummating the amendment and restatement of the trust agreement, the city and the trustee do hereby agree as follows:  
ARTICLE I. - NAME, AMENDMENT OF TRUST AND ACCEPTANCE BY TRUSTEE 
1.	This trust agreement and the trust fund it evidences shall, on and after April 1, 1998, be referred to as the Retirement Trust for Employees of the City of Rockledge, and the provisions of the Retirement Plan for Employees of the City of Rockledge which is attached hereto, is made a part hereof by reference. The plan, and any future amendments thereto, shall form a part of this trust agreement, and any amendments hereto, in the same manner as if all terms and provisions thereof were copied herein in detail; the terms and provisions of this trust agreement, and any future amendments hereto, shall form a part of the plan, as from time to time amended, in the same manner as if the same were copied in the plan in detail; and all terms not explicitly defined in this trust agreement shall be construed as defined in the plan which is attached hereto. 
2.	The plan and trust agreement are an amendment and restatement as of April 1, 1998 of the documents describing the retirement plan for employees of the City of Rockledge and the retirement trust for employees of the City of Rockledge and the trust fund evidenced by this trust agreement is a continuation of the trust fund created under the superseded plan, the prior plan and prior plan two and their respective trust agreements. 
3.	The assets which are held under the provisions of the aforementioned prior plan and trust agreement immediately prior to the date of execution hereof, together with all cash and other property hereafter added thereto, shall constitute the trust fund. By execution of the trust agreement, Barnett Banks Trust Company, N.A. accepted the provisions hereof and agreed to hold and administer all monies and other property which comprise the assets of the trust fund and which are maintained by it as trustee hereunder, as well as any trust fund property hereafter received by the trustee for the uses and purposes herein expressed. 
4.	Effective October 1, 1994 the assets which are held in the trust fund under the terms of the trust agreement shall be transferred by Barnett Banks Trust Company, N.A. to the retirement committee as trustee, together with all cash and other property hereafter added thereto, shall constitute the trust fund. By execution of this trust agreement, the retirement committee as trustee accepts the provisions hereof and agrees to hold and administer all monies and other property which, comprise the assets of the trust fund and which are maintained by it as trustee hereunder, as well as any trust fund property hereafter received by the trustee for the uses and purposes herein expressed. 
5.	Effective April 1, 1998 the assets which are held in the trust fund under the terms of the trust agreement shall constitute the trust fund. By execution of this trust agreement, the retirement committee as trustee accepts the provisions hereof and agrees to hold and administer all monies and other property which, comprise the assets of the trust fund and which are maintained by it as trustee hereunder, as well as any trust fund property hereafter received by the trustee for the uses and purposes herein expressed. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
ARTICLE II. - CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TRUST FUND 
1.	Subject to the provisions of Article IX hereof, the city on behalf of itself and its employees, intends (but is not required), from time to time, to deliver or cause to be delivered to the trustee such amounts of cash and other property acceptable to the trustee as the city, in its sole discretion, deems necessary to comply with the provisions of the plan and to meet the minimum funding requirements, as specified in the actuary's valuation report for the period for which such cash and other property are delivered. All such amounts received by the trustee from an city shall constitute one common fund and may be commingled. Unless the context clearly implies or indicates the contrary, the term "trust fund" comprises all property of every kind held by the trustee, from time to time, pursuant to this trust agreement. The trustee shall have no duty, express or implied, to compel any payment to be made to it by the city or otherwise be responsible for the adequacy of the trust fund to meet and discharge any liabilities under the plan and shall be accountable only for cash and other property actually received by it. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
ARTICLE III. - PAYMENTS FROM THE TRUST FUND 
1.	Payments shall be made from the trust fund by the trustee to such persons, in such manner, at such times, and in such amounts as the retirement committee, established by the city council to administer the plan pursuant to the provisions thereof, may from time to time direct in writing; provided, however, that the trustee may withhold compliance with the retirement committee's direction to the extent that, and so long as, the trustee shall deem such withholding necessary to insure payment of the trustee's expenses or to protect the trustee against liability for taxes or any other liability. 
2.	The city shall promptly notify the trustee of the names of the members of the retirement committee as of the date of this trust agreement and of any subsequent changes in the retirement committee. In the absence of any notification of changes, the trustee may assume that the retirement committee is the same as last reported by the city to the trustee. The retirement committee shall furnish the trustee with all necessary factual information required by it to perform its duties as trustee hereunder, and the trustee shall not be required to verify the facts so furnished by the retirement committee. The trustee, in following the directions of the retirement committee, is authorized to act upon instructions of the secretary of the retirement committee or any member of the retirement committee that the retirement committee, by a majority thereof, shall designate in writing, and shall not be liable for its acts with respect to payments from the trust fund when following such instructions or directions or for failure to act in the absence of such instructions or directions. The trustee shall not be liable or responsible for any payment made by it in good faith and in the exercise of reasonable care without knowledge of the changed conditions or status of the payee. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
ARTICLE IV. - INVESTMENT OF THE TRUST FUND 
1.	The trust fund, except such estimated amounts as in the opinion of the trustee are required by current payments and expenses, and except such amounts as are used to invest in real estate or insurance, if any, shall be invested and reinvested by the trustee without distinction between principal and income. The trustee is authorized to invest and reinvest the trust fund in such property, real, personal or mixed, either within or without the state comprising the situs of the trustee, unless specifically prohibited by law or by the provisions of the trust agreement, or in such investments to include without limitation: bonds, notes, debentures, mortgages, equipment trust certificates, investment trust certificates preferred or common stock, real estate, savings and loan accounts, investment trusts, insurance policies on the lives of participants in the plan payable to the trust fund, or the trustee may, to the extent it deems it advisable, invest in any common trust fund for qualified employee benefit trusts maintained by any bank in the United States acting as trustee hereunder. The trustee shall not cause or permit the trust fund to engage in a transaction with a party-in-interest, as defined in the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, which is prohibited under the provisions of said Act. The trustee shall not acquire or hold in the trust fund any assets outside the jurisdiction of the district courts of the United States. 
2.	With specific prior authorization in writing, from the city, the retirement committee shall have the right, but shall be under no obligation, to appoint an investment advisor to direct the investment of all or any portion of the assets of the trust fund. In the event the retirement committee exercises this right, the retirement committee shall certify to the trustee and such investment advisor the scope of the duties and responsibilities of the investment advisor. Such investment advisor shall be either registered as an investment advisor under the Investment Advisor's Act of 1940 or a bank as defined in that Act. Upon its appointment, the investment advisor shall certify and acknowledge to the retirement committee and the trustee that he has a copy of the trust agreement and the plan, that he is a fiduciary with respect to such plan and trust agreement, and that he has assumed the duties and responsibilities conferred upon him by the retirement committee. 
3.	The retirement committee, or any investment advisor duly appointed and authorized by the retirement committee, shall, subject to the provisions of this trust agreement with respect to permissible investments, have the right, but shall be under no obligation, to direct the trustee to purchase or not to purchase or to retain or to sell such property, real or personal, or such investments, either as a class or as an individual item of investment, as the retirement committee or such investment advisor, as the case may be, in its sole discretion, shall designate, and the trustee shall not be liable for its acts in following such direction unless it is clear that the actions to be taken under such directions are prohibited by the fiduciary responsibility rules of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 or are contrary to the terms of this trust agreement. Except to the extent that the trustee from time to time receives directions under this paragraph from the retirement committee or such investment advisor, the trustee shall be authorized to administer the trust fund without regard to this paragraph. 
4.	With specific prior authorization in writing from the city, the retirement committee may direct the trustee to enter into a contract or contracts or an agreement or agreements with one or more legal reserve life insurance companies for the purchase of retirement income or retirement annuity contracts, in such manner and in such form as may be appropriate by the retirement committee, as provided in the plan, and the trustee shall not be liable for its acts in following such directions. Except to the extent the trustee from time to time receives directions under this paragraph from the retirement committee, the trustee shall be authorized to administer the trust fund without regard to this paragraph. 
5.	In purchasing investments, and in directing the trustee to purchase investments, the trustee, the retirement committee and any investment advisor duly authorized by the retirement committee shall each endeavor to exercise and discharge its duties and carry out these purposes with the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent man acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of like character with like aims by diversifying the investments of the plan so as to minimize the risk of large losses, unless under the circumstances it is clearly prudent not to do so, and in accordance with the provisions of the trust agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
ARTICLE V. - POWERS OF THE TRUSTEE 
1.	Subject to the provisions of Article IV, the trustee is authorized and empowered: 
(a)	To sell, exchange, convey, transfer or dispose of and also to grant options with respect to any property, whether real or personal, at any time held by it, and any sale may be made by private contract or by public auction, and no person dealing with the trustee shall be bound to see to the application of the purchase money or to inquire into the validity, expediency or propriety of any such sale or other disposition; 
(b)	To retain, manage, operate, repair and improve and to mortgage or lease for any period and on such terms as the trustee shall deem proper any real estate or personal property held by the trustee, including power to demolish any buildings or other improvements and to make leases that may extend beyond the term of the trust agreement; and to foreclose, extend, renew, assign, release or partially release and discharge mortgages or other liens; 
(c)	To compromise, compound and settle any debt or obligation due from third persons to it or to third persons from it as trustee hereunder, and to reduce the rate of interest on, to extend or otherwise to modify or to foreclose upon default or otherwise to enforce such obligation; 
(d)	To vote in person or by proxy, with or without power of substitution, on any stocks, bonds, or other securities held by it; to exercise any options appurtenant to any stocks, bonds or other securities, or to exercise any rights to subscribe for additional stocks, bonds, or other securities and to make any and all necessary payments thereof; to join in, dissent from or oppose the reorganization, recapitalization, consolidation, sale or merger of corporations or properties in which it may be interested as trustee, upon such terms and conditions as it may deem wise and to accept any securities which may be issued upon any such reorganization, recapitalization, consolidation, sale or merger and thereafter to hold the same; 
(e)	To make, execute, acknowledge and deliver any and all deeds, leases, assignments, documents of transfer and conveyance, documents of release and satisfaction and any and all other instruments that may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the powers herein granted; 
(f)	To enforce any right, obligation or claim in its discretion and in general to protect in any way the interest of the trust fund, either before or after default; and in the case it shall consider such action for the best interest of the trust fund, to abstain from the enforcement of any right, obligation or claim, to abandon any property, whether real or personal, which at any time may be held by it; 
(g)	To cause any investment in the trust fund to be registered in, or transferred into, its name as trustee, or in the name or names of its nominee or nominees, or to retain them unregistered or in a form permitting transferability by delivery, but the books and records of the trustee shall at all times show that all such investments are part of the trust fund; 
(h)	To retain in cash or other property unproductive of income such portion of the trust fund as deemed advisable, without liability therefore; 
(i)	If a bank, to deposit in its commercial banking department that portion of the trust fund as deemed advisable, without liability for the payment of any interest thereon; 
(j)	To acquire property returning no income or slight income, or retain any such property so long as the trustee shall deem advisable; 
(k)	To consult with counsel, who may be counsel to the city, and in so doing shall be fully protected in acting upon the advice of such counsel; 
(l)	To continue to exercise any powers and discretion herein granted for a reasonable time after the termination of the trust agreement; 
(m)	To utilize, if an individual or individuals, the facilities of any bank, as a depository; and 
(n)	To perform all acts which it may deem necessary or proper and to exercise any and all powers of the trustee under this agreement upon such terms and conditions as it may deem for the best interest of the trust fund. 
2.	In addition to the powers and authorities herein elsewhere granted, except as herein expressly provided otherwise the trustee shall have the powers, authorities and discretion set forth in the laws of the state comprising the situs of the trustee insofar as applicable hereto. The powers and authorities granted to the trustee shall not be limited by the fact that such trustee may be a bank or other financial institution, and no trustee duly appointed, qualified and acting hereunder shall be subject to limitations or restrictions imposed upon a bank or other financial institution or upon fiduciaries generally with respect to the type of investment any such institution or trustee may make of its own funds or the funds of others except to the extent provided under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. Specifically, such trustee may retain, acquire or otherwise deal in stock for which it is registrar, transfer agent, and the like, may deposit funds with itself as trustee and as a bank or between itself as trustee and any other institution for which it then, therefore or thereafter may be acting as trustee, subject to the laws of the state comprising the situs of the trustee and subject to the provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. 
3.	Whenever and as often as the trustee deems such action desirable, it may by written instrument appoint any person or corporation in any state of the United States to act as ancillary trustee with respect to any portion of the trust fund assets then held or about to be acquired on behalf of the trustee. If the trustee deems an ancillary trustee desirable, the trustee shall then notify the retirement committee of its decision. Each such ancillary trustee shall have such rights, powers, duties and discretion permitted under the terms of this trust agreement as are delegated to it by the trustee, but shall exercise the same subject to such limitations or further directions of the trustee as shall be specified in the instrument evidencing its appointment. The ancillary trustee may resign or may be removed by the trustee, as to all or any portion of the assets so held at any time or from time to time, by written instrument delivered one to the other, and the trustee may thereupon appoint another ancillary trustee or successor to whom the assets shall be transferred, or may itself receive such assets in termination of the ancillary trusteeship to that extent. Such ancillary trustee shall be accountable to the trustee and shall be entitled to reasonable compensation as agreed between it and the city. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
1.	The trustee shall maintain, with respect to the city to which this trust agreement is applicable, true and accurate records and accounts reflecting all receipts and disbursements made by it pursuant to this trust agreement and containing a description of all assets from time to time held by it hereunder. Such records and accounts shall be open to the inspection of the retirement committee and the city at all reasonable times and maybe audited from time to time by such person or persons as the retirement committee or the city may designate. Within sixty (60) days after the end of each plan year, and at such other times as the city may request in writing filed with the trustee, the trustee shall deliver to the city a report and account in writing, a copy of which shall also be delivered to the retirement committee, covering the period from the last previous report and account, in such form and detail as the city may request, and the approval of any such report and account by the city council shall be a full acquittance and discharge of the trustee with respect to the matters therein set forth. Upon the expiration of ninety (90) days from the date of filing such annual or other report and account, or upon the earlier specific approval thereof as provided above, the trustee shall be forever released and discharged from all liability and accountability, except for actual fraud or a breach of fiduciary responsibility by failure to abide by the terms of this trust agreement, to anyone with respect to the property of its acts and transactions except with regard to those as to which the city shall within such ninety-day period file written objections with the trustee. Nothing herein contained, however, shall be deemed to preclude the trustee from its right to have its accounts judicially settled by a court of competent jurisdiction, in which event only the trustee and the city shall be necessary parties. 
2.	The trustee may employee such agents, attorneys (who may be counsel to the city), auditors, clerical and other assistants as, in its judgement, may be necessary or desirable for the proper administration of the trust fund and to advise the trustee hereunder, and pay them a reasonable compensation from the trust fund, and may delegate to any person so employed any ministerial power or duty of the trustee. 
3.	The trustee may institute, maintain or defend any litigation necessary in connection with the administration of the trust fund, provided the trustee shall be under no duty or obligation to do so unless it shall have been indemnified to its satisfaction against all expenses and liabilities which it may sustain or reasonably anticipate by reason thereof, and unless the trustee shall be paid a reasonable compensation for its own extraordinary services in connection therewith. 
4.	The trustee shall be reimbursed for all of its expenses and, unless the trustee is an individual or individuals employed by the city, shall be paid such reasonable compensation as may be agreed upon from time to time by the city and the trustee. Such expenses and compensation shall be paid from the trust fund if not paid by the city. 
5.	No person shall be obliged to see to the application of any money or property delivered to the trustee, nor shall any such person be required to take cognizance of the provisions of this trust agreement. The certificate of the trustee, duly executed, may be received by any person dealing with the trustee as conclusive evidence of any matter relating to this trust agreement or the administration thereof. In general, each person dealing with the trustee may act upon any advice, request or representation in writing by the trustee, or the trustee's duly authorized agent, and shall not be liable to any person in so doing. In case of doubt as to whether the trustee has or has not been granted a specific power not enumerated hereunder, the certificate of the trustee that the exercise of such power is necessary or desirable for the proper administration or distribution of the trust fund shall be conclusive upon all persons dealing with the trustee to the same extent as if such power had been specifically granted to the trustee. 
6.	If the assets held by the trustee hereunder, or any benefits payable by the trustee hereunder, shall become liable for the payment of any estate, inheritance or income tax, which in the trustee's opinion, it shall be or may be required to pay, the trustee shall have full power and authority to pay such tax, out of any monies or other property in its hands for the account of the person whose interests hereunder are liable for such tax, but at least ten (10) days prior to making any such payment, the trustee shall mail a notice to the retirement committee of its intention to make such payment. The trustee, also, prior to making any payment to any beneficiary hereunder, may require such releases or other documents from any lawful taxing authority and may require such indemnity from such beneficiary as it shall deem necessary for its protection. 
7.	The trustee may require any certificate, notice or other instrument or information believed by it to be necessary to perform its duties hereunder, and may rely and act upon the basis of any such certificate, notice, instrument or other information furnished to the trustee which it believes to be reliable and to have been signed, made or presented by the proper party or parties, except that any action herein permitted or required to be taken by the city shall be by resolution of its city council to take such action. 
8.	The retirement committee shall furnish to the trustee all the information necessary for the trustee to carry out the purposes of the trust agreement. This shall include, but shall not be limited to, annual estimates of the future benefits to be paid from the trust fund and shall also include other information regarding the plan and its participants that the trustee may regard as necessary to carry out its functions. 
9.	The trustee shall not be liable for its actions in making payment or delivery of any cash or other property at the direction of the retirement committee, and, in the event of litigation, actual or threatened, the trustee shall not be liable for declining to make delivery thereof until final adjudication shall have been made by a court of competent jurisdiction or by agreement of the parties. All costs and expenses of such litigation shall be paid by the city. 
10.	The trustee shall be under no duty to inquire into any rule, regulation, instruction, direction or order purporting to have been issued by the retirement committee, or by a member of the retirement committee designated by the majority of the retirement committee as authorized to instruct the trustee; and any certificate duly signed by the secretary or such member of the retirement committee, purporting to evidence any such instruction, direction or order, shall be accepted by the trustee as conclusive proof thereof. The trustee shall also be fully protected in acting in good faith upon any notice, resolution, instruction, direction, order, certificate, opinion, letter, telegram, or other document believed by the trustee to be genuine and to be the act of the retirement committee. 
11.	The city intends that the trust agreement herein established for the purpose of implementing the plan shall qualify under Sections 401 and 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and amendments thereto; and shall until advised to the contrary in writing, the trustee may assume that the trust agreement is so qualified and is entitled to the exemption from taxes provided for in said sections. In the event the trustee at any time bona fide believes such exemption to be uncertain, the trustee may, but is not required to, take such steps and withhold such payments as it deems necessary to protect itself and to preserve the assets of the trust fund. 
12.	Only such bond or bonds as may be required by an applicable law or statute of the United States or of any state having appropriate jurisdiction, which may not under such law or statute be waived by the parties to this trust agreement, shall be required of any trustee, successor trustee, ancillary trustee or other fiduciary hereunder. 
13.	The trustee shall establish a checking account with a bank for the payment of any benefit or expense from the trust fund. The trustee shall appoint the chairman, vice chairman and secretary of the retirement committee and the city treasurer as those persons authorized to sign any check. Each check issued from this account shall require the signature of any two (2) of the above designated persons holding said positions. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
ARTICLE VII. - SUBSTITUTION OF TRUSTEE 
1.	There shall be one (1) or more trustees (individual and/or corporate), as determined from time to time be the city council. When there is more than one trustee, action by the trustees shall be determined by the majority of the trustees. Such action shall be binding upon all parties at interest. The trustees may act by vote at a meeting or in writing without a meeting. Any act of the trustee or trustees shall be sufficiently evidenced if certified to by a trustee, and, if there is more than one (1) trustee, one (1) of the trustees may be given authority to perform all administrative and ministerial duties. Each trustee shall serve until a successor trustee shall be named by the city council or until his and/or their resignation, death, incapacity or removal, in which event such city council shall name a successor trustee. An individual trustee otherwise eligible to participate in the plan and trust agreement shall not be excluded on the grounds that he is an individual trustee. The word "trustee" as used herein shall include the original and any successor trustee or trustees, whether corporate or individual. 
2.	A trustee may resign at any time upon giving thirty (30) days prior written notice to the city, or, with the consent of the city council, a trustee may resign with less than thirty (30) days prior written notice. 
3.	The city council may remove a trustee by giving at least thirty (30) days prior written notice to such trustee. 
4.	Upon such removal or resignation of a trustee, the city council shall (if there are no trustees remaining) or may (if there are trustee remaining) appoint and designate a successor trustee which shall be one (1) or more individual successor trustees, or a bank or trust company organized under the laws of the United States or of any state hereof, with authority to accept and execute trusts. Any successor trustee must accept and acknowledge in writing its appointment as a successor trustee before it can act in such capacity. 
5.	Title to all property and records or true copies of such records necessary to the current operation of the trust fund held by the trustee hereunder shall vest in any successor trustee acting pursuant to the provisions hereof, without execution or filing of any further instrument. Any resigning or removed trustee shall execute all instruments and do all acts necessary to vest such title in any successor trustee of record. Each successor trustee shall have, exercise and enjoy all the powers, both discretionary and ministerial, herein conferred upon his predecessor. No successor trustee shall be obliged to examine the accounts, records and acts of any previous trustee or trustees, and each successor trustee in no way or manner shall be responsible for any action or omission to act on the part of any previous trustee. 
6.	Any corporation resulting from any merger or consolidation to which the trustee may be a party, or succeeding to the trust business of the trustee, or to which substantially all the trust assets of the trustee may be transferred, shall be the successor to the trustee hereunder without further act or formality with like effect as if such successor trustee had originally been named trustee herein; and in any event it shall not be necessary for the trustee or any successor trustee to give notice thereof to any person, and any requirement, statutory or otherwise, that notice shall be given is hereby waived. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
ARTICLE VIII. - FIDUCIARY DUTIES 
1.	The city council, the members of the retirement committee, the trustee, any investment advisor appointed by the retirement committee, and any other person who exercises any discretionary authority or control respecting management of the plan or trust agreement, exercises any authority or control respecting the management or disposition of assets of the trust fund or has any discretionary authority or responsibility in the administration of the plan and trust agreement shall be deemed to be a "fiduciary" for the purposes of the plan and trust agreement. 
2.	Each fiduciary may, but need not, be a council member, officer or employee of the city and may serve in more than one fiduciary capacity. 
3.	In implementing the procedures and purposes of the plan, each fiduciary shall act in the interest of the participants and their beneficiaries and in so doing shall endeavor to exercise the judgement and care in the circumstances then prevailing which men of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs. 
4.	Each fiduciary shall assume no obligation or responsibility with respect to any act or action required under the provisions of this trust agreement or the plan on the part of any other fiduciary unless such former fiduciary knowingly participates in or undertakes to conceal a breach of duty committed by any other fiduciary. If any fiduciary has knowledge of any such breach of duty by another fiduciary it must take reasonable steps under the circumstances prevailing to remedy such breach. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
ARTICLE IX. - AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION 
1.	This trust agreement may be amended from time to time in any respect whatever by delivery to the trustee of a copy of the ordinance of the city council specifying such amendment, subject to the following limitations: 
(a)	Under no condition shall such amendment or amendments result in or permit the return or repayment to the city of any property held or acquired by the trustee hereunder, or the proceeds thereof, or result in or permit the distribution of any such property for the benefit of anyone other than employees of the city who are beneficiaries under the plan, except to the extent provided for by paragraph 3 of Article X. 
(b)	Such amendment or amendments shall become effective only upon execution by the trustee and shall not increase the duties or responsibilities of the trustee hereunder without its written consent. 
2.	This trust agreement and the trust fund may be terminated by the city at any time by delivering to the trustee written notice, in the form described in Paragraph 7 of Article VI hereof, specifying that (a) the plan is being terminated, or (b) contributions are being discontinued. This trust agreement and trust fund shall automatically terminate when no cash or property remains in the trust fund. 
3.	Nothing in this trust agreement shall be construed to prevent the city from suspending contributions to the trust fund for any period whatsoever, or permanently, but such a suspension, whether temporary or permanent, shall not of itself terminate the trust agreement. 
4.	Unless otherwise terminated, this trust agreement shall continue to exist for such period of time as is permitted by the laws of the state comprising the situs of the trustee now in force and effect, or by any amendment thereof. Upon termination of the trust agreement, the trustee shall forthwith wind up the affairs of the trust agreement and distribute to the then participants the entire trust fund according to their beneficial interests therein and to the extent of benefits then paid for as directed by the retirement committee. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98)  
ARTICLE X. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
1.	No personal liability whatever shall attach to or be incurred by any official or employee, as such, of the city, under or by reason of the terms or conditions contained in or implied from this trust agreement. The duties, obligations and rights of the trustee shall be limited to and by the provisions of this trust agreement notwithstanding any reference herein to the plan; provided, however, the city agrees to deliver to the trustee a copy of each amendment to the plan within thirty (30) days of the date of execution of such amendment. 
2.	No benefits or beneficial interest provided for hereunder or under the plan shall be subject in any manner to anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, encumbrance or charge, either voluntary or involuntary, and any attempt to so anticipate, alienate, sell, transfer, assign, pledge, encumber or charge the same shall be null and void; neither shall such benefits or beneficial interest be liable for or subject to the debts, contracts, liabilities, engagements or torts of any person to whom such benefits or funds are payable. 
3.	The city shall have no beneficial interest in the trust fund or any part thereof, and no part of the trust fund shall ever revert or be repaid to the city, either directly or indirectly, except for such part of the trust fund, if any, which remains after satisfaction of all liabilities to persons entitled to benefits under the plan and except as provided in section 7.4(C)(5) of the plan. 
4.	The trustee shall hold, own, and control all contracts and policies purchased by the trust fund, if any, as well as all other property belonging to the trust fund, subject to the rights of participants as specified in this trust agreement. 
5.	No insurance company which may issue any contract upon the application of the trustee shall be required to take or permit any action contrary to the provisions of such contract; or be bound to allow any benefit or privilege to any person interested in any contract it has issued which is not provided in such contract; or be deemed to be a party to this trust agreement; or be required to look into the terms of this trust agreement, or question any act of the trustee hereunder; or be required to see that any action of the trustee is authorized by this trust agreement. Any such issuing company shall be fully discharged from any and all liability for any amount paid to the trustee, or in accordance with its direction; and no issuing company shall be obligated to see to the application of any monies so paid by it. Any such issuing company shall be fully protected in taking or permitting any action on the faith of any instrument executed by the trustee in its name as trustee, and shall incur no liability for so doing. 
6.	The laws of the state comprising the situs of the trustee shall govern, control and determine all questions arising with respect to the trust fund and interpretation and validity of the provisions of this trust agreement. In the event any provision or provisions of this trust agreement shall be held illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this trust agreement, but shall be fully severable and the trust agreement shall be construed and enforced as if said illegal or invalid provision or provisions had never been inserted herein. 
7.	Words and phrases are used interchangeably in the plan and this trust agreement and a word, term or phrase defined in either is similarly defined for the purposes of the other. The terms "agreement," "herein," "hereunder," and similar terms refer to this trust agreement, including the plan which is made a part hereof, unless otherwise qualified by the context. 
8.	This trust agreement shall be binding upon persons who are entitled to any benefits hereunder, their heirs and legal representatives, and upon the city, the trustee and their respective successors and assigns. 
9.	This trust agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts, each of which shall be an original, and all of which together shall constitute one and the same instrument. A copy hereof, confirmed with the signatures of the parties hereto and certified by the trustee - or a copy may be used for any purpose without production of an original counterpart. 
(Ord. No. 1158-98, § 1, 5-6-98) 


LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS CITY OF ROCKLEDGE, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Adopted November 21, 1990 
Effective November 21, 1990 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
M MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION C C Tallahassee, Florida       1991  
PREFACE 
    This volume contains the Land Development Regulations of the City of Rockledge, Florida, adopted as Volume II of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances by Ordinance No. 984-90, enacted November 21, 1990, as amended. 
    Except as otherwise noted, the regulations have been printed as adopted and the original numbering has been retained. A uniform style has been employed for titles and headings. Phrases such as "this chapter" and "this article" have been changed to "these regulations," "this section," etc., where appropriate to the context. Obvious typographical errors have been corrected without notation; words or phrases added by the editor for purposes of clarification are enclosed in brackets. 
Amendatory Legislation 
    A feature of this publication that is particularly useful is the table of amendments. Any amendatory legislation may be located therein by number and date of enactment, and the sections or subsections amended will be listed. In addition, the sources of any amendments to a section are listed in a parenthetical history note following the amended section. The absence of such a note indicates that the section derives unamended from the regulations as originally adopted by Ordinance No. 984-90. 
Index 
    As part of the publication project, a comprehensive index was prepared. Each particular subject has been placed under several headings, some couched in lay phraseology and others in legal terminology. There are numerous cross references within the index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    Another special feature of this volume is the supplemental service, by which the publication will be kept up to date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendments, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication with instructions for the manner of inserting the pages and deleting the obsolete pages. The instruction sheet for the most current supplement should be placed in the front of the volume, and it is recommended that deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference. 
Acknowledgements 
    This volume is presented for the use and benefit of the citizens of the City of Rockledge, Florida. Publication was under the direct supervision of Robert L. Laslie, Vice-President, Supplements, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers would also like to extend their sincere appreciation to the city officials for their cooperation and assistance throughout the publication of the volume. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 1547-2010  5- 5-10 Included 24 1548-2010  5- 5-10 Included 24 1549-2010  5-19-10 Included 24 1550-2010  5-19-10 Included 24 1551-2010  6-16-10 Included 24 1554-2010  8-18-10 Included 24 1572-2011  2- 2-11 Included 24 1573-2011  2- 2-11 Included 24  
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Part I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
SECTION 1.00. - PREFACE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1.00 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. 

1.01. - Short title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the "Land Development Regulations" or the "LDR'S" of the City of Rockledge. 
1.02. - Authority. 
(a)  These land development regulations are adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 163.3202, Florida Statutes, 1989 (the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulations Act), and the broad general Home Rule powers conferred upon the City of Rockledge by Article VIII, Section 2 of the Constitution of the State of Florida, and Chapter 166, Florida Statutes. 
(b)  No special statutory authority is required in order to compile into a single code those provisions more frequently found in separate zoning, subdivision, flood control, and other land development regulations, as this document involves a change in form rather than substance, the requirements of Chapter 163.3202 can be referenced as authority. 
(c)  Whenever any provision of these regulations refers to or cites a section of the Florida Statutes and that section is later amended or superseded, these regulations shall be deemed amended and refer to the amended section or the section that superseded the original section. 
1.10. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  These regulations are applicable within the corporate limits of the City of Rockledge. 
(b)  These regulations shall be applicable to all development related applications submitted to the City by an applicant for the purpose of securing approval of any development order within the corporate limits as said limits exist from time to time established by the City of Rockledge, Florida, which shall include, but not limited to, Industrial Parks, planned developments, subdivisions, mobile home parks, travel trailer parks, townhouses, multi-family or motel hotel units, single-family and all other development projects of any kind and nature whatsoever, except, those that are specifically excluded herein from any or part of these regulations. 
1.20. - Adopting ordinance. (Reserved) 
Editor's note- The land development regulations were adopted by Ord. No. 984-90, enacted Nov. 21, 1990. 
1.30. - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of these regulations are severable, and if such section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of these regulations since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation into these regulations of such unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase. 
1.35. - Computation of time. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded, making the next regular working day the last day. 
(b)  When the period of time prescribed for an act is less than seven days, the intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall be excluded. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided, whenever a person has the right or is required to perform an act within a prescribed period of time after the service of a notice or other paper upon him and the notice or paper is served by mail, five days shall be added to the prescribed period. 
1.40. - No use or sale of land or buildings except in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. 
(a)  No person may use, occupy or sell any land or building, or authorize, or permit, the use, occupancy or sale of land or buildings under his control except in accordance with all the applicable provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the "use" or "occupancy" of a building, land or water relates to anything and everything that is done to, on, or in that building, land or water. 
1.50. - Relationship to existing zoning, subdivision and environmental regulations, including flood control ordinances. 
(a)  To the extent that the provisions of these regulations are the same substance as the previously adopted provisions that were contained, in whole or in part, in the City of Rockledge Code, [former] Chapters 2.1, 3, 4, 4.1, 5, 5.1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 9.1, 11, 16, 16.1, 17, 18, 19, 20, 24 and Chapter 25, these provisions shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments unless otherwise specified. In particular, if a situation did not constitute a lawful, nonconforming situation under the previously adopted ordinances, it does not achieve lawful nonconforming status under these regulations merely by the repeal of the prior ordinance. 
1.60. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  As used in these regulations, words denoting the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
(b)  Words used in the singular in these regulations include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. 
1.70. - Purpose and intent. 
    The general purpose of these regulations is to establish procedures and standards for the development of land within the corporate limits of Rockledge in an effort to: 
(a)  Insure proper legal description, identification, monumentation, and recordation of real estate properties. 
(b)  Provide for the harmonious development of the city. 
(c)  Realize a coordinated design pattern of streets. 
(d)  Encourage sufficient recreational facilities. 
(e)  Preserve water resources. 
(f)  Provide for flood prevention, proper storm drainage, and appropriate utility systems. 
(g)  Conserve valuable and scenic natural features, with provisions for adequate open space. 
(h)  Promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(i)  Encourage a high degree of quality and aesthetics in developments. 
1.75. - Relationship to the comprehensive plan. 
    It is the intention of the City Council and Local Planning Agency that these regulations serve to implement the requirements of the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, Chapter 163.3202 of the Florida Statutes, that requires the adoption of Land Development Regulations, and comply with the requirements of the Department of Community Affairs (DCA) Rule 9J-24, Florida Administrative Code (F.A.C.). These land development regulations specifically address the following provisions: 
(a)  The subdivision of land, including provisions that meet the statutory requirements of Chapter 177, Part I, F.S., including review procedures, design and development standards, provisions for adequate public facilities, mitigation of development impacts, land dedications, fees and administrative provisions; 
(b)  The regulation of the use of land and water for the use categories included in the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan as implemented by a set of zoning districts, Planning Overlay Districts, Historic Overlay District and a zoning map; 
(c)  The protection of potable water supply sources through the control of land uses and activities within each planning district, which encourages re-use lines, xeriscape, and retention of the first one? of 24 hour event for a 25 year storm; 
(d)  The regulation of areas subject to seasonal and periodic flooding and the provision of drainage and storm water management through the control of the type, location, density and intensity of land uses located within these areas; 
(e)  The protection of environmentally sensitive lands designated in the Comprehensive Plan, particularly the wetland areas identified in the Recreational and Open Space Element of the Comprehensive Plan; 
(f)  The regulation of signage; 
(g)  The provision of public facilities and service concurrent with the impact of development based upon adopted Levels of Service (LOS); 
(h)  The provision of safe and convenient on site traffic flow, considering the need for vehicle parking and pedestrian movement; and 
(i)  The implementation of the regulations specifically stated in the adopted policies of the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan. 
Note- See the editor's note to the title of § 1.80. 
SECTION 1.80. - COMPREHENSIVE PLANcustom>[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1.80 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. Provisions originally numbered as § 1.80 have been renumbered as § 1.75. 

1.81. - Authority. 
    This section (Ordinance No. 890-88) is being adopted pursuant to Article VIII, Section 2, Constitution of the State of Florida; Chapter 11094, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1925; Chapter 166, Florida Statutes; and Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, entitled "Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act." 
1.82. - Purpose and intent. 
    The city hereby declares that the purpose and intent of this section is to provide for the City of Rockledge a plan which will guide future growth and development; encourage the most appropriate use of land, water and other resources consistent with the public interest; preserve, promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance, convenience and general welfare; preserve the residential or historical character of neighborhoods; prevent the overcrowding of land; avoid undue concentration of population; provide adequate and energy-efficient transportation, water, sewage, drainage, fire protection, law enforcement, schools, parks, recreation facilities, housing and other services, facilities and resources; enhance the aesthetic appeal of the community; promote the residential, business and industrial needs of the community; and conserve and protect natural resources within the City of Rockledge, while protecting private property rights. By the adoption of this plan, the city will encourage and actively pursue coordination and cooperation between the planning and development activities of the City of Rockledge, other local governments, regional agencies, state government and private property owners. By adopting this section, the city reserves the right to balance the needs of the community. 
1.83. - Adoption of Comprehensive Plan. 
    The City of Rockledge hereby adopts by reference the "City of Rockledge Comprehensive Plan Adopted October 5th, 1988," and the goals, objectives and policies of each element to wit: Future Land Use Element; Traffic Circulation Element; Housing Element; Public Facilities Element (Wastewater, Solid Waste, Drainage, Potable Water and Natural Groundwater and Aquifer Recharge Element); Coastal Management Element; Conservation Element; Recreation and Open Space Element; Intergovernmental Coordination Element; Capital Improvements Element; and CIE Schedule of Capital Improvements. Each of said Elements is included in the Comprehensive Plan adopted by this section, a copy of which plan and the elements therein is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. Each element of the Comprehensive Plan hereby adopted is related to and consistent with each other element, and said elements are consistent with the comprehensive plans of the State of Florida and the Regional Policy Plan of the Central Florida Regional Planning Council, pursuant to the provisions of Section 163.3177, Florida Statutes, 1988. 
1.84. - Adoption of Future Land Use Map. 
    The City of Rockledge hereby adopts by reference the Future Land Use Map as part of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Rockledge. Said Future Land Use Map is included in the Comprehensive Plan adopted by this section, a copy of which plan and the Future Land Use Map therein is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
1.85. - Adoption of Future Traffic Circulation Map. 
    The City of Rockledge hereby adopts by reference the Future Traffic Circulation Map as part of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Rockledge. Said Future Traffic Circulation Map is included in the Comprehensive Plan adopted by this section, a copy of which plan and the Future Traffic Circulation Map therein is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. The Future Traffic Circulation Map shall serve as an official guide for future development within the city. 
1.86. - Adoption of procedure for monitoring and evaluation. 
    The City of Rockledge hereby adopts by reference the procedure for monitoring and evaluation of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Rockledge. Said procedure for monitoring and evaluation is included in the Comprehensive Plan adopted by this section, a copy of which plan and the procedure for monitoring and evaluation therein is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
1.87. - Construction. 
(a)  The Comprehensive Plan and its elements shall be construed by the city and its officials to accomplish the purpose and intent of this section. In the event various elements of the plan may appear to be in conflict, then, in that event, the city and its officials shall resolve said conflict consistent with the purpose of this section. Any decision by the city or its officials construing various elements of the Comprehensive Plan shall be presumed to be fairly debatable. 
(b)  The city expressly reserves its legislative function to implement this Comprehensive Plan and to construe its various elements. 
1.88. - Interpretation of land use boundaries. 
(a)  Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the land use districts as shown on the Future Land Use Map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where boundaries approximately follow streets, alleys or highways. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline or street line of streets, the centerline or alley line of alleys, or the centerline or right-of-way line of highways, such lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries. 
(2)  Where boundaries parallel street lines, alley lines or highway right-of-way lines. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, the centerlines or alley lines of alleys, or the centerlines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said Future Land Use Map. 
(3)  Where boundaries approximately follow lot lines. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(4)  Where the boundary follows a railroad line. Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be located midway between the main tracts of said railroad line. 
(5)  Where a boundary follows a body of water. Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake, river or other body of water, said boundary line shall be construed to include the entire area of the jurisdiction of the City of Rockledge in said water unless otherwise indicated. 
(6)  Submerged areas not included in district. All areas within the corporate limits of the city which are under water and are not shown as included within any district shall be subject to all of the regulations of the district which immediately adjoins the water area. If the water area adjoins one or more districts, the boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line until they meet the other district. 
(7)  Vacation of public ways. Whenever any street, alley or public way is vacated in the manner authorized by law, the land use district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all areas included in the vacation shall then henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
(8)  Where boundary follows platted lot lines. Where district boundaries are indicated as following platted lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the district boundaries. 
(9)  Where boundaries are indicated by specific dimensions. Where district boundaries are indicated by specific dimensions, such specific dimensions shall control. 
(10)  Scale of Future Land Use Map to control. Where district boundaries divide platted lots or cross unsubdivided property, and where no specific dimensions are indicated on the Future Land Use Map, the scale of the Future Land Use Map shall control. 
(11)  Interpretation of land use map by city manager. Where the street or property layout or other physical features existing on the ground are at variance with the Future Land Use Map, or where other uncertainties exist as to interpretation of the Future Land Use Map, the city manager or his designee shall interpret the map to fix the exact location of land use boundaries. 
1.89. - Legal effect of comprehensive plan and future land use map. 
(a)  The Comprehensive Plan and Future Land Use Map shall have the legal effect as provided for in Florida Statutes, Section 163.3194 (1987) and as otherwise provided for by law. 
(b)  All development undertaken after the effective date of this section (October 5, 1988) shall be consistent with such plan and elements and maps except as provided herein. 
1.90. - Vested rights. 
(a)  In the event any provision of this Comprehensive Plan or maps would limit or modify the rights of any person to complete any development that has been previously authorized, then, in that event, the city may recognize said right to complete such development as provided herein. The city hereby recognizes the right of any person to complete the following development: 
(1)  Development that has received a building permit; 
(2)  Development that has received final plat approval or final site plan approval; 
(3)  Development that has received preliminary plat approval, preliminary subdivision approval, preliminary PUD approval, or preliminary site plan approval, provided such development has secured a permit to construct all or any phase of such development and is continuing such development in good faith. 
(b)  Any person who has a right to complete such development and has secured a building permit, final plat approval, final site plan approval or preliminary approval as provided above shall lose its right to complete such development if such development does not maintain a current building permit, or current site plan or development approval as provided for by the Code of Ordinances of the city. Once a development has lost its current approval, then, in that event, future development shall comply with applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and maps. 
(c)  The city may recognize other application for vested rights in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Any property owner who claims to have vested rights based upon a prior approval from the city other than as provided above may submit to the city manager, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of this section (October 5, 1988), a written request for recognition of such vested rights. 
(2)  The applicant shall submit such information as he deems appropriate to demonstrate his claim of vested rights including legal description of property, dates of any recent rezoning, preparation of any plans, approval of any plans, any action of the city upon which applicant has relied, facts showing substantial reliance or change in position. 
(3)  Within ninety (90) days after receipt of said application, the city council shall either recognize or reject the applicant's claim of vested rights. In reviewing the application, the city council shall be guided by the case of Hollywood Beach Hotel v. City of Hollywood, 329 So. 2d 10 (Florida 1976). If the city fails to act upon said request within ninety (90) days, then said application shall be deemed to be denied. No suit shall be filed by the applicant unless prior thereto the applicant has made a request of the city prior to said litigation. 
1.91. - Constitutional claim. 
(a)  In the event any person claims that any provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, elements, or maps constitute a taking of the landowner's property without due process of law and the payment of just compensation as provided for in the Florida Constitution and the Constitution of the United States of America, then, in that event, said person shall first present said claim to the City of Rockledge. The provisions of Section 163.3215, Florida Statutes, 1987, shall prevail on any claims that may be asserted under said statutes and this section shall not be construed as an additional remedy presently governed by Section 163.3215, Florida Statutes, 1987. 
(b)  Any person claiming said taking shall: 
(1)  Submit said claim in writing, identifying the name and address of the property owner; 
(2)  The present use of the property; 
(3)  The present land use designation and zoning classification; 
(4)  The particular provision of the Comprehensive Plan that such person believes to have constituted a taking; 
(5)  The remedy requested; 
(6)  Documentation or other evidence demonstrating the economic deprivation; 
(7)  Case law or authority, if any, which demonstrates the taking; 
(8)  Such other information demonstrating how said plan or element constitutes a taking. 
(c)  After the city has received said request, it shall have ninety (90) days to review and act upon said request. Due public notice as required by Chapter 163 and 166 shall be provided prior to granting any relief under this section. The city reserves its full legislative function to act upon requests under this section and said actions shall be presumed to be fairly debatable. 
SECTION 1.95. - DEFINITIONS 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly defined with the context of these regulations, the following definitions shall apply to the words and phrases used herein: 
(1)  Abutting property: Any property that is immediately adjacent to or contiguous to property that may be subject to any hearing required to be held under this act, or that is located immediately across any road or public right-of-way from the property subject to any hearing under this act. 
(2)  Accepted engineering principles: Means and refers to engineering concepts generally accepted by the broad base of professionals in the particular engineering discipline for which a concurrency evaluation is being conducted. 
(3)  Accessory building and use: A subordinate building or portion of a main building the use of which is incidental to that of the primary use of the main building or land, including accessory signs, bona fide servants quarters, storage sheds, swimming pools, garages, garage apartments and greenhouses operated on a non-profit basis. An accessory use is one that is incidental to the main use of the premises. Such building, structure or use shall be constructed after the principal structure or use is substantially completed. Each structure, excepting swimming pools, shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet. 
(4)  Activity center: A designated portion of urbanized area characterized by intense activities and comprised of a concentration of land uses which could include employment, mixed residential, commercial, educational, cultural, and recreational activities. 
(5)  Addition (to an existing building): Means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
(6)  Agricultural uses: Activities within land areas which are predominantly used for the cultivation of crops and livestock including: nurseries; ornamental horticulture areas; groves; confined feeding operations; specialty farms; and silviculture areas. 
(7)  Airport facility: Any area of land or water improved, maintained or operated by a governmental agency for the landing and takeoff of aircraft, or privately owned paved runways of 4,000 or more feet in length, and any appurtenant area which is used for airport buildings, or other airport facilities or rights-of-way. 
(8)  Alley: A public or private way which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon; which is not otherwise designated a thoroughfare or for general traffic and which is not otherwise officially designated as a street. 
(9)  Alteration: Any change in the arrangement of a building; any work affecting the structural parts of a building; or any change in wiring, plumbing or heating and air conditioning systems. 
(10)  Apartment house: See Dwelling, multiple. 
(11)  Appeal: Means a request for a review of the building official's or any public official's interpretation of any provisions of these regulations or a request for a variance or special exception. 
(12)  Applicant: The record owner, or his authorized representative, of a tract of land which is the subject of a request for a change in zoning classification, a conditional use, a variance, or an appeal or the record owner, or his authorized representative, of a tract of land that is to be developed as a subdivision within the scope of these regulations, or any person having an ownership or leasehold interest, whether legal or equitable, in a parcel of land in the city, or said person's attorney-in-fact, who applies for a development order. 
(13)  Area of shallow flooding: Means a designated AO or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
(14)  Area of special flood hazard: Is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one per cent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
(15)  Areawide: A descriptive term applied in reference to a geographic area, generally including all or portions of two or more local governmental jurisdictions but may also be applied to a portion of one local governmental jurisdiction if a large geographic area is encompassed. 
(16)  Arterial road: A roadway providing service which is relatively continuous and of relatively high traffic volume, long trip length, and high operating speed. In addition, every United States numbered highway is an arterial road. 
(17)  Assisted living facility: An institution, building or other place, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its management to provide, for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours, housing, food services and one or more personal services for four (4) or more adults, not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage, who require such services; or to provide extended congregate care, or limited nursing services as defined in Chapter 464, Florida Statutes. The assisted living facility shall not be considered an adult family-care home or facility. 
(18)  Assured construction: Means and refers to construction improvements to a Public Facility scheduled to be made to a Major Thoroughfare Link or other roadway, Wastewater Treatment Facility, Potable Water Supply Facility, Stormwater Management System, Parks and Recreation System, or Solid Waste Disposal Facility, or construction or obtaining one of the foregoing by one or more of the following means: (i) For Parks and Recreation System, Stormwater Management Systems drainage Retention Systems, or Major Thoroughfare Link or other roadway improvements, or for Solid Waste Disposal Facilities, Wastewater Treatment Facilities or Potable Water Supply Facilities, all in relation to a no-Final Development Order, inclusion in the adopted Five-Year Schedule of a local government or in the State's Five-Year Schedule of Capital Improvements, of a funded improvement; provided that the aforementioned schedule is realistic, financially feasible, is based on currently available revenue sources, and contains estimated project completion dates for the affected Public Facility; or (ii) For Wastewater Treatment Facilities, Solid Waste Disposal Facilities, and Potable Water Supply Facilities, if the Development Permit is a Final Development Order, construction of the facility must be complete, and the facility must be operable and able to supply all capacity needed for a particular proposed project or phase thereof, all prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for structures within the proposed project or phase thereof. For any programmed construction to be considered to be Assured Construction pursuant hereto, the necessary right-of-way of property needed for the Public Facility and Service must have been obtained prior to the issuance of the Development Order, and at a minimum, subject to: a binding contract for purchase, currently filed and pending condemnation lawsuit, or binding, uncontested agreement or condition of Development approval. If the Assured Construction (other than for Wastewater Treatment, Solid Waste, or Potable Water) which was relied upon for the issuance of a Development Order, pursuant to the concurrency section of this Code, was included in the Five-Year Capital Improvements Program of a local government or the State, and the amount of construction or timing of the construction is subsequently deleted from the Five-Year Capital Improvements Program, Final Development Orders for a Proposed Project or phase thereof, which Proposed Project or phase was conditioned on that particular construction may be granted, notwithstanding the original phasing schedule for the deleted construction, as though the construction was completed in accordance with the Five-Year Capital Improvements Program upon which the Development Order was based; provided further, that the necessary right-of-way or property has been acquired. For purposes of this paragraph, "deletion" shall mean the elimination of the construction program, the material reduction in the scope of construction work or funding thereof (as it affects the construction program), the postponement of the construction project in the Five-Year Capital Improvements Program for more than one year beyond the year the construction was originally programmed and funded in the Five-Year Capital Improvements Program, the failure to continue funding of the construction program; but shall not include construction delays, design delays, contracting delays, or similar delays. 
(19)  Available: Means that a particular Public Facility and Service will be provided as follows: 
1.  The Public Facility and Service is in place to serve a Proposed Project at the time a Development Order is granted; 
2.  A Development Order is issued subject to the condition that the particular and necessary Public Facility and Service will be in place when the impact upon the Public Facility and Service of the Project occurs; 
3.  The necessary Public Facility is under construction at the time a Development Order is issued; 
4.  The necessary Public Facility and Services are the subject of a binding executed contract for the construction of the Public Facilities or provision of services at the time the Development Order is issued; 
5.  The necessary Public Facilities and Services are guaranteed in an enforceable Development Agreement, including but not limited to a Development Agreement, or Development Order issued pursuant to Chapter 380, Florida Statutes; or 
6.  Construction of the Public Facility is Assured Construction. 
(20)  Average annual daily traffic (AADT): Means and refers to the average of two consecutive twenty-four (24) hour weekday traffic counts taken at one location, with one count being taken in the Peak Season and the other in the Off-Peak Season. The Traffic Volume Map(s) shall normally be used to determine existing AADT for the City. Average Annual Daily Traffic existing shall be established by averaging the Peak Season and Off-Peak Season traffic counts. However, in all cases, where data becomes available from the Florida Department of Transportation or from Brevard County and such data is substantially consistent with this Code, such data shall be used. An Applicant may provide a traffic count which may be used, subject to the approval of the Development Director, based upon Accepted Traffic Engineering principles, and consistent with this [section and] the concurrency chapter [section 85.00] instead of the counts on the Traffic Volume Map(s) or where such counts are not available. 
(21)  Average peak hour volume: Means and refers to the average of Peak Season and Off-Peak Season turning movements. 
(22)  Background traffic: Means and refers to the projected traffic generation from previously approved but incomplete Projects, as described in Section 85.00. 
(23)  Base flood: Means the flood having a one per cent chance of being equaled or exceed in any given year. 
(24)  Basement: Means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level). 
(25)  Beach: Oceanic and estuarine shorelines. 
(26)  Best management practices: Design, construction, operational or maintenance techniques which are accepted by research institutes, professional societies or regulatory agencies as the most advanced and effective for any given application. For example, Best Management Practices (also known as "BMP's") have been developed for stormwater pollution control, agricultural activities, silvicultural management and construction practices. 
(27)  Bicycle and pedestrian ways: Any road, path or way which is open to bicycle travel and traffic afoot, and excludes motor vehicles. 
(28)  Block: A lot or group of lots entirely and immediately surrounded by streets or highways, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, subdivision boundaries or any combination thereof. 
(29)  Boardinghouse: A building other than a hotel, motel, motor lodge, apartment building or restaurant where, for compensation and by prearrangement for a definite period, meals and/or lodging are provided for three (3) or more persons. 
(30)  Bond: Security, including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the City of Rockledge. All bonds shall be approved by the city council wherever a bond is required by these regulations (see section 70.63). 
(a)  Performance bond: Prior to recording of the plat, security must be posted in the amount of one hundred ten (110) per cent of the engineer's estimate of cost, including landfill. 
(b)  Maintenance bond: Upon issuance of the certificate of completion, and prior to the release of the performance bond, security must be posted in the amount of fifty (50) per cent as to paving and drainage, and fifty (50) per cent of all public improvements, based upon the original engineer's estimate of the cost of improvements. The condition of this obligation is such that the city will be protected against any defects resulting from faulty materials or workmanship of the aforesaid improvements for a period of two (2) years (see Part VII). 
(31)  Borrow pit: Shall be defined as any site, area or location from which earth, and, dirt, rock, shell or other material is excavated, and where such excavated material is to be removed from one lot, piece, parcel or tract of land for use on another site, regardless of whether it is to be donated, sold, traded or bargained for anything of value (see sec. 80.10). 
(32)  Breakaway wall: Means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
(33)  Buffer: An area or zone between two land uses which is intended to ameliorate, reduce or mitigate the adverse affects one may have on the other. Examples include the placement of office parks between industrial uses and nature preserves, or the preservation of a naturally vegetated upland zone around wetlands as a part of a development project (see Sec. 40.30). 
(34)  Buildable area: The portion of a site on which a structure or improvements may be erected. 
(35)  Building: Any structure designed or built for support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. "Building" shall include "structure." 
(36)  Building line: An imaginary line across the property defined in each district by the setback requirement on which any wall of a building may be built. For the purpose of measuring, setbacks shall be determined by measuring from any vertical support of a roof-covered section to the nearest point to the lot line. 
(37)  Building, main: A building in which is connected to [is conducted] the main or principal use of the lot or parcel on which said building is situated. 
(38)  Building permit: Means and refers to a Development Order issued pursuant to Section 85 of the City Code. 
(39)  Buildout permit: means and refers to a Development Order issued pursuant to Section 85 of the City Code. 
(40)  Buildout period: Means and refers to the time between the issuance of a Development order and completion of a Proposed Project. The Buildout Period of the Proposed Project shall be subject to the review and approval of the Development Director, based on the following criteria: (i) The size, type, and location of the Proposed Project; (ii) Customary Buildout Periods for Projects of similar size, type, and location; and (iii) Any other factors or conditions relevant to the specific Project, including special market conditions and schedules of Assured Construction. Completion of a Project shall mean the issuance of the final certificates of occupancy for structures in a Project. In the case of a commercial Project, final certificates of occupancy for interior tenant improvements for eighty per cent (80%) of the gross leasable area shall be the completion of the Proposed Project. In the case of a residential subdivision Project, issuance of final certificate of occupancy for seventy-five per cent (75%) of the units, or structures on seventy-five per cent (75%) of lots in the Project, shall be completion of the Project. 
(41)  Capital budget: The portion of a government's budget which reflects capital improvements scheduled for a fiscal year. 
(42)  Capital improvement: Physical assets constructed or purchased to improve or replace a public facility and which are large scale and high in cost. The cost of a capital improvement is generally nonrecurring and may require multi-year financing. 
(43)  Captured trips: Means and refers to trips not generated by a Proposed Project which are passing trips already on the roadway on which the Proposed Project is to be located. 
(44)  Care unit: A residential treatment facility, other than a nursing home, which is occupied by more than four residents and where, for compensation, clients receive food, lodging, and some form of on-site therapeutic care. This type of care may involve psychiatric/psychological therapies, behavior modifications, and other such services. As distinguished from the residents of a group home or residential center, the client population has a greater need for therapeutic care (e.g., youth crisis, substance abuse, spouse abuse, offender halfway, and like care facilities or shelters), and may be characterized by a lesser degree of permanence of residence. No administrative or professional office is permitted in these facilities in any single-family or multi-family zoning district. 
(45)  Carport: A open sided parking structure. 
(46)  Central business district (CBD): That portion of a highly urbanized area where the predominant land use is intense business activity. A central business district and similar areas are characterized by high density development, large numbers of pedestrians, commercial vehicles, loading and unloading of goods and people, a large demand for parking space, and a high degree of turnover in parking. 
(47)  Certificate of completion: That certificate issued by the city subdivision inspector following the final inspection that all improvements have been completed in conformity with the requirements of these regulations and the approved construction plans and specifications. 
(48)  Certificate of ownership: An opinion of title of a licensed attorney or title company certifying to the City of Rockledge, based upon an examination of an abstract of title or the Official Records of Brevard County, stating that the applicant is the owner in fee simple to the tract submitted for subdivision. The certificate shall also state the names and nature of all liens, mortgages and encumbrances against the title to said tract, if any. 
(49)  Certified local government: A general purpose unit of local government that has received certification to conduct development of regional impact reviews within its jurisdiction pursuant to the provisions and requirements of F.S. § 380.065, or designated for historic preservation management activities pursuant to U.S. Department of Interior criteria. 
(50)  Churches, temples, synagogues and other places of worship: A building(s) used for nonprofit purposes by a recognized or established religion as defined by Internal Revenue Service as its place of worship. Such building may include a residential area for the pastor or minister of a sect. Common uses associated with places of worship include the following: religious assembly; day care, schools, counseling; pray studies; food distribution to the needy; housing of staff members; recreation; residences of destitute persons; scouting meetings; weddings and funeral services; pot luck and banquet events and fund raising activities. 
(51)  City: The City of Rockledge, Florida, being a municipal corporation chartered and existing under the laws of the State of Florida. 
(52)  Clinic: An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one person or a group of persons practicing any form of healing or health-building services to individuals, whether such persons be medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, naturopaths, optometrists, dentists or any such profession, the practice of which is lawful in the State of Florida. 
(53)  Club: A building and facilities owned and operated by a corporation or association of persons for social or recreational purposes, but not operated primarily for profit nor to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
(54)  Coastal area: 
(a)  As used in the "Coastal Resources Sub-Element": The geographical area defined by the city limits of Rockledge. 
(b)  As used in the "Hurricane Evacuation Planning Sub-Element": The hurricane vulnerability area (Level of Threat A) as defined by the Hurricane Evacuation Study (East Central Florida Regional Planning Council). Includes the area bounded by Rockledge Drive on the west and the Indian River Lagoon on the east. 
(c)  As used in the "Post Disaster Redevelopment and Coastal High Hazard Sub-Element": The area bounded by US 1 on the west and the shore of the Indian River Lagoon on the east, including Rockledge Drive. 
(55)  Coastal barriers: Barrier islands, spits, peninsulas, or similar landforms which front on the Atlantic Ocean and which separate estuaries or harbors from the open waters of the Atlantic Ocean. 
(56)  Coastal dune: A mount or ridge of loose sediments, usually sandsized sediments, lying landward of the beach fronting on the Atlantic Ocean. 
(57)  Coastal high hazard areas: Areas designated by local governments (pursuant to F.S. § 163.3178(2)(h)) and includes areas which have historically experienced destruction or severe damage, or are scientifically predicted to experience destruction or severe damage, from storm surge, waves, erosion, or other manifestations of rapidly moving or storm driven water. These areas shall include all areas where public facilities have been damaged or undermined by coastal storms, Federal Emergency Management Agency designated V zones, areas seaward of the coastal construction control line established by the Florida Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Chapter 161, F.S., and inlets which are not structurally controlled. 
(58)  Coastal or shore protection structures: Shore-hardening structures, such as seawalls, bulkheads, revetments, rubblemound structures, groins, breakwaters, and aggregates of materials other than natural beach sand used for beach or shore protection, and other structures which are intended to prevent erosion or protect other structures from wave and hydrodynamic forces including beach and dune restoration. 
(59)  Coastal zone: That area of the region which lies within the watersheds of coastal estuaries (i.e., the Halifax River, Mosquito Lagoon, the Indian River and the Banana River) or the Atlantic Ocean. 
(60)  Cogeneration: The simultaneous production of electricity and useful thermal energy from the same combustion process accomplished through the capture of waste heat that otherwise escapes from an engine or turbine as electrical or mechanical power is generated. Possible uses of the heat include industrial processes, sterilization, production of hot water and comfort heating. 
(61)  Collector road: A roadway providing service which is of relatively moderate traffic volume, moderate trip length, and moderate operating speed. Collector roads collect and distribute traffic between local roads or arterial roads. 
(62)  Commercial uses: Activities within land areas which are predominantly connected with the sale, rental and distribution of products, or performance of services. Commercial uses will be at a relatively low to moderate intensity, consistent with existing uses. 
(63)  Community park: Designed to serve residents of a group of neighborhoods, preferably adjacent to a junior or senior high school. Community parks have a service area which is 0.5 to 3 miles in radius, and serve up to 5,000 people. Such parks provide both passive and active recreation, but may be more dedicated to the active pursuits (e.g., pools, softball/baseball fields, tennis courts) and are at least ten (10) acres but not greater than twenty (20) acres in size. 
(64)  Comprehensive plan: The Rockledge Comprehensive Plan, which was adopted by ordinance consistent with Chapter 163.3161, Florida Statutes, on June 6, 1979, as amended, and which serves as the legal guideline for the future development of Rockledge. No public or private development shall be permitted which is not in conformity with the plan or as the plan is amended. 
(65)  Concurrency: Shall measure the potential impact of any proposed project or expansion to an existing project upon the established minimum acceptable Levels of Service for roadways, solid waste, potable water, drainage, wastewater treatment, and recreation/parks. 
(66)  Conditional use: Uses which may be allowed by special exception are outlined in each district. The procedure for obtaining a conditional use permit is outlined in Part III of this Code. See: Special exception. 
(67)  Condominium: Means that form of ownership of real property which is created pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 718 F.S., which is comprised of units that may be owned by one or more persons, and [in] which there is, appurtenant to each unit, an undivided share in common elements. 
(68)  Cone of influence: An area around one or more major water wells the boundary [of] which is determined by a government agency based on groundwater travel or drawdown depth. 
(69)  Conservation uses: Activities within land areas designated for the purpose of conserving or protecting natural resources or environmental quality and includes areas designated for such purposes as flood control, protection of quality or quantity of groundwater or surface water, floodplain management, fisheries management, or protection of vegetative communities or wildlife habitats. 
(70)  Construction permit: The construction permit is deemed to be restricted to the construction of improvements which are technically under the control of the City (i.e. water, sewers, streets, etc., and not clearing of land.) 
(71)  Construction plans and specifications: The engineering drawings, specifications, tests and data necessary to show plans for construction of the proposed improvements in a subdivision in sufficient detail to permit evaluation of the proposals. 
(72)  Consumptive use: Withdrawal and use of water in such a way as to make the water unavailable for immediate reuse. The use of potable water by humans is a consumptive use, since the result (wastewater) cannot be immediately reused. Use of water by powerplants usually is not a consumptive use, since the water can be immediately recycled or returned to the source. 
(73)  Convalescent home: See Nursing home. 
(74)  County: The county commission of Brevard County, Florida, and/or its appointed officials. Other county constitutional officers are referred to by title. This also includes the unincorporated areas of Brevard County, Florida. 
(75)  Critical habitat: Habitat which contains constituent elements essential to the survival or recovery of an endangered or threatened species, and whose geographic extent has been defined by the USFWS, NMFS, FGFWFC, FDNR, FDACS. 
(76)  Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed by excavation, or the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface-also known as excavation. 
(77)  Deepwater habitat: Permanently flooded lands lying below the deepwater boundary of wetlands, and includes environments where surface wear is permanent and often deep, so that water, rather than air, is the principal medium within which the dominant organisms live. As in wetlands, the dominant plants are hydrophytes; however, the substrates are considered non-soil because the water is too deep to support emergent vegetation. 
(78)  De minimus project: Means and refers to Development of a single-family residence in a subdivision platted prior to June 20, 1979, or to be developed on an unplatted parcel of land. 
(79)  Desalinization: The removal or reduction of the salt concentration in water to produce potable water. One of the most popular forms of desalinization is "reverse osmosis." 
(80)  Density: The number of residential dwelling units permitted per acre of land, exclusive of dedicated public rights-of-way, canals and drainage ditches. 
(81)  Detention: The collection and temporary storage of stormwater in such a manner as to provide for the control of peak runoff discharges and velocities to levels permitted by the appropriate WMD. Where detention is used as a method of controlling stormwater pollution, water is detained in such a manner as to provide for treatment through physical, chemical or biological processes as well as whatever water quantity control is needed. "Detention" implies that a surface water outlet from the system exists, except in the case of "detention with filtration," in which stormwater is passed through a layer of suitable fine textured granular medium, such as porous soil, which may be used in conjunction with filter fabric and/or underdrain pipe. (See also, "Retention," "Diversion.") 
(82)  Diversion: With regard to stormwater management systems, refers to the separation the "first flush" of stormwater runoff (which contains the majority of stormwater pollutants) into a retention basin, while allowing the tailwater following the first flush to be discharged into surface waters or a detention basin, as appropriate. The diversion is accomplished through use of a specially designed baffle. (See also, "Detention," "Retention.") 
(83)  Development: Defined according to Chapter 380.04, Florida Statutes, as follows: " `Development' means the carrying out of any building or mining operation or the making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land and the dividing of land into three (3) or more parcels." The following activities or uses shall be taken for the purpose of these regulations to involve development, as defined in this section: 
(a)  A reconstruction, alteration of the size or material change in the external appearance of a structure on land. 
(b)  A change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure or on land or a material increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices or dwelling units in a structure or on land. 
(c)  Alteration of a shore or bank of a seacoast, river, stream, lake, pond or canal, including any coastal construction as defined in Florida Statutes 161.021. 
(d)  Commencement of drilling, except to obtain soil samples, mining or excavation on a parcel of land. 
(e)  Demolition of a structure. 
(f)  Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction. 
(g)  Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land. 
The following operations or uses shall not be taken, for the purposes of these regulations, to involve development as defined in this section. 
a.  Work by a highway or road agency or railroad company for the maintenance or improvement of a road or railroad track, if the work is carried out on land within the boundaries of the right-of-way. 
b.  Work by a utility and/or other person engaged in the distribution or transmission of gas or water, for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, renewing or construction on established rights-of-way, [of] any sewers, mains, pipes, cables, utility tunnels, power lines, towers, poles, tracks or the like. 
c.  Work for the maintenance, renewal, improvement or alteration of any structure, if the work affects only the interior or the color of the structure or the decoration of the exterior of the structure. 
d.  The use of any structure or land devoted to dwelling uses for any purpose customarily incidental to enjoyment of the dwelling. 
e.  The use of any land for the purpose of growing plants, crops, trees and other agricultural or forestry products; raising livestock; or for other agricultural purposes. 
f.  A change in use of land or structure from a use within a class specified in an ordinance or rule to another use in the same class. 
g.  A change in the ownership or form of ownership of any parcel or structure. 
h.  The creation or termination of rights of access, riparian rights, easements, covenants concerning development of land, or other rights in land. 
"Development," as designated in an ordinance, rule or development permit, includes all other development customarily associated with it unless otherwise specified. When appropriate to the context, development refers to the act of developing or to the result of development. Reference to any specific operation is not intended to mean that the operation or activity, when part of other operations or activities, is not development. 
(84)  Development agreement: Means and refers to an agreement entered in pursuant to Section 163.3220 et seq, Florida Statutes, which the City is a party to and that may assure construction or provision of a Public Facility and Service. 
(85)  Development director: Means and refers to: (i) the individual City employee appointed to said position by the City Manager; or (ii) the Development Director's designee. 
(86)  Development fact sheet: A form which is available from the city clerk, to be completed by the applicant with the assistance of the zoning official, prior to submitting an application for rezoning or other land development permit. The city staff will provide information on the capacity and availability of public services and facilities, while the applicant will provide basic information about the subject site. The development fact sheet is designed to present relevant facts (positive and negative) pertaining to the proposed development. 
(87)  Development order: Means any order granting, with or without conditions, a Development Permit, including any amendments to a Development Permit. 
(88)  Development permit: Means any building permit, zoning approval, rezoning, subdivision approval (including either preliminary or final plat approval), site plan approval, conditional use, order permitting a Florida Quality Development, variance approving an exceedance of maximum lot coverage, or approval of a development of regional impact application for development approval. The definition of the term "development permit" shall not be construed to include a certificate of occupancy. 
(89)  Development plan: A plan indicating the design concept of a development or subdivision in compliance with the requirements of this these regulations. 
(90)  Development stage: A specified portion of a subdivision that may be developed as an independent, freestanding entity that is delineated in the preliminary plat or development plan, whichever is applicable. 
(91)  Developed: That point in time when the site and improvements thereon have received all required final inspection approvals. 
(92)  Diameter at breast height (DBH): The diameter of the trunk of a tree, or the sum of the stems of a multistemmed tree, measured four and one-half (41/2) feet above natural or redevelopment grade. 
(93)  Directly accessed: Means and refers to accessing the link(s) that serves as the project's immediate and direct access or means of ingress and egress. Each access point of a project shall be considered to have access to at least one link; provided that the access points of a project may be considered to share a common link. If a given access point is not immediately connected to a link, the first Link connected to the proposed project shall be the link for the purpose of this Code. If a project access point is connected to more than one link, project trips shall be assigned to the links in accordance with Accepted Traffic Engineering Principles. 
(94)  DOT guidelines: Means and refers to the Florida Highway System Plan-Level of Service Standards and Guidelines Manual Published in 1989 by the Florida Department of Transportation, all as subsequently amended and updated. 
(95)  Drainage facilities: Systems of man-made structures designed to collect, convey, hold, divert or discharge stormwater, and includes stormwater sewers, canals, detention structures and retention structures. 
(96)  Drainage detention structure: A structure which collects and temporarily stores stormwater for the purpose of treatment through physical, chemical, or biological processes with subsequent gradual release of the stormwater. 
(97)  Drainage maintenance access easement/tract: The area of land extending outward from the normal high water level to the outer edge of the entire surface stormwater retention easement or tract. This area shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width, while having a slope/grade of not greater (steeper) than a 1 to 5 slope/grade ratio, this easement/tract shall be kept free of all structures and plantings, including but not limited, to fences, docks, trees, and seawalls. 
(98)  Drainage retention structure: A structure designed to collect and prevent the release of a given volume of stormwater by complete on-site storage. 
(99)  Drainage basin: The area defined by topographic boundaries which contributes stormwater to a drainage system, estuarine waters, or oceanic waters, including all areas artificially added to the basin. 
(100)  Drinking water standards: State drinking water standards appear in Chapter 17-22, F.A.C. 
(101)  Drip line: A vertical line running from the outermost horizontal circumference of the tree branches extending to the ground. 
(102)  Due public notice: As used in connection with the phrase "public hearing" or "hearings with due public notice", shall mean publication of notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City in the manner prescribed by Section 166.041, Florida Statutes (2001) or, if allowed by statute, notice may be accomplished by the mailing of said notice to persons owning real property within five hundred (500) feet of the affected area at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Should a specific section of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations establish notice requirements different from herein and it does not involve zoning or rezoning, then those procedures shall be followed for that matter. 
(103)  Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof which is designated for or used for residential purposes, but does not include a trailer coach, or converted trailer, hotel, motel, lodging house or boardinghouse. 
(104)  Dwelling, one-family (single family): A private residential building used or intended to be used as a home or residence in which the use and management of all sleeping quarters, all appliances for sanitation, cooking, ventilation, heating and lighting are designated exclusively for the use of one family. Partitioning so that any substantial interior area of the dwelling is inaccessible from any other interior portion of the dwelling without resort to exterior access is prohibited, and the building shall have only one kitchen and one electrical meter. 
(105)  Dwelling, two-family: A residential building designed for or occupied by two (2) families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided (duplexes). The common wall or party wall separating the dwelling units of a two-family dwelling (duplex) shall extend to the roof line of the dwelling building and shall meet the same fire wall requirements and [as] applicable to the common wall or party wall separating townhouse units. Each dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling (duplex) shall be serviced with separate utilities, such as electric, water, gas and sewer facilities, and [the units] shall otherwise be independent of one another. (See, Townhouse.) 
(106)  Dwelling, multiple-family: A residential building designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) or more families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided, including dwellings, two-family, garden apartments and the following (see Part VI): 
(a)  Apartment house. A building or portion thereof used as a multiple dwelling for the purpose of providing three (3) or more separate dwelling units which may share means of egress and other essential facilities. 
(b)  Condominium dwelling unit. Defined by the Standard Building Code, the same as apartment house. 
(c)  Efficiency apartment. A dwelling unit in which the kitchen, living, sleeping and dining facilities are located within one room. 
(107)  Duplex: See Dwelling, two-family. 
(108)  Economic development: Any business creation, expansion, relocation, or investment which results in an addition to the economic activities of an area. 
(109)  Economic development enhancement program: Any program that seeks to promote economic development. 
(110)  Educational uses: Activities and facilities of public primary or secondary schools, vocational and technical schools, and colleges and universities licensed by the Florida Department of Education, including the areas of buildings, campus open space, dormitories, recreational facilities or parking. 
(111)  Elevated building: Means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls or breakaway walls. 
(112)  Emergency water shortage plans: Plans developed by WMD's which detail the graded response to various levels of water shortage during drought conditions developed pursuant to s. 373.175. F.S. 
(113)  Eminent danger: A readily perceived or conspicuous hazard which could cause harm or damage to the public. 
(114)  Enclosed storage areas: Those areas that are entirely enclosed within a continuous fence or wall constructed of solid material that is nontransparent, opaque and cannot be seen through. Said enclosure must be a uniform height of six (6) feet, and any gate in the enclosure shall also be constructed of nontransparent material six (6) feet in height and be kept closed at all times except when ingress and egress is being made to or from the storage space. No materials, equipment, supplies or other form of tangible personal property shall at any time be placed, stored or kept within the storage space so as to exceed the height of the fence or wall constituting the enclosure, or so as to be visible to persons and members of the public who may walk or travel in motor vehicles adjacent to the enclosure. 
(115)  Encroachment: Encroachment is defined as any protrusion of a vehicle outside a parking space, displayed area or accessway into a landscaped area, sidewalk and any other public access. 
(116)  Endangered species: Species in danger of extinction if the deleterious factors affecting their populations continue to operate, since their numbers have already declined to such a critically low level or their habitats have been so seriously reduced or degraded that without active assistance their survival in Florida is questionable. Includes those species listed as "endangered" by the USFWS, FGFWFC, FDACS and assigned State Element Ranks of S1 by the FNAI. (See also "Threatened species," "Species of special concern.") 
(117)  Erosion and sedimentation control plan: A plan for the control of soil erosion and sediment resulting from a land-disturbing activity, also known as an ESC plan (see Part IV). 
(118)  Estuary: A semi-enclosed, naturally existing coastal body of water in which saltwater is naturally diluted by freshwater and which has an open connection with oceanic waters. "Estuaries" includes bays, embayments, lagoons, sounds and tidal streams. 
(119)  Evacuation routes: Routes designated by county civil defense authorities or the regional evacuation plan, for the movement of persons to safety in the event of a hurricane. 
(120)  Existing grade: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
(121)  Existing traffic: Means and refers to Average Annual Daily Traffic. 
(122)  Family: As used in these regulations, and as used in the Standard Building Code or any building code hereafter adopted by the City of Rockledge, "family" shall mean one or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive of household servants. A number of persons, but not exceeding two (2) living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, though not related by blood, adoption or marriage shall be deemed to constitute a family. 
(123)  Filling: The placement of any soil or other solid material, either organic or inorganic, on a natural ground surface or an excavation in an effort to raise the existing grade. 
(124)  Filling station: See Service station (see Part VIII). 
(125)  Final development order: Means and refers to a building permit. 
(126)  Finished grade: The final grade or elevation of the ground surface forming the proposed design. 
(127)  First flush: The initial volume of stormwater runoff generated following the onset of rainfall which contains the majority of stormwater pollutants. For the purpose of stormwater regulations, the first flush is usually defined as the runoff generated by the first one inch of rainfall, or the first one-half inch of runoff. (See also "Detention," "Diversion," and "Retention.") 
(128)  Flood or flooding: Means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(129)  Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM): Means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
(130)  Flood insurance rate map (FIRM): Means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
(131)  Flood insurance study: Is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
(132)  Floodplains: Areas inundated during a 100-year flood event, identified by the National Flood Insurance Program as an A Zone or V Zone on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM's) or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or identified by the USGS, WMD's, or local governments. 
(133)  Floodway: Means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
(134)  Floor: Means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood-frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
(135)  Floor area, minimum: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of several floors of a building or buildings, measured from exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of walls, separating two (2) attached buildings. 
(136)  Floridan Aquifer: The confined, artesian aquifer underlying the East Central Florida Region which serves as the principal supply of water for this region. 
(137)  Functional dependent facility: Means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
(138)  Garage apartment: An accessory or subordinate building, not a part of or attached to the main building, containing living facilities for not more than one family, which living facilities shall not occupy more than fifty (50) per cent of the total floor area of said building. 
(139)  Garage, private: An accessory building or a portion of the principal building, used for storage of automobiles of the occupants of the principal building. A carport is a private garage. 
(140)  Garage, public: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for the sale, storage, serving, repairing, equipping and hiring of motor-driven vehicles. 
(141)  Garage, storage: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for the storage or parking of automobiles. Service, other than storage, at such storage garage shall be limited to refueling, lubrication, washing, waxing and polishing. 
(142)  Garden apartment: Multiple-family dwellings, consisting of structures placed side-by-side, or one at the rear of another, sharing at least one common wall, and with not more than two-and-one-half (21/2) stories in height. Garden apartment includes duplexes (dwelling, two-family). 
(143)  Goal: The long-term end toward which programs or activities are ultimately directed. 
(144)  Grading: Altering surfaces to specified elevation, dimensions and/or slopes. This includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
(145)  Greywater: Wastewater obtained from domestic sinks and tubs, but excluding that part of the plumbing waste stream which includes human wastes ("blackwater"). 
(146)  Ground covers: Ground cover plants used in lieu of grass shall be placed in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and may be used in conjunction with decorative mulch such as pine or cypress bark or other materials of similar nature. 
(147)  Group home: A facility which provides a living environment for unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional and social needs of the residents. Adult Congregate Living Facilities comparable in size to group homes are included in this definition. It shall not include rooming or boarding homes, clubs, fraternities, sororities, monasteries or convents, hotels, residential treatment facilities, nursing homes, or emergency shelters. 
(148)  Guest cottage: Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main building, to be used exclusively for housing members of the family occupying the main building and their nonpaying guests. Such quarters shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. Said building shall have no separate electric meter, no kitchen, and shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet (see RCE zoning in Part VI). 
(149)  Habitat corridor: A relatively natural connection between two parks, preserves or other managed areas. Habitat corridors may be terrestrial, aquatic, or both. They serve not only to permit the movement of individual organisms, but may also provide the biological connectivity necessary to thwart the random ecological, meteorological or genetic events which might otherwise doom populations of plants or animals isolated in a preserve, by allowing periodic outbreeding with external populations, or colonization of the preserve by new founders (especially after local extinctions within the preserve). (See also "Wildlife corridor.") 
(150)  Hazardous waste: Solid waste, or a combination of solid wastes, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly transported, disposed of, stored, treated, or otherwise managed. 
(151)  Hazardous waste facility: Any building, site, structure, or equipment at or by which hazardous waste is disposed of, stored, or treated. 
(152)  Hazardous waste management: The systematic control of the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, processing, treatment, recovery and disposal of hazardous wastes. 
(153)  Hazardous waste transfer facility: A facility for the temporary collection of hazardous waste prior to transport to a processing plant or to final disposal. 
(154)  Heavy industrial: Uses are generally likely to produce adverse physical and environmental impacts such as noise, land, air and water pollution and transportation conflicts. Accordingly, compatibility of heavy industrial developments with surrounding land uses is a major concern. The type of uses and activities allowed in the heavy industrial category includes mining, heavy manufacturing repair and other uses similar in character along with necessary supporting uses, the manufacturing of the resins and other components from which such products are made, processing including scrap processing, manufacturing of paints, enamels and allied products concrete batching plants, storage/warehousing including bulk storage of liquids, research and development activities, transportation terminals including fright terminals, transmission and relay towers, yard waste composting, and recycling facilities. Heavy industries must be located with convenient access to the transportation network which includes major highways, railroads, airports and port facilities. 
(155)  Hedge: A line of shrubs planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken visual screen (see Part VIII). 
(156)  Highest adjacent grade: Means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
(157)  Historic resources: All areas, districts or sites containing properties listed on the Florida Master Site File, the National Register of Historic Places, or designated by a local government or potentially eligible for designation as historically, architecturally, or archaeologically significant. 
(158)  Historical traffic growth map: Means and refers to a map(s) prepared by the Development Director, showing the preceding three (3) years' increase or decrease in Average Annual Daily Traffic on various State, County, and City arterial and collector Links, based upon traffic counts and which provide the information to be used in projecting the Background Traffic during the Buildout Period of the Proposed Project. This map(s) shall be prepared within one month after the effective date of this Code and updated as new Significant Projects are approved. This map(s) shall not include three (3) years of traffic data and information until three (3) years after the effective date of this Code (see Sec. 85). 
(159)  Home occupation: Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by an occupant thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof. Home occupation shall not be construed to include barbershops, beauty parlors, tea rooms, food processing, restaurants, sale of antiques, commercial kennels, real estate offices, professional offices or insurance offices. Refer to Part VIII, [Section 80.03,] entitled "Home Occupations." 
(160)  Hotel: Any building or group of buildings containing sleeping room accommodations for twenty-one (21) or more guests and providing services generally provided by a hotel and recognized as a hotel in the community in which it is situated or by the industry. 
(161)  Hurricane shelter: A structure designated by local officials or identified in plans as a place of safe refuge during a storm or hurricane. 
(162)  Hurricane vulnerability zone: The areas delineated by the regional or local hurricane evacuation plan as requiring evacuation. 
(163)  Indigenous: Any species of plant native to the Central Coastal area of Florida. 
(164)  Industrial land use: Activities within land areas which are predominantly connected with manufacturing, assembly, processing, storage of products. Industrial uses will be at a relatively low to moderate intensity, consistent with existing uses. 
(165)  Industrial marina: Marinas which exclusively serve commercial interests. These facilities may include fish houses, docking areas, boatyards, shipyards and oil/coal terminals. (See also "Marina," "Port facility.") 
(166)  Infrastructure: Those man-made structures which serve the common needs of the population, such as: sewage disposal systems; potable water systems; potable water wells serving a system; solid waste disposal sites or retention areas; stormwater systems; utilities; piers; docks; wharves; breakwaters; bulkheads; seawalls; bulwarks; revetments; causeways; marinas; navigation channels; bridges; and roadways. 
(167)  Insignificant impact link study: Means and refers to a traffic study of any Directly Accessed Links of a proposed Insignificant Project. 
(168)  Insignificant project: Means and refers to a Project, other than a Major Project, for which the Project Trips on every Link(s) during the Buildout Period and upon completion of the Project are projected to be less than or equal to three per cent (3%) of the Threshold Level of Service D, as set forth in the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan and computed by use of DOT Guidelines. Trips generated by an insignificant Project shall be computed by use of the Trip Generation Standards, alternative standards as set forth in Section 85.00 of this Code, or actual current traffic counts using Accepted Engineering Principles and Standards for traffic counts set forth in this Code. If the Proposed Project does not generate more than three per cent (3%) of the Threshold Level of Service on the Proposed Project's Directly Assessed Link, it shall be presumed that the rate of traffic generation occurs on all Links and that the Proposed Project is therefore an Insignificant Project. However, this presumption may be rebutted by the City or any interested citizen. 
(169)  Institutional uses: Activities within land areas which are predominantly connected with schools, hospitals, and medically related facilities. Institutional land uses will be at a relatively low to moderate intensity, consistent with existing uses. 
(170)  ITE: Means and refers to the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
(171)  Integrated pest management: A program of agricultural and/or silvicultural pest control which combines chemical pesticides with biological controls and special cultivation measures which, collectively, reduce the amount of chemical pesticides used while maintaining a nearly equivalent amount of pest control. 
(172)  Inter-district transfer (of water): The transport of water from within one WMD to another. Since WMD's are organized along surface watershed boundaries, such a transfer will usually also be an interbasin transfer, where surface water is involved. However, an inter-district transfer of ground water may not be an interbasin transfer. Inter-district transfers are regulated pursuant to s. 17-40.05, F.A.C. 
(173)  Interbasin transfer (of water): The transport of water, usually for the purpose of public water supply, from one surface water or ground water basin to another. However, "interbasin transfer" may also refer to those instances wherein water is moved between basins for reasons other than public water supply, such as agricultural drainage canals. 
(174)  Isolated wetlands: Wetlands which do not have a direct surface water connection to waters of the State as defined in s. 403.031(12), F.S.; essentially, those wetlands which are not subject to the permitting jurisdiction of the FDER. (See also "Wetlands.") 
(175)  Junkyard: An open area where waste, or used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, store, baled, packed, disassembled or wrecked, including, but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junkyard includes an automobile wrecking yard. 
(176)  Kennels, pet: See Pet kennel. 
(177)  Land development code: For purposes of these regulations, "land development regulations" or "regulations for the development of land" include any local government zoning, subdivision, building and construction, or other regulations controlling the development of land. The various types of local government regulations or laws dealing with the development of land within a jurisdiction may be combined in their totality in a single document known as the "land development code" of the jurisdiction. 
(178)  Land-disturbing activity: Any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
(179)  Landscaping: Landscaping shall consist of any of the following or a combination thereof: living material, such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, and trees. Landscaping may include, for accent purposes, nonliving durable material such as, but not limited to, rocks, mulch, pebbles, walls or fences, but excluding paving. 
(180)  Landscaped area: The area designated on any site upon which landscaping material may be placed, including stormwater retention areas. 
(181)  Laundry, self-service: A business that provides home-type washing and drying or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises. 
(182)  Leachate: A discharge, in the form of an aqueous solution, particulate suspension or emulsion, from an underground source carried through the groundwater which penetrates and/or permeates the source. For example, groundwater flowing through a landfill and carrying chemical wastes picked up from domestic wastes off the site of the landfill would constitute leachate. 
(183)  Level of service: Means and refers, with regard to traffic and transportation, [to] the measure of the functional and operational characteristics of a roadway based upon traffic volume in relation to road capacity. The Level of Service for a specific roadway is set in the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan and is computed as set forth in this Code. In reference to water, the term means and refers to the amount of potable water available for consumption by occupants or others within a residential, commercial, industrial, or other type of Project in relation to the amounts consumed by a Project. In reference to sanitary sewage, the term means and refers to the amount of wastewater generated by a residential, commercial, industrial, or other type of unit, the capacity for [which] is available in a Wastewater Treatment Facility or on-site disposal system to effectively treat Wastewater in compliance with all governmental standards. In reference to Solid Waste, the term means and refers to the amount of Solid Waste generated by a Project in relation to the capacity of a Solid Waste Disposal Facility. In reference to Parks and Recreation, the term refers to the amount of active or passive recreational property necessary to serve a Development Project in relation to the capacity of Parks and Recreational Facilities Available to serve the Project. In reference to Stormwater Runoff/Drainage, the term refers to the amount of stormwater runoff generated by a Proposed Project for which there is retention and capacity to treat [as] collected, or [capacity to] convey by a Stormwater Management System. 
(184)  Light industrial: This category includes totally enclosed industrial uses, which have fewer objectionable impacts such as noise, odor, toxic chemical and wastes. Types of primary uses include light assembly and manufacturing, packaging, business/professional offices, radio/T.V. studios, medical clinics, veterinarians, vocational/trade schools and building trade contractors. Secondary uses include institutional uses, and public facilities such as trade and technical schools, health clinics, fire stations, utility plants, churches and day care centers; commercial, retail and service establishments, broadcasting studios, business as well as professional offices including veterinarians, filling stations, restaurants and similar other supporting commercial uses. 
(185)  Limited access facility: A roadway especially designed for through traffic, and over, from, or to which owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons have no greater than a limited right or easement of access, and includes expressways, interstates and toll roads. 
(186)  Limnetic zone: The open water area of a lake or pond which is too deep to support the growth of rooted submerged, emergent or floating-leaf aquatic macrophytes (i.e., wetland plant species). (See also "Wetlands," "Littoral zone.") 
(187)  Link: Means and refers to the portion of a Major Thoroughfare between two major intersections, or between a Major intersection and the end of the thoroughfare, or between a Major Intersection or end of the thoroughfare and the City limits. 
(188)  Littoral zone: The interface between the open water area of a lake or pond and the surrounding uplands which will support the growth of submerged, emergent or floating-leaf aquatic macrophytes (i.e., wetland species of plants). (See also "Wetlands," "Limnetic zone.") 
(189)  Live entertainment: This includes, but is not limited to, singers, pianists, musicians, musical groups, bands, vocal or instrumental dancers, theatrical shows, magicians, performers, comedians and all fashions, forms and media of entertainment carried on and conducted in the presence of and for the entertainment and amusement of others as distinguished from records, tapes, pictures and other forms of reproduced or transmitted entertainment. 
(190)  Living area: The minimum floor area of a residential dwelling unit as measured by its exterior dimensions, exclusive of carports, porches, sheds, garages and utility rooms which are not within the walls of a dwelling, and having access from within the main living area. 
(191)  Living marine resources: Oceanic or estuarine plants or animals, such as mangroves, seagrasses, algae, coral reefs, and living marine habitat, fish, shellfish, crustacea and fisheries; and sea turtles and marine mammals. 
(192)  Loading space: A space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks or other motor vehicles. 
(193)  Local planning agency (LPA): The agency designated by the city council, through ordinance, to prepare and monitor the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan. The LPA designation has been given to the city planning commission. 
(194)  Locally unpopular land use: A term that has been applied to projects which have historically generated intense local opposition to their siting. It is often used in referring to such land uses as prisons, hazardous waste facilities, landfills, power plants and other uses perceived by the public as posing a health or safety risk. 
(195)  Local road: A roadway providing service which is of relatively low traffic volume, short average trip length or minimal through traffic movements, and high volume land access for abutting property. 
(196)  Lodging house: A building other than a hotel or boardinghouse where lodging for at least three (3) but not more than twenty (20) persons is provided for definite periods for compensation pursuant to previous arrangements. 
(197)  Lot: A parcel of land shown on a recorded plat, or any piece, parcel or tract of land described in a deed recorded in the official records in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the eighteenth Judicial Circuit of Florida in and for Brevard County, and having its principal frontage upon a public or privately owned and city-approved street, or drive, and meeting all minimum zoning requirements of the City of Rockledge. The term "lot" shall include "plot," "parcel," "tract" or "site." 
(198)  Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
(199)  Lot, coverage: That portion of any lot, parcel or tract of land which is covered by all structures. 
(200)  Lot, depth: The distance measured from the middle point of the front line to the middle point of the opposite rear line of the lot. 
(201)  Lot, double frontage: A double frontage or through lot is defined as a lot that has frontage on two (2) nonintercepting streets. The applicable front setback requirement shall apply to both frontages regardless of which line the landowner elects as the front line, unless such lot has a permanent solid face subdivision perimeter buffer wall precluding access along one frontage. 
(202)  Lot, key: A key lot is a lot so configured or situated that one or both of its side lines coincide with the rear lot line or lines of adjacent lots on either or both of its sides. 
(203)  Lot line, front: In case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the front lot line is the line separating such lot from the right-of-way line of said street. In the case of double frontage lots, one such line shall be elected by the owner to be the front line for the purpose of this regulation. 
(204)  Lot line, rear: The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a rear lot line in which such lot line or lines are more than twenty (20) degrees from parallel to the front lot line, the rear lot line shall be that assumed line parallel to the front lot line, the length of which shall not be less than fifty (50) per cent of the required lot width in the zoning district. 
(205)  Lot line, side: A side lot line is any lot boundary not a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from the street is an exterior side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
(206)  Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Brevard County, or a parcel of land the deed of which was recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Brevard County. 
(207)  Lot, reversed corner: A corner lot the street side lot line of which is substantially the continuation of the front line of the first lot to its rear. 
(208)  Low and moderate income housing: Rental or owner housing that is affordable to lower income families and households whose annual income does not exceed 80 per cent of the median income for the area. 
(209)  Low density residential land use: Low density residential land uses shall be at a density not exceeding three (3) dwelling units per acre. 
(210)  Major and minor arterial roadways: A major arterial roadway is intended and designed to function primarily as a corridor of through traffic movement, rather than the provision of access to individual parcels of land. Major arterials generally have higher operating speeds, and are of greater overall length than minor arterials. A major arterial augments the interstate highway systems, while minor arterials augment the major arterial systems. 
(211)  Major projects: Means and refers to any Project which is: (i) A Development of Regional Impact; (ii) A residential Project of 250 or more dwelling units; (iii) A commercial or industrial Project of more than 50,000 square feet of gross building area; (iv) Any project of any type which is contractually bound to financing or constructing any portion of a Major Thoroughfare which is not site related; (v) Any specific school site identified pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 85.00; or (vi) Any Florida Quality Development. 
(212)  Major project map: Means and refers to a map(s) prepared by the Development Director, showing the location of all Major projects in the City. This map shall be prepared within two (2) months after the effective date of this Code and updated as new Projects are approved. 
(213)  Major thoroughfares: Means and refers to: (i) All roads that function as arterials and collector streets as determined by the Development Director; (ii) All proposed and approved roads that would, if built, function as arterials and collectors during the Buildout Period of the Proposed Project; or (iii) For a Proposed Project, any local road or non-collector or non-arterial roadway providing direct access from the Proposed Project to an intersection on an existing collector or arterial Link; all as determined by the Development Director, in accordance with Accepted Traffic Engineering Principles or as identified in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(214)  Major trip generators or attractors: Concentrated areas of intense land use or activity that produces or attracts a significant number of local trip ends, including but not being limited to developments of regional impact and similar types of development. 
(215)  Mangrove stand: Means an assemblage of mangrove trees which is mostly low trees noted for a copious development of interlacing adventitious roots above the ground and which contain one or more of the following species; black mangrove (Avicennis nitida); red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle); white mangrove (Languncularia racemosa); and buttonwood (Conocarpus erecta). 
(216)  Manufactured housing: Any house constructed in compliance with the federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
(217)  Marginal land: Those lands that are considered only marginally suitable for any economic use (other than perhaps agriculture, recreational open space, or very low-density residential development). They are characterized as flood hazard areas (100-year flood-prone area and wetland) or poor soil areas (poorly drained or high water table) as defined by the Soil Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the U.S. Geological Survey, the federal flood insurance agency, or other public agencies. Where professional derived site specific data conflicts with published data, the site specific data shall prevail if technically verified by the city staff. 
(218)  Marina: Any facility for the sale, repair, rental, storage and servicing of boats, which requires direct, contiguous access to a water course, water body or coastline associated with jurisdictional waters of the State. 
(219)  Marine habitat: Areas where living marine resources naturally occur, such as mangroves, seagrass beds, algal beds, salt marshes, transitional wetlands, marine wetlands, rocky shore communities, hard bottom communities, oyster bars or flats, mud flats, coral reefs, worm reefs, artificial reefs, offshore springs, nearshore mineral deposits, and offshore sand deposits. This definition includes, but is not necessarily limited to, those community types classified as Estuarine or Marine by the Florida Natural Areas Inventory. 
(220)  Mass transit: Passenger services provided by public, private or non-profit entities such as the following surface transit modes: commuter rail, rail rapid transit, light rail transit, light guideway transit, express bus, and local fixed route bus. 
(221)  Medium density residential land use: Medium density residential land uses shall be at a density greater than three (3) dwelling units per acre and not exceeding fourteen (14) dwelling units per acre. 
(222)  Mean sea level: Means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purpose of these regulations, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
(223)  Metropolitan core area: See "Central business district (CBD)." 
(224)  Minerals: All solid minerals, including clay, gravel, phosphate rock, lime, shells (excluding live shellfish), stone, sand, heavy minerals, and any rare earths, which are contained in the soils or waters of the state. 
(225)  Mini-warehouse: A fully enclosed building or buildings having individual compartmentalized units, stalls or lockers with privately controlled access points which are to be rented only as storage space for customer's goods, wares or personal property. The maximum interior area of each unit shall be four hundred (400) square feet with a maximum interior height of fourteen (14) feet, with access being provided by overhead garage doors with maximum dimensions of ten (10) feet in width and twelve (12) feet in height or one side-hinged door with maximum dimensions of three (3) feet in width and eighty (80) inches in height. Each unit may be provided with overhead electric lighting. An office for the rental of the storage spaces may be included provided it does not exceed three hundred (300) square feet, excluding any bathroom facilities. 
(226)  Mixed land use: This area allows more than one predominant use in a defined designated area on the Rockledge Future Land Use Map. 
Planning District 5- This mix encourages commercial, manufacturing and governmental support facilities with a mixture of medium density residential and which discourages any other residential use. 
Planning District 6- Multi-family residential uses may be allowed to locate on the west side of Murrell Road to a depth of 630 feet. Commercial uses may also be allowed to a depth of 300 feet. 
Planning District 7- This mix is a balanced mix of commercial, recreational and multifamily residential to service both the permanent and tourist populations. Recreational uses will focus around a golf course community. Multi-family densities will not exceed 14 dwelling units per acre. No single use will predominate but all uses will be functional related. 
(227)  Mobile home: "Mobile home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight (8) body feet or more in width, over thirty-five (35) body feet in length, built on an integral chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. In addition to the foregoing, the term "mobile home" shall mean any structure which meets all of the requirements of this paragraph and which is a dwelling unit fabricated on or after June 15, 1976, in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, with each section bearing a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
(228)  Modular factory-built homes: A modular unit residential building comprised of one or more dwelling units, or habitable rooms or component parts thereof, which is either wholly manufactured or is a substantial part constructed in central manufacturing facilities and bears the approval of the department of community affairs. However, this term does not apply to mobile homes as defined by Florida Statutes. 
(229)  Mosquito impoundment: A diked coastal wetland area used to impound water for the control of airborne arthropods, including mosquitoes. Impoundments usually have little or no hydrological connection with the estuary. 
(230)  Motel: A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units designed primarily for transient travelers. The term "motel" includes buildings designated as auto courts, tourist courts, motor lodges and similar appellations. 
(231)  National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD): As corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
(232)  Native vegetation: Trees, shrubs, herbs, and other plants which are indigenous to the State of Florida, and were not introduced by man. 
(233)  Native wildlife: Those animals, to include all species of mammals, birds, fish, reptiles, amphibians, and invertebrates, which are indigenous to the State of Florida, and were not introduced by man. 
(234)  Natural community: A naturally occurring ecological association of native plants and animals found in the State of Florida. Natural communities include, but are not necessarily limited to, those identified in the Florida Natural Areas Inventory list of natural community types. (See also "Native vegetation," "Rare or endangered ecosystems.") 
(235)  Natural drainage features: The naturally occurring features of an area which accommodate the flow of stormwater, such as streams, rivers, lakes and wetlands. 
(236)  Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
(237)  Natural reservations: Areas designated for conservation purposes, and operated by contractual agreement with or managed by a federal, state, regional or local government or non-profit agency. 
(238)  Neighborhood park: A park which serves the population of a neighborhood and is generally accessible by bicycle or pedestrian ways, which is either active or passive, that can serve up to 5,000 people and is no greater than five (5) acres in size. 
(239)  New construction: Means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after March 4, 1987. 
(240)  Newspaper of general circulation: Means and refers to a newspaper published at least on a weekly basis and printed in English, but does not include a newspaper intended primarily for members of a particular occupational or professional group, a newspaper whose primary function is to carry legal notices, or a newspaper that is given away primarily to distribute advertising. 
(241)  Nonconforming use: The use of a building or portion thereof, or land or portion thereof, which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located and was legally established and existed prior to the effective date of such use regulations. 
(242)  Nonindigenous: Any species of plants not native to the Central Coast of Florida. 
(243)  Nonpoint source pollution: Any source of water pollution that is not a point source. 
(244)  Nursing (convalescent) home: An institution, building or other place, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide, for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours, nursing care, personal care or custodial care for three (3) or more persons not related to the owner or manager by blood or marriage who by reason of illness, physical infirmity, or advanced age require such services, and which nursing (convalescent) home does not include any place providing care and treatment primarily for the acutely ill; but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. Nursing (convalescent) homes shall not be considered adult family-care homes or facilities. 
(245)  Objective: A specific, measurable, intermediate end that the City is striving to achieve and which marks progress toward a goal. 
(246)  Off-peak season: Means and refers to the time from May 2nd through November 30th, inclusive. 
(247)  Off-street parking space: Minimum net area of appropriate dimensions for parking an automobile, exclusive of access drives or aisles. 
(248)  Older adult living facility (OALF): A housing complex for older persons, intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit. Such a complex shall also adhere to the following conditions and requirements in order to be classified "housing for older persons" as defined in F.S. § 760.29(4)(b): eighty (80) per cent of all units in the complex shall be occupied by one person fifty-five (55) years of age or older; complex shall be designed to meet the physical and social needs of older persons; managers of the complex shall publish and adhere to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
(249)  Open spaces: Undeveloped lands suitable for passive recreation or conservation uses. 
(250)  Outlying business district: An area within the influence of an urbanized area that is normally separated by some distance from the central business district and its fringe area, but that has the intense activity characteristic of a central area. The principal land use is business, and there may be heavy traffic or through movements, causing vehicles to operate at lower speeds than in fringe areas. Also characterized by large demand for parking and high turnover and moderate pedestrian traffic. This category does not include off-street shopping on one side of a street only. Moderate to heavy strip development on both sides of a street shall be considered as outlying business district areas. 
(251)  Paratransit: Transit services, including ridesharing, car or van pools, demand responsive buses, and other public transit services, which are characterized by their nonscheduled, non-fixed route nature. 
(252)  Parcel of land: Means any quality [quantity] of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its locations and boundaries may be established, which is designated by its Owner or Developer as land to be used, or developed as, a unit or which has been developed as a unit. 
(253)  Park: A neighborhood, community or regional park. 
(254)  Peacetime emergency plan: The plans prepared by the Florida Division of Emergency Management, county civil defense or county emergency management agency addressing weather-related natural hazards and man-made disasters except nuclear power plant accidents and war. The plan covers hazard mitigation, emergency preparedness, emergency response, emergency recovery. 
(255)  Peak season: Means and refers to the time from December 1st through May 1st, inclusive. 
(256)  Performance security: Means and refers to sufficient funds irrevocably committed by written instrument to secure complete performance of a contract or condition of a Development Order or Developer's Agreement in a form as approved by the City Attorney of a: (i) Letter of Credit issued by a Florida banking institution; (ii) Escrow Agreement wherein funds are held by an escrow agent located in Florida; (iii) Surety Bond; (iv) Cash Bond; (v) Tri-Party Agreement executed by the City, the Developer, and a Florida lending institution; or (vi) Any other method of comparable security as set forth in i-v, approved by the City Council and in a form approved by the City Manager and City Attorney (see Part VII). 
(257)  Person: The term "person" shall include individual, partnership, cooperation, association or other legality, and shall include the plural as well as the singular. 
(258)  Pet kennel: Any lands, structure or facility where any pet or pets, regardless of number, are kept for sale, or for breeding, boarding or treatment purposes, except where allowed in any animal hospital or grooming parlor or pet shop. Any premises used for residential purposes where four (4) or more pets, excluding fish, six (6) months or older are kept, harbored or maintained shall be deemed to be a pet kennel. 
(259)  Planned shopping center: A center, mall, plaza or other commercial retail development which includes separate retail stores, shops, offices and other retail outlets, hereinafter referred to as "stores," where goods or services are marketed for sale to the public and such stores are congregated on a single piece, parcel or tract of land, and share common parking facilities and other amenities. To be deemed a planned shopping center, the development shall include all of the following: 
(a)  The development shall encompass an area of four (4) or more acres of land; and 
(b)  Contain a structure or structures having a combined cumulative total of twenty-five thousand (25,000) or more square feet of usable interior space; and 
(c)  Is required to have one hundred (100) or more automobile parking spaces under the provisions of Section 62.110 of the Rockledge Code; and 
(d)  Includes more than three (3) separate stores, shops, offices or retail outlets. 
(260)  Point source pollution: Any source of water pollution that constitutes a discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture. 
(261)  Policy: The way in which programs and activities are conducted to achieve an identified regional goal. 
(262)  Pollution: Is the presence in the outdoor atmosphere, ground or water of any substances, contaminants, noise, or manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of air or water, in quantities or at levels which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life, or property, or unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property. Pollution includes, but is not necessarily limited to, violations of FDER standards for air quality (Chapter 17-2, F.A.C.), water quality (Chapter 17-3, F.A.C.), dredge and fill (Chapter 17-4 and 17-12, F.A.C.), and drinking water (Chapter 17-22, F.A.C.). 
(263)  Port facility: Harbor or shipping improvements used predominantly for commercial purposes including channels, turning basins, jetties, breakwaters, landings, wharves, docks, markets, structures, buildings, piers, storage facilities, plazas, anchorages, utilities, bridges, tunnels, roads, causeways, or all other property or facilities necessary or useful in connection with commercial shipping. (See also, "Marina," "Industrial marina.") 
(264)  Potable water: Water which is suitable for drinking. Implies that the water meets the criteria of ss. 17-3.071, 17-3.404, and/or 17-22, F.A.C. 
(265)  Potable water facilities: A system of structures designed to collect, treat, or distribute potable water, and includes water wells, treatment plants, storage tanks, reservoirs, and distribution mains. 
(266)  Previously issued development order/previously approved development order: Means and refers to a Development Order issued prior to the effective date of this Code. 
(267)  Private recreation sites: Sites owned by private, commercial or non-profit entities available to the public for purposes of recreational use. 
(268)  Project: Means and refers to Development on a Parcel of Land or expansion of any Development of a Project. 
(269)  Potable water supply facilities: Means and refers to publicly owned water supply works. 
(270)  Proposed project: Means and refers to a Project for which an Applicant seeks or intends to seek the issuance of a Development Order(s), which Project is unbuilt, or which Project involves expansion of an existing developed Project. 
(271)  Public areas: Street rights-of-way, utility easements, ingress and egress easements, service road easements, parks and recreational land, canals, educational facilities, governmental facilities and submerged lands. 
(272)  Public facilities and services or public facility: Means and refers to public transportation, roadways, drainage/stormwater management, potable water, solid waste disposal, wastewater treatment, parks, recreation, and open space facilities and services. 
(273)  Public recreation sites: Sites owned or leased on a long-term basis by a federal, state, regional or local government agency for purposes of recreational use. 
(274)  Public school: Means and refers to a land use and attendant buildings operated by the Brevard County School District, Brevard Community College, or state education institution, for educational or training purposes, as follows: Elementary School; Junior High School; High School; Vocation or Technical School; or college level curricula. 
(275)  Prime groundwater recharge areas: Recharge areas designated by WMD's pursuant to s. 373-095(3), F.S. 
(276)  Public access: The ability of the public to physically reach, enter or use recreation sites including beaches and shores. 
(277)  Public buildings and grounds: Structures or lands that are owned, leased or operated by a government entity, such as a civic and community centers, hospitals, libraries, police stations, fire stations, and government administration buildings. 
(278)  Public facilities: Transportation systems or facilities, wastewater treatment systems or facilities, solid waste systems or facilities, drainage systems or facilities, potable water systems or facilities, educational systems or facilities, parks and recreation systems or facilities and public health systems or facilities that are owned, leased or operated by a government entity, provided that such facilities are determined to be significant regional facilities. (See also "Regionally significant.") 
(279)  Rain sensor device: A low voltage electrical component placed in the circuitry of an automatic lawn irrigation system which is designed to turn off a sprinkler controller when it rains enough to meet the needs of the landscape. There are two (2) types: 
(a)  A soil moisture sensor senses the moisture content of the soil via probes inserted into the root zone. 
(b)  A rain switch measures the rainfall via a cup similar to a small evaporative pan or via a wick which expands and in turn switches off the sprinkler system. 
(280)  Rare or endangered ecosystem: A natural, native ecological community type which due to its limited distribution, small areal extent or rate of disappearance/modification is in danger of being lost as a viable component of the natural landscape. Includes those natural community types assigned State Element Ranks of S1 or S2, or which are identified by the FGFWFC, FDNR or RPC as rare or endangered on the basis of quantitative habitat inventories. (See also "Natural community.") 
(281)  Recreation: The pursuit of leisure time activities occurring in an indoor or outdoor setting. 
(282)  Recreational facility: A component of a recreational site used by the public such as a trail, court, athletic field or swimming pool. 
(283)  Recreational vehicle: The following types of vehicles enumerated are deemed to be recreation vehicles: 
(a)  Travel trailers. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and towed; designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses; permanently identified "travel trailer" by the manufacturer on the trailer; and when factory equipped for the road, having a body width not exceeding eight (8) feet and a body length not exceeding thirty-two (32) feet. 
(b)  Motor home or pickup coach. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses. 
(c)  Camping trailer. A collapsible, temporary dwelling structure covered with a water-repellent fabric, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses. 
(d)  Auto camper. A lightweight, collapsible unit that fits on top of an automobile and into the truck with the cover removed, and is designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses. 
(e)  All terrain vehicles. Dune buggies, swamp buggies and the like shall be considered recreation vehicles, whether or not licensed as such by the state. 
(284)  Recycling: The reuse of liquid, gaseous, or solid waste in manufacturing, agriculture, power production, or other processes. 
(285)  Regional airport: A certified air carrier (AC) airport having regularly scheduled instate or interstate flights which serve the residents of more than one local governmental jurisdiction. 
(286)  Regional goal: Means the long-term end toward which programs or activities are ultimately directed. 
(287)  Regional highway network or system: Means any roadway which meets the definition of being regionally significant (see also "Regionally significant"), and may include but not be limited to: 
1.  Interstates and other federal highways; 
2.  State highways, as components of the State Highway System; 
3.  Highways that are components of an adopted Metropolitan Planning Organization plan; 
4.  Other highways or roadways: 
a.  Whose location or service area lies within two or more local governmental jurisdictions, 
b.  That provide access to regional activity centers, including developments of regional impact, 
c.  Linking two (2) or more state roads, or 
d.  That carry a significant amount of background and project traffic generated by a regional activity center. 
(288)  Regional park: A large park (250 acres or more) on the periphery of an urban area (30 minutes to 1 hour driving time) serving a population of 100,000 or more. Such parks provide largely passive recreational opportunities which do not require intensive development (e.g., camping, nature and bridle paths, picnicking). 
(289)  Regional water (supply) authority: Authorities created by agreement between local governments for the purpose of developing, storing, and supplying water for county or municipal purposes. 
(290)  Regionally significant: As defined in s. 27E-4.02(8)(a)-(e), F.A.C. means: 
1.  A resource or facility whose area, extent or service delivery area lies within two or more local governmental jurisdictions. 
2.  A resource or facility whose uniqueness, function, benefit or importance identifies it as being of greater than local concern. 
3.  A resource or facility defined to be of greater than local concern or importance by state or federal legislative or administrative action. 
4.  A resource or facility whose proper and efficient management involves the participation or involvement of two or more governmental entities. 
5.  Facilities or resources identified as being of regional or state significance in an adopted state agency functional plan or state rule, or in the comprehensive regional policy plan or other rule of a regional planning council. 
(291)  Relocation housing: Dwellings which are made available to families displaced by public programs, provided that such dwellings are decent, safe, sanitary and within the financial means of the families or individuals displaced. 
(292)  Rendition: Means and refers to the issuance of a letter of determination by the Development Director or City Council or Board, the date of execution of which shall be presumed to have been made on the date set forth in said letter [of] determination. The letter shall be filed with the City Clerk on the same date. 
(293)  Resident population: Inhabitants counted in the same manner utilized by the U.S. Bureau of the Census, in the category of total population resident population[, which] does not include seasonal population. 
(294)  Residential uses: Activities within land areas used predominantly for housing. 
(295)  Community residential homes and care units: A governmental, non-governmental, non-profit, or proprietary facility providing an alternative to institutional placement in which a caretaker provides twenty-four-hour care to dependent clients away from their own parents, relatives or guardians, and assists them to the extent necessary to participate in normal activities and to meet the demands of daily living. This includes foster care homes, group care facilities, adult congregate living facilities and treatment and recovery facilities. 
A.  Community residential homes: 
1.  Foster care home. A dwelling in which the owners or operators are subject to licensing and approval by the State of Florida. Occupants live permanently and provide full-time care and supervision in a family living environment to full-time clients who are unrelated to the owners or operators. 
2.  Group care facility. A structure in which the owners or operators are subject to licensing and approval by the State of Florida and provide basic care and supervision in a family living environment for clients not related to the owners or operators. This non-secure facility provides supervision and care as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional and social needs of the clients. This shall include group homes, intermediate care facilities for the developmentally and intellectually disabled, runaway shelters (nondelinquent), with no more than twenty (20) clients per licensed facility. 
3.  Adult family-care home/adult congregate living facility (ACLF): A structure in which the owners or operators are subject to licensing and approval by the State of Florida, which may be operated on a profit or nonprofit basis. This is a nonsecure facility where lodging, food and one or more personal services are provided for unrelated adults. This facility shall be licensed by the State of Florida as an adult congregate living facility and will have more than twenty (20) clients per licensed facility. 
B.  Care units: 
1.  Treatment and recovery facility. A secure or nonsecure facility that provides residential and rehabilitation services, including room and board, personal care, and intensive supervision and case work. Emphasis in such facilities is on treatment and counseling services, as opposed to care and habilitation services. 
Such facilities may include an outpatient component. The following types of facilities are included, but not limited to: 
a.  Psychiatric residential treatment programs. 
b.  Drug and alcoholic rehabilitation programs. 
c.  Group treatment centers. 
d.  Group treatment centers for status offenders. 
e.  Emergency shelters. 
f.  Spouse abuse centers. 
The facility shall be licensed by the State of Florida as a treatment and recovery facility. 
(296)  Resource recovery: The process by which materials, excluding those under control of the Atomic Energy Commission, which still have useful physical or chemical properties after serving a specific purposes are reused or recycled for the same or other purposes, including use as an energy source. 
(297)  Restrictive covenants: An agreement which restricts the use of private property. 
(298)  Retention: Means the prevention of the discharge of a given volume of stormwater runoff into a public drainage system by complete on-site storage where the capacity to store the given volume must be provided by a decrease of stored water caused by percolation through the soil, evaporation, or evapotranspiration. Retention shall include, for the purpose of this definition, detention. Detention shall mean the collection, temporary storage, and discharge of stormwater in such manner as to provide for conformance to water quality standards as determined from time to time in Chapter 40C-4 and 40C-42, Florida Administrative Code. (See also, "Detention," "Diversion.") 
(299)  Retrofitting: To improve or re-construct an existing facility with the intent of bringing it into compliance (or, where that is not feasible, more nearly into compliance) with modern standards for such facilities. This term is most frequently used in reference to upgrading of wastewater treatment plants to more advanced treatment standards, or improvement of existing drainage systems to include stormwater pollutant control facilities where such facilities are either non-existent or insufficient. 
(300)  Reuse (of water): The practice of using water which is no longer fit for a particular use for a different application which can tolerate water of lesser quality, for example, capturing the "greywater" from sinks and tubs within homes and using it for lawn irrigation and car washing. 
(301)  Reverse osmosis: A process of "desalinization" whereby water is forced, under pressure, through a semi-permeable membrane, removing salt and producing potable water. 
(302)  Right-of-way: 
[a.]  Land dedicated, deeded, used, or to be used, for a street, alley, walkway, boulevard, drainage facility, access for ingress and egress, or other purpose by the public, certain designated individuals or governing bodies. 
[b.]  Land in which the state, a county, or a municipality owns the fee simple title or has an easement dedicated or required for a transportation or utility use. 
(303)  Roadway functional classification: The assignment of roads into categories according to the character of service they provide in relation to the total road network. Basic functional categories include limited access facilities, arterial roads, collector roads, and local roads, which may be subcategorized into principal, major or minor levels. Those levels may be further grouped into urban and rural categories. 
(304)  Rockledge Planning Commission or planning commission: The city council created the planning commission through Rockledge City Ordinance 412-76 (see Part II). 
(305)  Row house: See Townhouse. 
(306)  Saltwater intrusion: The process by which saline water contaminates fresh groundwater supplies, making them unusable for use as drinking water. Intrusion may be "lateral," from the ocean, or "vertical" from the relict seawater which underlays the Florida Aquifer. 
(307)  Sand dunes: Means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
(308)  Sanitary sewer facilities: Structures or systems designed for the collection, transmission, treatment or disposal of sewage and includes trunk mains, interceptors, treatment plants and disposal systems. 
(309)  Screened porch: A covered room, portico, piazza, veranda, or structure attached to a main dwelling at least two (2) exterior walls or sides of which porch are constructed principally of screen or mesh material pervious to air. A screened porch is characterized by the fact that at least two (2) of its sides consist primarily of broad expanses of uncovered screen material through which air circulates freely and visibility is not significantly impeded. 
(310)  Screening: Either: 
(a)  A strip of at least ten (10) feet wide, densely planted (or having equivalent natural growth) with shrubs or trees at least four (4) feet high at the time of planting, or a type that will form a year-round dense screen at least six (6) feet high; or 
(b)  An opaque wall or barrier of uniformly painted fence at least six (6) feet high. 
Either (a) or (b) shall be maintained in good condition at all times and may have no signs affixed to or hung in relation to the outside thereof except the following: For each entrance, one directional arrow with the name of the establishment with "For Patrons Only" or like limitation, not to exceed over two (2) square feet in area, which shall be nonilluminated. Where required in the district regulations, a screen shall be installed along or within the lines of a plat as a protection to adjoining or nearby properties. 
(311)  Seagrass bed: The natural, vegetative community which is formed by the presence of one or more of the following aquatic, flowering plant species on the bed of an estuary: Halodule wrightii, Thalassia, testudinum, filiforme. Synonymous with the classification of the estuarine community identified as "grass bed" by the Florida Natural Areas Inventory. 
(312)  Seasonal employment: Employment which does not last year-round, but which recurs at the same time each year. 
(313)  Seasonal population: Part-time inhabitants who utilize, or may be expected to utilize public facilities or services, but are not residents. Includes tourists, migrant farmworkers, and other short-term and long-term visitors. 
(314)  Sea turtle: Those species of turtle which swim freely in the Atlantic Ocean and the estuaries of the region, including the Atlantic green turtle (Chelonia mydas), the Atlantic loggerhead turtle (Caretta caretta), the Atlantic hawksbill turtle (Eretmochelys imbricata), the Kemp's Ridley turtle (Lepidochelys kempi) and the Atlantic leatherback turtle (Dermochelys coriacea). With the exception of the Kemp's Ridley turtle, all of these species may potentially nest on the Atlantic beaches of the region. 
(315)  Sediment: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is suspended, is being transported, or has been removed from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
(316)  Service station: Any building, structure or land used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuel, oils or accessories, and in connection with which is performed general automotive servicing and repairs. 
(317)  Services: The programs and employees determined necessary by a local government to provide adequate operation and maintenance of public facilities and infrastructure as well as those educational, health care, social and other programs necessary to support the programs, public facilities and infrastructure set out in the local plan or required by local, state or federal law. 
(318)  Setback: The minimum distance between the lot line and the building line. When two (2) or more lots under one ownership and unit of title are used, the exterior property lines shall be used in determining setbacks. 
(319)  Shrubs: A self-supporting, nondeciduous species of plants reasonably capable of growing and surviving in the environmental zone of the city, which shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height immediately upon planting (unless of dwarf species). 
(320)  Site: That parcel of land for which any permit from the city is sought. 
(321)  Significant impact traffic study: Means and refers to a traffic study of Links, Directly Accessed Links, and intersections within the Radius of Development Influence of a proposed Significant Project. 
(322)  Significant project: Means and refers to a Project for which Project Trips during the Buildout Period of the Project would be more than three per cent (3%) of the Threshold Level of Service D, as calculated in Section 85 of this Code. 
(323)  Significant regional facility or resource: See "Regionally significant." 
(324)  Slope: Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal usually expressed in per cent or degree. 
(325)  Solid waste: Garbage, rubbish, refuse, or other discharged solid or semi-solid materials resulting from domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, or governmental operations, but does not include solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage effluent or other significant pollutants in water resources such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste water effluents, dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or other common water pollutants, or hazardous waste. 
(326)  Solid waste facilities: Structures or systems designed for the collection, processing or disposal of solid wastes and includes transfer stations, processing plants, recycling plants, and disposal systems. 
(327)  Solid waste processing plants: A facility for incineration, resource recovery, or recycling of solid waste prior to its final disposal. 
(328)  Solid waste transfer station:: A facility for temporary collection of solid waste prior to transport to a processing plant or to final disposal. 
(329)  Special exception: A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the particular zoning district or classification, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would not adversely affect the public health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance, convenience, morals and the general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in such zoning district or classification as special exceptions only if specific provisions and standards for such special exceptions are made in the zoning ordinance. For the purposes of these regulations, the term "special exception" shall include the term "conditional use." 
(330)  Species of special concern: Species which are not "threatened" or "endangered," yet warrant special attention because they are: (1) species that, although they are perhaps relatively abundant and widespread in the State, are especially vulnerable to certain types of exploitation or environmental changes and have experienced long-term population declines, or (2) species whose status in Florida has a potential impact on other endangered or threatened populations of same or other species, both within or outside the State. For example, although the gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) is relatively abundant, it has been listed as a Species of Special Concern (SSC) by the FGFWFC because its abundance may affect that of several endangered, threatened or SSC species (indigo snake, gopher frog, Florida mouse) which share its burrows in a commensal relationship. Species of special concern include those which are designated SSC by the FGFWFC or FDACS. (See also "Endangered species," "Threatened species.") 
(331)  Spoil island: A deposit comprised of sand and shell material dredged from wetland or deepwater habitats for the construction or maintenance of navigation channels or other engineering works. Spoil islands are often characterized by fringing mangrove and/or salt marsh vegetation, a zone of opportunistic upland freshwater or salt-tolerant plant species (often including cedar trees), [and] an inner area which is either bare of vegetation or covered only by grasses and small herbaceous species. Spoil islands may be important nesting habitat for certain bird species, including brown pelicans, least terns, and a variety of wading birds and shore-birds. 
(332)  Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation and/or mulch or other ground cover and/or a combination when installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the transport of sediment by wind, water or gravity. 
(333)  Start of construction: For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvements was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
(334)  Storage: When used in conjunction with hazardous waste, means the containment or holding of a hazardous waste, either on a temporary basis or for a period of years, in such a manner as not to constitute disposal to [of] such hazardous waste. 
(335)  Stormwater: The flow of runoff water which results from a rainfall event. 
(336)  Stormwater detention facility: A structure which collects and temporarily stores stormwater for the purpose of treatment through physical, chemical, or biological processes with subsequent gradual release of the stormwater. 
(337)  Stormwater management plan: Means and refers to a plan for stormwater management prepared consistent with Part IV, of this Code, and such other regulations as may be from time to time developed to regulate drainage and stormwater runoff. 
(338)  Stormwater management system: Means and refers to a public system which collects and conveys stormwater runoff from a Project to a surface water body, such as St. Johns River basin or the Indian River Lagoon. 
(339)  Stormwater management systems facilities: A system of man-made structures or natural resources designed or used to collect, convey, hold, divert or discharge stormwater, and includes stormwater sewers, canals, detention structures, retention structures, lakes, holding basins, wetlands, and natural depressions. 
(340)  Stormwater retention facility: A structure designed to collect and prevent the release of a given volume of stormwater by complete on-site storage. 
(341)  Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and ceiling next above it. 
(342)  Street: A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. "Street" includes any lane, place, way or other means in ingress or egress regardless of the term used to describe it. In order for a privately owned thoroughfare to be deemed a "street" for purposes of meeting city zoning, subdivision or building regulations, such privately owned thoroughfare must first be approved as a street by the Rockledge City Council. 
(343)  Street right-of-way line: The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and the contiguous tract. The right-of-way line shall be considered a property line, and all front setback requirements provided in these regulations shall be measured from said right-of-way line, except corner lots which shall be controlled by the right-of-way of the side street. 
(344)  Structural alteration: Any change, except for repair or replacement, in the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
(345)  Structural controls: Dams, weirs, locks, levees, canals, pumps, drainage wells or other artificial mechanisms or works designed to modify the stage and/or flow of surface waters. Includes, at minimum, those structures adopted as official "works of the district" by the governing boards of the WMD's. 
(346)  Structural practices: Soil and water conservation measures, other than vegetation, utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss, including, but not limited to, open sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways, or outlet diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc. 
(347)  Structure: Anything constructed, erected or placed, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, and shall include tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, or other structures on wheels, or other supports, and used or intended for business or living quarters; excluding fences not over six (6) feet above the natural grade. This shall include decks, pads and concrete slabs. This shall exclude front yard driveways covering up to forty (40) per cent of the required front yard and one side yard driveway up to ten (10) feet in width, extending from the front to the rear building lines. 
(348)  Subdivision: The division of a parcel of land, whether improved or unimproved, into three (3) or more contiguous lots or parcels of land, designated by reference to the number or symbol of the lot or parcel contained in the plat of such subdivision, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or, if the establishment of a new street is involved, any division of such parcel. The term includes a resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or the land subdivided. However, the division of land lying in any zoning district other than the RCE, R1, R2, R2A, R3, MH, and TH zoning districts into two (2) or more separate parcels, regardless of the number of such parcels, will not be deemed a "subdivision" so as to require platting if, after such division, each parcel will meet all minimum frontage, area and lot requirements applicable in the zoning classification wherein the property is located, and will have all road, utility, draining and other public improvements required for a subdivision lot under the subdivision ordinances of the city; provided, that any such division of property will not result in any portion or parcel thereof having a greater density than is permitted under applicable zoning ordinances of the City of Rockledge. 
(349)  Subdivision inspector: Is the building official or his subordinate who would review the compliance standards of proposed subdivisions with the standards set by the city, in the preliminary stages of site plan review through acceptance of the completed subdivision as built. 
(350)  Submerged vegetation: Plants which normally grow entirely underwater, and may or may not be anchored to a substrate by roots or holdfasts. Includes certain species of algae, aquatic mosses, aquatic ferns and aquatic flowering plants. 
(351)  Substandard lot of record: The owner of such nonconforming lot of record is permitted to build on such lot if the proposed structure meets all setback requirements for the zoning district where the lot is located and the planned structure meets all minimum standards (setbacks, size of structure, etc.) as required for that zoning district, subject to the following: 
(a)  Setbacks. On the substandard corner lots in subdivisions platted prior to the adoption of these regulations, on secondary streets the setback shall be one-half of the setback as required under these regulations, but in no case shall the setback be less than twelve and one-half (121/2) feet. All other setbacks shall comply to the setback requirements of each district on which a structure is to be erected. 
(b)  Front yards. Where lots comprising forty (40) per cent or more of the frontage on one side of a block are developed, the average alignment of the existing buildings along such frontage shall be the front yard line of said side block and no building erected or structurally altered shall project beyond it; provided, however, that no front yards shall be less than twenty (20) feet in depth. 
(352)  Substantial improvements: Means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a structure, taking place during the life of a structure, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) per cent of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety codes specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(353)  Support documents: Any surveys, studies, inventory maps, data, inventories, listings or analysis used as bases for or in developing the local comprehensive plan. 
(354)  Surficial aquifer: An unconfined, non-artesian body of water stored in the soil. The top of the surficial aquifer may form the groundwater table. 
(355)  Survey, certified: A survey, sketch, plan, map or other exhibit is said to be certified when a written statement regarding its accuracy or conformity to specified standards is signed and sealed by a registered surveyor. 
(356)  Swimming pool: "Swimming pool" shall mean a structure designed to contain a body of fresh or salt water for swimming, bathing, wading or other recreational purposes over eighteen (18) inches in depth and with a surface exceeding seventy-five (75) square feet. For the purpose of calculating lot coverage, the term "swimming pool" shall not include decks or walkways other than the required three-foot walkway. 
(357)  Threatened species: Species that are likely to become endangered in the State within the foreseeable future if current trends continue, including: (1) species in which most or all populations are decreasing because of overexploitation, habitat loss, or other factors; (2) species whose populations have already been heavily depleted by deleterious conditions and which, while not actually endangered, are nevertheless in a critical state; and (3) species which may still be relatively abundant but are being subjected to serious adverse pressures throughout their range. Includes those species listed as "threatened" by the USFWS, FGFWFC, FDACS and assigned State Element Ranks of S2 by the FNAI. (See also "Endangered species," "Species of special concern.") 
(358)  Threshold level of service: Means and refers to the Level of Service for Public Facilities and Services as set forth in the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan and as computed by use of these regulations, which threshold is the point at which the Level of Service crosses from a permitted Level of Service to a Level of Service not permitted by the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan based on peak hour traffic volume characteristics relative to Average Annual Daily Traffic, potable water on line for consumption by a Project relative to total potable water quality, wastewater or solid waste, to be generated by a Project relative to total Waste Water Treatment Facility or Solid Waste Disposal capacity, amount of Stormwater Management System and retention capacity, [available to] directly service a Project, or amount and type of active or passive recreation park land necessary to serve a Project relative to the total capacity of Parks and Recreational Facilities, as generally found in the City. 
(359)  Tourist home: See Guest home. 
(360)  Total traffic: Means and refers to the traffic during the Buildout Period of the Project, which is the sum of: (i) Existing Traffic; (ii) Traffic which would be generated by the proposed Project less Capture Trips and (iii) Background Traffic. 
(361)  Townhouse: A single family dwelling unit constructed as one of a series or group of attached single family dwelling units with property lines separating each dwelling unit. Each townhouse shall be constructed upon a separate lot and serviced with separate utilities and other facilities and shall otherwise be independent of one another. 
(362)  Traffic volume map(s): Means and refers to the map(s) maintained and revised from time to time by the Development Director which depicts the current Level of Services and volume to capacity (v/c) ratio on each State, County, and City operated and maintained arterial and collector (see Section 85.00). 
(363)  Transportation disadvantaged: Those individuals who because of physical or mental disability, income status, or age are unable to transport themselves or to purchase transportation and are, therefore, dependent upon others to obtain access to health care, employment, education, shopping, social activities, or other life-sustaining activities. 
(364)  Trailer coach: See Recreation vehicle. 
(365)  Travel trailer park: A park, licensed and approved by the Florida Department of Rehabilitative Services, and established to carry on the business of parking recreational vehicles, as defined in this Code. 
(366)  Treatment: When used in connection with hazardous waste, means any method, technique, or process, including neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological character or composition of any hazardous waste so as to neutralize it or render it nonhazardous, safe for transport, amenable to recovery, amenable to storage or disposal, or reduced in volume or concentration. The term includes any activity or processing designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of hazardous waste so as to render it nonhazardous. 
(367)  Trees: A woody or fibrous perennial plant which at the time of maturity has one or more upright limbs with a minimum diameter at breast height of four (4) inches, or a sum of diameter at breast height of four (4) inches for multistemmed trees, and an average mature height of at least fifteen (15) feet. 
(368)  Trip generation standards: Means and refers to the book entitled Trip Generation, 4th Edition, prepared by the ITE in 1987, all as amended or revised from time to time including more editions. 
(369)  Urban-district park: A park located in a large urban area or on its periphery, within 30 to 40 minutes driving time of the population it services. Such parks serve a population of about 50,000 people and incorporate both active and passive recreational opportunities (e.g., hiking and riding trails, nature center, boating, swimming, sports fields). 
(370)  Urban fringe area: The portion of an urbanized area immediately outside the central business district. This area exhibits a wide range of business activities (small businesses, light industry, warehousing, automobile service centers and intermediate strip development, with some concentrated residential areas). Traffic in these areas generally involves trips that do not have an origin or destination within the area. An area also exhibits less pedestrian traffic and lower parking turnover than a central business district. However, large parking areas serving the central business district might be present. 
(371)  Urban residential area: An area within the urbanized area in which the predominant land use is residential development (small businesses may be present) with a few pedestrians and low parking turnover. 
(372)  Urban service area: An area in which a full range of urban services, such as central water and sewer, fire protection, law enforcement, schools, health facilities, and transportation access, are available or planned to be available. 
(373)  Used, occupied: As applied to any land or building shall include the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed to be used or occupied." 
(374)  Variance: As used in connection with the provisions of these regulations dealing with zoning, means a modification of the zoning ordinance regulations when such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and when, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. A variance is authorized only for height, area and size of structure or size of yards and open space. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or classification or in adjoining zoning districts or classifications. Any variance to the zoning ordinance regulations must be authorized by the Rockledge Board of Adjustment and must meet the criteria stated in this Code. 
(375)  Vegetative communities: Ecological communities, such as coastal strands, oak hammocks, and cypress swamps, which are classified based on the presence of certain soils, vegetation and animals. Vegetative communities in the East Central Florida region may include, but are not necessarily limited to, those identified by the Florida Natural Areas Inventory Community List for East Central Florida. 
(376)  Viable: With respect to a natural vegetative community or ecosystem, means that the community: (1) possesses the flora characteristic of the community type; (2) that there are no non-native species among the dominant plants which comprise the community; (3) alterations or modifications to the community, other than the fact of isolation, have not been so extreme as to eliminate or severely diminish the value of the community as fish and/or wildlife habitat; and (4) the community, under the proper conditions or management (e.g., occasional controlled burning), is capable of maintaining a stable existence as a community type. 
(377)  Wastewater treatment facilities (WWTF): Means and refers to publicly owned Wastewater Treatment Works. 
(378)  Water-dependent natural ecosystems: Those ecosystems or natural vegetative communities whose continued stable existence depends upon a hydrological regime which limits the ecosystem's distribution to areas associated with surface water or high groundwater table conditions, including those community types listed as palustrine, lacustrine, riverine, marine and estuarine by the Florida Natural Areas Inventory. 
(379)  Water-dependent uses: Activities which can be carried out only on, in or adjacent to water areas because the use requires access to the water body for waterborne transportation including ports or marinas, recreation, electrical generating facilities, or water supply. 
(380)  Water-related uses: Activities which are not directly dependent upon access to a water body, but which provide goods and services that are directly associated with water-dependent or waterway uses. 
(381)  Watershed: See "Drainage basin." 
(382)  Water course: Any natural or artificial channel, ditch, canal, stream, river, creek, waterway or wetland through which water flows in a definite direction, either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed, banks or other discernible boundary. 
(383)  Water recharge: The process by which water which falls on the land surface percolates into the soil and is stored in an underground aquifer. Recharge may be to a surficial aquifer, or (under special conditions) to the artesian Floridan Aquifer. 
(384)  Water recharge areas: Land or water areas through which groundwater is replenished. 
(385)  Water reclamation: Similar to "Water reuse," but implies that some form of processing and/or decontamination is required before the water can be used. For example, wastewater can be treated to advanced standards and then reused for irrigation. Even greywater may need some processing to reduce health risks associated with its use. 
(386)  Water reuse: The recovery of water after its application for one use (which requires relatively high-quality water), and diverting it to another use which requires water of lesser quality. A farm on which high-quality groundwater is used for irrigation, but tailwater collected from runoff is pumped back on to the land to supplement the groundwater withdrawal, is an example of direct reuse. Some rescue [reuse] applications may require prior treatment of the "waste" water, such as in the use of greywater. (See also "Water reclamation.") 
(387)  Water wells: Wells excavated, drilled, dug, or driven for the supply of industrial, agricultural or potable water for general public consumption. 
(388)  Wetlands: Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For the purposes of this classification wetlands must have one or more of the following three attributes: (1) at least periodically, the land supports predominantly hydrophytes (i.e., wetland indicator plant species as given in s. 17-4.022, F.A.C.); (2) the substrate is predominantly undrained hydric soil (as indicated by SCS soils classifications); and (3) the substrate is nonsoil and is saturated with water or covered by shallow water at some time during the growing season of each year. (See also, "Isolated wetlands.") 
(389)  Wildlife corridor: A special case of "habitat corridor," in which the primary purpose of the biological connection between preserves is to allow the movement of individual animals in their search for food or mates. Such connections are not necessarily "roadways for animals," but may instead serve to allow long-term cross-breeding between scattered populations, or allow colonization of habitat which is unutilized by a particular species. However, in the case of large animals with large home-range requirements (e.g., black bear, Florida panther), the corridors may provide connections between areas that would in themselves be too small to provide suitable habitat, but together satisfy the species' requirements. The terms "habitat corridor" and "wildlife corridor" are usually used interchangeably and meant to be synonymous, since "wildlife corridor" connections for specific species of large wildlife will also provide the functions implicit in "habitat corridors." 
(390)  Yard: An open space at grade between a mean building and the adjoining lot lines. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building line shall be used. 
(391)  Yard, front: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the principal building or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, uncovered balconies or uncovered porches. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
(392)  Yard, rear: A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear of the principal building or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, balconies or porches. On all corner lots, the rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
(393)  Yard, side: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building or any projection thereof. 
(394)  Zero lot lines: An optional zoning alternative to provide for subdivision design flexibility while maintaining the integrity of single family detached life style. This zero lot line subdivision design allows a single family structure to be placed on one side of the property line, thereby maximizing the utilization of land and individual lots in new subdivisions, meeting the requirements of this subsection. This provision is only applicable for PUD zoning, unless stated differently in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1016-91, § 1, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 1049-93, § 6, 4-21-93; Ord. No. 1047-93, § 1, 4-21-93; Ord. No. 1080-94, § 2, 7-6-94; Ord. No. 1120-96, § 1, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1211-2000, §§ 1-3, 4-5-00; Ord. No. 1268-2002, § 1, 4-3-02; Ord. No. 1294-2002, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 1364-2004, § 1, 12-1-04; Ord. No. 1379-2005, § 2, 6-1-05; Ord. No. 1530-2009, § 1A., 1B., 9-23-09; Ord. No. 1534-2009, §§ 1, 2, 11-4-09) 
Part II - ADMINISTRATIVE 
SECTION 21.00. - THE ADMINISTRATOR/ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 

21.01. - Scope. 
    The provisions of these regulations shall be administered in accordance with the rules set forth in this part and the detailed regulations governing each district. The building official and the zoning official are given certain powers, limitations and responsibilities in regard to these regulations and their implementation. All necessary administrative procedures are set forth including those regarding the general relationship of other departments, administrative agencies and governmental bodies; the method for public participation; remedies for applicants; fees and recording of documents and similar matters. Appellant procedure to the court system regarding any ruling or decision on any matter covered in these regulations has been provided. The method for amending these regulations and related documents has been prescribed. The adoption and the effective date of these regulations and other related documents are also outlined and prescribed. 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, former § 25-301 of the Code of Ordinances has been included herein as § 21.01. 
21.03. - The city council. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the Council of the City of Rockledge to perform the following duties and responsibilities in accordance with these regulations: 
(a)  To adopt these regulations in accordance with, and based upon, the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Rockledge. 
(b)  To make amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and the zoning map, and to rezone property as prescribed in these regulations and to establish policies and formal procedures to ensure compliance with Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, and the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan, including all required reports on amendments to said plan. 
(c)  To hear appeals from the various governmental bodies and agencies as provided in these regulations and make decisions. 
(d)  To hold public hearings, where and when required, as prescribed in these regulations. 
(e)  To ensure proper preparation of all reports, including amendments to said plan, in compliance with Florida Statutes. 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, former § 25-310 of the Code of Ordinances has been included herein as § 21.03. 
21.10. - The administrator. (Reserved) 
21.15. - Creation of building official. 
[(a)]  The office of building official is hereby established. The building official shall be appointed by the city council at its first regular meeting after the annual election each year, and shall hold office until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. 
[(b)]  The city building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of these regulations. 
[(c)]  No person shall hinder or interfere with the building official or any of his assistants or subordinates in the discharge of their duties. 
21.20. - Duties and responsibilities of building official. 
    Duties of the building official shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of these regulations have been satisfied; 
(b)  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(c)  Notify adjacent communities and the Florida Department of Community Affairs prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(d)  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(e)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with Section 42.00. 
f)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with Section 42.00. 
(g)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the building official shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with Section 42.00. 
(h)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building official shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section. 
(i)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 42, then the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article III [Section 50.50]. 
(j)  All records pertaining to the provisions of these regulations shall be maintained in the office of the building official and shall be open for public inspection. 
21.40. - Enforcement officer/zoning official. 
    Building official deemed enforcement/zoning officer. The building official and/or his designee is hereby designated and required to enforce these regulations, except as otherwise herein specifically provided: 
(a)  Notification of violations; abatement. Upon receipt of information, and upon verification by the building official that any of the provisions of these regulations are being violated, the building official shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the sections of these regulations being violated and ordering the necessary steps to abate such violation. The building official shall order the discontinuance of the use of land, water or building; the removal of any building, addition or other structure; or the discontinuance of any work or any other thing being done in violation of these regulations. 
(b)  Legal remedies for violations. In addition to other remedies, the building official, through the city attorney, may institute an appropriate action or proceedings to compel compliance with any of the provisions of these regulations. 
21.41. - Planning director/zoning official duties and responsibilities. 
    There is hereby created the position of planning director/zoning official. The planning director/zoning official shall have the following powers and responsibilities, and in his absence, the city manager may perform these duties: 
(a)  To accomplish all administrative actions required by these regulations, including the giving of notices as specified in these regulations; preparation of reports as specified in these regulations or as otherwise required; receiving and processing of appeals. 
(b)  To maintain and keep up-to-date the Zoning Ordinance, zoning map and all records relating to the Zoning Ordinance and its administration, as may be set forth in these regulations or as may otherwise be necessary. 
(c)  To make and determine the boundaries of zoning districts as provided for in Part VI of this Code. 
(d)  To provide for the initial intake and processing of all applications for zoning changes, variances, conditional uses, special exceptions, design options, historical areas and similar uses as required in these regulations. 
(e)  To refer to other involved agencies, departments or governmental bodies for review of all applications for which such reviews are specified in these regulations; provide liaison with other agencies needed; and provide copies of reports and/or case records to other agencies as requested or as directed in these regulations. 
(f)  To review all applications for any permits requiring proper land use as required by these regulations to ensure their conformity to the applicable provisions of these regulations. 
(g)  To be subject to the policies laid down by the city council and with the assistance of the city attorney to interpret the Zoning Ordinance to members of the public, governing agencies, departments and all branches of government, as requested or needed. 
(h)  To undertake preliminary negotiations with and provide advice to all applicants for zoning changes, variances, conditional uses, special exceptions and similar matters covered by these regulations and make the proper referrals to the planning commission or other involved agencies of government. 
(i)  The city manager shall appoint an individual, other than the building official, to accept and account for all fees. 
(j)  To issue temporary use permits, sign permits and any other similar permits that may be required by this Code. 
(k)  To make determinations on fulfillments of requirements for conditional uses and issue approvals thereof as required by this Code. 
(l)  To suggest to the planning commission and the city council modifications to the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map with a written statement outlining the need for such changes. 
(m)  To act upon or refer to the proper department, agency or government any matter brought before him within three (3) calendar weeks of the date of filing, or within such longer period of time as may be agreed upon by the zoning official and the applicant; if no decision or appropriate referral has been made at the expiration of such time, the applicant shall be deemed to have been denied and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the status of his application. 
(n)  To make all required inspections necessary to make decisions on matters on which he is empowered to render such decisions, or, subject to the approval of the governing body, to enlist such expert opinion as he may deem necessary to report upon any technical issues that may arise. 
(o)  To hire such persons as necessary to assist in the fulfillment of the requirements of his office, subject to the applicable employment regulations, and delegate to these employees such of his assigned duties and responsibilities as may be necessary to carry out properly the functions of his office. 
(p)  To enforce the provisions of this Code and to cooperate with other agencies, departments and branches of government in such ways as may be necessary or required to accomplish this end. 
(q)  To be the chief implementor of the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan by coordinating the development review process. 
(r)  To chair the development review committee. 
(Ord. No. 1376-2005, § 8, 5-4-05) 
21.42. - Administrative waiver of setback(s) and height requirements by the building official. 
(a)  In all residential zoning classifications, side, rear and front setbacks and height regulations may be partially waived by the building official under the following conditions: 
(1)  Said waiver shall not apply to special setbacks imposed by any provisions of this Code other than the provisions establishing setback requirements generally in different zoning classifications. 
(2)  Said waiver shall not exceed ten (10) per cent of the required minimum setback(s) or height restriction in the specific zoning classification. 
(3)  Said waiver shall not, in the opinion of the building official, have an adverse affect on the surrounding neighborhood or general welfare of the area, and must be consistent with the applicable intent and policies for the planning district as identified in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(4)  Said waiver shall apply only to the principal structure, not to any accessory structures. 
(b)  Applicants for administrative waivers of setback and/or height requirements shall submit a letter to the building official setting forth the specific request and the need therefor. Said letter shall have the following criteria documentation attached: 
(1)  A signed affidavit from all abutting property owners indicating no objection to the requested waiver of setback or height restriction. 
(2)  Verification by certified survey of required setbacks and/or height requirements and the proposed setbacks and/or height requested by the applicant, and the percentage of setback or height differential proposed for the lot or parcel. 
(c)  Failure of the applicant to obtain signatures of all abutting property owners will divest the building official of authority to grant the requested administrative waiver, and will confer jurisdiction and authority therefor to the board of adjustment after a public hearing with the same public notice as required of applicants for a variance or special exception pursuant to the provisions of Section 23.30(b) of this Code. 
(d)  Denial of the request for an administrative waiver under the provisions of this section may be appealed to the board of adjustment under Section 23.30(a). 
SECTION 22.00. - THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

22.10. - Creation and authority. 
    The city planning commission is hereby created and shall be known hereafter as the planning commission. Upon the appointment of the planning commission members, election of officers and adoption of bylaws, its existence shall begin. The planning commission may engage in planning operations in any area within and without the political legal boundaries of the city if such area may affect the public health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance, convenience, morals and general welfare of the city. However, the planning commission shall not exercise authority over any area without the incorporated area of the city except where otherwise allowed by Part II of Chapter 163 of the Florida Statutes, aforesaid. 
22.11. - Commission designated "local planning agency." 
    The city planning commission, is hereby designated as the "local planning agency" of the city pursuant to the requirements of Section 163.3167(8) and Section 163.3174, Florida Statutes. 
22.12. - Statutes adopted. 
    Part II of Chapter 163 of the Florida Statutes, as same may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as fully as if incorporated and set out at length herein, and the city does hereby elect to proceed under the provisions of such law and to exercise the powers granted thereby. 
22.20. - Powers and duties. 
    The functions, powers and duties of the planning commission shall be, in general and in addition to any functions, powers or duties set forth in the provisions of this Code and other Ordinances of the city and in Part II of Chapter 163 of the Florida Statutes, aforesaid, to: 
(a)  Gather, process and store information and materials relating to the use and development of land. 
(b)  Investigate matters which might affect the health, welfare, safety or public interest of the city and other matters which might affect the environmental quality of the area. 
(c)  Employ means of publicity and education to promote public understanding of matters related to planning and environmental quality. 
(d)  Conduct such meetings and surveys as are deemed necessary to aid in the determination of community goals and attitudes of the citizens of the city and adjoining areas. 
(e)  Make or cause to be made any necessary special studies to aid in the performance of its functions, powers and duties. 
(f)  Establish principles, objectives and policies for the planned use and development of land in and adjacent to the city. 
(g)  Prepare and maintain plans for the future development of the city. 
(h)  Recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public facilities and improvements, and recommend to the appropriate agencies and governing bodies regulations and programs to prevent degradation of the environmental quality of the area. 
(i)  Consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations and with citizens with relation to the protecting and carrying out of the plans, policies, principles and objectives established by the planning commission. 
(j)  Employ lawful means and methods to aid in the performance of its functions, powers and duties. The planning commission, its employees and agent, in the performance of their functions, powers and duties, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. The planning commission, its employees and agents shall have such powers as are required for the performance of official functions in carrying out the purposes of this section. 
(k)  Assign duties to agents to aid in the performance of its functions, powers and duties. 
(l)  Review land use and development proposals for land in and adjacent to the city. 
(m)  Conduct public hearings as required by provisions of this section. 
(n)  Expend appropriated funds as authorized or approved by the city council for salaries, fees and expenses necessary in the conduct of the work of the planning commission. 
(o)  Employ such experts, technicians and staff as may be deemed proper and pay their salaries, contractual charges and fees, and such other expenses as are necessary to conduct the work of the planning commission subject to the approval or authorization of the city council and within the financial limitations set by appropriations made or other funds available. 
(p)  Review and make recommendations on all applications and requests for special exceptions, amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and amendments to the comprehensive plan. 
(q)  Submit written recommendations to the city council and board of adjustment as it deems necessary, as requested or as required by provisions of this Code and other Ordinances of the city. 
(r)  Perform any other duties which lawfully may be assigned to it. 
(s)  Review and make recommendations to the city council with respect to those site plans that are transmitted to the planning commission for its review and recommendations pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
22.30. - Appointment and terms of office. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of nine (9) members who are to be appointed by the city council. 
(b)  The term of office of each member shall be a period of three (3) years; except that of the original nine (9) appointments, three (3) members shall have designated terms of one year each, three (3) members shall have designated terms of two (2) years each and three (3) members shall have designated terms of three (3) years each. 
(c)  Three (3) appointments shall be made each year after the year of original appointments; except, that appointments may be made to fill vacancies. Any vacancy occurring during the unexpired term of office of any member shall be filled by the city council for the remainder of the term. Such vacancy shall be filled within thirty (30) days after the vacancy occurs. 
(d)  Any members of the committee may be removed for cause by the city council. Further, any member who has three (3) consecutive unexcused absences, which are those not approved by the committee chairman prior to the meeting involved, or a total of four (4) absences during any twelve-month period, excused or unexcused, shall automatically be terminated and removed as a member of the committee. The city council shall appoint a replacement for any removed member at its next regularly scheduled meeting in the same manner as other appointment of members for the remainder of such term. 
(e)  No member of the commission shall be a relative (blood, marriage or adoption) or persons residing in the same household may simultaneously serve on the commission at any time. This shall not preclude those individuals from serving on other boards or commission. 
(f)  The School Board of Brevard County shall appoint a district representative who shall sit on the planning commission as a non-voting member who shall attend all meetings thereof and consider comprehensive plan amendments and rezonings that would, if approved, increase residential density on the property that is the subject of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1242-2001, § 2(A), 2-7-01; Ord. No. 1340-2004, § 1, 3-10-04; Ord. No. 1343-2004, § 4, 3-24-04) 
22.31. - Commission officers; appointment, duties of secretary. 
    The planning commission shall elect a chairman [and] a vice-chairman from among its members. The term of office shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be the executive director of the planning commission or an employee of the city. Such secretary shall be responsible for the preparation, printing and distribution of the minutes of each planning commission meeting and other duties as directed by the acting chairman. 
22.32. - Commission meeting; quorum, vote required. 
    The planning commission shall meet at regular intervals to be determined by it, and at such other times as the chairman or planning commission may determine. A simple majority of the total membership will constitute a quorum. Meetings with less than a quorum shall not be considered planning commission meetings, and official business shall not be transacted at any such meeting. A majority vote of members present at a planning commission meeting shall be required to decide an issue unless otherwise provided by law. All meetings of the planning commission shall be public. 
22.33. - Commission bylaws and rules; records required. 
    The planning commission shall adopt and maintain a set of bylaws to establish standards for its operations and organization including procedural rules for the conduct of its meetings and transaction of its business. The bylaws adopted by the planning commission shall reflect the schedule, the manner in which notice shall be given, the time and the place for regular meetings and the method of calling and conducting special meetings. The planning commission shall keep a properly indexed record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
22.34. - Commission expenditures. 
    The planning commission may, subject to the approval of the city council and within the financial limitations set by appropriations made or other funds available, employ such experts, technicians and staff as may be deemed proper and pay their salaries, contractual charges and fees and other such expenses as are necessary to conduct the work of the planning commission. 
22.35. - Funding of commission; income. 
    The city council may make appropriations for salaries, fees and expenses necessary in the conduct of the work of the planning commission and may also establish a schedule of fees to be charged by the planning commission. In the performance of its lawfully assigned duties, the planning commission, with the approval of the city council, has the authority to expend all sums so appropriated and other sums made available for its use from fees, gifts, state or federal grants, state or federal loans and other sources when acceptance of such loans is approved by the city council. 
SECTION 23.00. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

23.10. - Creation and organization. 
(a)  Creation; composition. A board of adjustment is hereby created. The board of adjustment shall have seven (7) members. Members shall be appointed by the city council. In addition, the city council may appoint not more than two (2) alternate members designating them as such. Such alternate members may act in the temporary absence or disability of any regular member, or may act when a regular member is otherwise disqualified in a particular case that may be presented to the board. No member or alternate member of the board shall be a paid or elected official or employee of the city council involved. 
(b)  Terms; removal of members; vacancies. The term of office of each member shall be a period of three (3) years; except, that of the original seven (7) appointments, three (3) members shall have designated terms of three (3) years each, two (2) members shall have designated terms of four (4) years each, and two (2) members shall be designated terms of five (5) years each. The members shall serve until their successors are appointed. Any member of the board may be removed from office for cause by the appointing city council upon written charges and after public hearing. Further, any member who has three (3) consecutive unexcused absences, which are those not approved by the committee chairman prior to the meeting involved, or a total of four (4) absences during any twelve-month period, excused or unexcused, shall automatically be terminated and removed as a member of the committee. The city council shall appoint a replacement for any removed member at its next regularly scheduled meeting in the same manner as other appointment of members for the remainder of such term. 
(c)  Officers; rules. The board of adjustment shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from among its members and shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the city council or of the planning commission. The board may create and fill such other offices as it may determine to be necessary for the conduct of its duties. Terms of all such offices shall be for one year, with eligibility for reelection. The board shall adopt rules for transaction of its business, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine. 
(d)  Appropriation of funds; fees. The city council is authorized and empowered to appropriate such funds as it may see fit for salaries, fees and expenses necessary in the conduct and in the work of the board of adjustment. The city council is authorized to establish a schedule of fees to be charged by the board. The board shall have the authority to expend all sums so appropriated and other sums made available for its use from fees and other sources for the purpose and activities authorized by this section. 
(e)  No member of the board shall be a relative (blood, marriage or adoption) or persons residing in the same household may simultaneously serve on the board at any time. This shall not preclude those individuals from serving on other boards. This shall apply to the board of adjustment and appeals created by the adoption of the Standard Building Code in Subsection 58.15 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1242-2001, § 2(B), 2-7-01; Ord. No. 1343-2004, § 2, 3-24-04) 
23.15. - Legal counsel. 
    The city attorney shall represent the board of adjustment in all cases presented thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1405-2006, § 1, 3-22-06) 
23.20. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
(A)  To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any Zoning Ordinance or regulation adopted by the city council. 
(B)  To hear and decide such special exceptions as the board of adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance; to decide such questions as are involved in the determination of when special exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions with appropriate conditions and safeguards or to deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this act or any ordinance enacted under the authority of this act. 
(1)  In granting any special exception, the board shall find that such grant will not adversely affect the public interest. 
(2)  In granting any special exception, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with these regulations and any ordinance enacted under these regulations. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of these regulations. 
(3)  The board of adjustment may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the special exception is required shall be begun or completed or both. 
(4)  The board of adjustment shall confer with the planning commission in all cases involving requests for special exceptions. 
(5)  Special exceptions. In granting any special exception, the board of adjustment shall find that such grant will not adversely affect the public interest, and the board of adjustment shall specifically find the following: 
(a)  The special exception is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The special exception is consistent with the intent of the zoning district within which the special exception is sought. 
(c)  The special exception does not create any adverse impacts to adjacent property through the creation of noise, light, vibrations, traffic, utility requirements, or stormwater runoff that would not have been created had the property been developed for a principal use permitted in the applicable zoning district. 
(d)  The special exception will not create any unusual police, fire or emergency services requirements. 
(e)  A site plan for the special exception has been submitted pursuant to Part II [Part III] of these regulations, and that said site plan contains limitations and conditions on use of the property acceptable to the board and binding upon the property owner. 
(f)  That the special exception meets all the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, such as lot requirements, building setback requirements, lot coverage, height, buffer yards, off-street parking, signs, storage, landscaping, etc. 
(C)  To authorize upon appeal such variance from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest when, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardships. 
(1)  In order to authorize any variance from the terms of these regulations, the board must find: 
(a)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning district. 
(b)  That special conditions and circumstances do not result from actions of the applicant. 
(c)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by these regulations to other lands, buildings or structures in the same zoning district. 
(d)  That literal interpretation of the provisions of these regulations would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of these regulations, and would work unnecessary and undue hardships on the applicant. 
(e)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
(f)  That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of these regulations and that such variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(2)  In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with these regulations. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of these regulations. 
(3)  At the time of granting of any variance, the Rockledge board of adjustment may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is granted shall be begun or completed or both, and upon a showing of good cause, said board may extend the time so prescribed for an additional term that the board deems reasonable under the circumstances. Unless a different period of time is expressly provided by the board of adjustment at the time of granting of a variance, any variance granted pursuant to this section will automatically expire and become null and void twelve (12) months after the date of the granting thereof if the right, action or privilege for which the variance is granted is not fully exercised, implemented and completed within said twelve-month period, unless the board for good cause shown extends said twelve-month period. Any variance right, action or privilege granted by said board of adjustment which has been exercised, implemented and completed, and which is thereafter discontinued, revived or otherwise allowed to cease to exist for any continuous period of twelve (12) months shall, upon the expiration of said twelve-month period, automatically expire and be null and void. The provisions of this sub-subsection providing for the automatic expiration of any variance if the variance is not exercised and completed within twelve (12) months from the date of the granting thereof, unless otherwise provided by the board of adjustment, and providing for the automatic expiration of any variance which has been exercised but thereafter removed and discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, shall not be applicable to any variance granted prior to the effective date of this subsection, nor to any variance which has been removed or discontinued prior to the effective date of this subsection, until the elapse of twelve (12) months after the effective date of this subsection. 
(4)  Under no circumstances except as permitted above shall the board grant a variance to permit a use not generally or by special exception permitted in the zoning district involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of these regulations in the zoning district. No conforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning district and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other zoning districts shall be considered grounds for the authorization of a variance. 
(D)  In exercising its powers, the board of adjustment may, upon appeal and in conformity with provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any Zoning Ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant to these regulations, and may make any necessary order, requirement, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of a majority of all the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the board is required to pass under any such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 985-90, § 1, 12-19-90) 
23.30. - Appeals. 
(a)  From decision of administrative official. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, board or bureau of the city council affected by any decision of an administrative official under any Zoning Ordinance enacted pursuant to this Code. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after rendition of the order, requirements, decision or determination appealed from by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The appeal shall be in the form prescribed by the rules of the board. The administrative official from whom the appeal is taken shall, upon notification of the filing of the appeal, forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the documents, plans, papers or other materials constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Hearing of appeals. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. In every appeal for a variance or special exception (conditional use) written notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to the last known address of the owner of each lot, piece, parcel or tract of land within five hundred (500) feet of the periphery of the premises which is the subject of the appeal. Written notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the owners of adjacent property as herein required, even though such adjacent properties are located outside the municipal limits of the City of Rockledge. Appellants may be required to assume such reasonable costs in connection with appeals as may be determined by the city council through action in setting of fees to be charged for appeals. For procedural purposes, an application for a special exception (conditional use) shall be handled by the board of adjustment as for appeals. A fee established by the city council shall be paid to the city clerk at the time any notice of appeal is filed with the board of adjustment. 
23.40. - Stay of work and proceedings. 
    An appeal to the board of adjustment stays all work on the premises and all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the official from whom the appeal was taken shall certify to the board of adjustment that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings or work shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
23.50. - Hearings. 
    The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. Appellants may be required to assume such reasonable costs in connection with appeals as may be determined by the city council through action in setting of fees to be charged for appeals. For procedural purposes, an application for a special exception shall be handled by the board of adjustment as for appeals. 
23.60. - Judicial review or decisions of the board of adjustment. 
    Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment, or any officer, department, board, commission or bureau of the city council may apply to the circuit court of Brevard County, Florida, for relief within thirty (30) days after rendition of the decision by the board of adjustment. Review in the circuit court shall be either by trial de novo, which shall be governed by the Florida rules of civil procedure or by petition for writ of certiorari, which shall be governed by the Florida appellate rules. The election of remedies shall lie with the appellant. 
SECTION 24.00. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD 

24.10. - Creation. 
    This section may be cited as the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board Ordinance. 
24.20. - Authority. 
    This section is enacted pursuant to Chapter 162, Florida Statutes. 
24.30. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this section to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Rockledge by creating an administrative board with authority to impose administrative fines and other noncriminal penalties to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective and inexpensive method of enforcing the codes and ordinances in force in the City of Rockledge, where a pending or repeated violation continues to exist, including, but not limited to, occupational license, fire, building, zoning and sign codes. 
24.35. - Applicability. 
    There is hereby created a code enforcement board of the City of Rockledge, Florida, as provided in this section. The code enforcement board may be abolished by ordinance of the City of Rockledge. 
24.40. - Organization. 
(a)  The code enforcement board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the city council. Members of the code enforcement board shall be residents of the City of Rockledge. 
(b)  Appointments to the code enforcement board shall be made in accordance with applicable law and ordinances on the basis of experience or interest in the fields of zoning and building control. The membership of the code enforcement board shall, whenever possible, include an architect, a businessman, an engineer, a general contractor, a subcontractor and a realtor. 
(c)  The initial appointments to the code enforcement board shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two (2) members appointed for a term of one year each. 
(2)  Three (3) members appointed for a term of two (2) years each. 
(3)  Two (2) members appointed for a term of three (3) years each. 
(d)  Thereafter, any appointment shall be made for a term of three (3) years. A member may be reappointed by the city council. An appointment to fill any vacancy on the code enforcement board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. 
(e)  Any members of the committee may be removed for cause by the city council. Further, any member who has three (3) consecutive unexcused absence, which are those not approved by the committee chairman prior to the meeting involved, or a total of four (4) absences during any twelve-month period, excused or unexcused, shall automatically be terminated and removed as a member of the committee. The city council shall appoint a replacement for any removed member at its next regularly scheduled meeting in the same manner as other appointment of members for the remainder of such term. 
(f)  The members of the code enforcement board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman, who shall be voting members, from among the members of the code enforcement board. The presence of four (4) or more members shall constitute a quorum of the code enforcement board. Members of the code enforcement board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for such travel, mileage and per diem expenses as may be authorized by the city council or as are otherwise provided by law. 
(g)  No member of the board shall be a relative (blood, marriage or adoption) or persons residing in the same household may simultaneously serve on the board at any time. This shall not preclude those individuals from serving on other boards. 
(Ord. No. 1242-2001, § 2(C), 2-7-01; Ord. No. 1343-2004, § 3, 3-24-04) 
24.50. - Legal counsel. 
    The city attorney shall either be counsel to the code enforcement board or shall represent the city by presenting cases before the code enforcement board, but in no case shall the city attorney serve in both capacities. 
24.55. - Jurisdiction. 
    The code enforcement board shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide alleged violations of the codes and ordinances in force in the City of Rockledge, including amendments to such codes and ordinances. 
24.60. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the code inspector to initiate enforcement proceedings of the various codes and ordinances, and no member of the code enforcement board shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(b)  Except as provided in paragraph (c), if a violation of the codes or ordinances is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator and give him a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the code inspector shall notify the code enforcement board and request a hearing. The code enforcement board, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearings shall be hand delivered or mailed as provided in Section 24.90 to said violator. At the option of the code enforcement board, notice may additionally be served by publication or posting as provided in Section 24.90. If the violation is corrected by the code inspector, the case may be presented to the code enforcement board even if the violation has been corrected prior to the board hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(c)  If the code inspector has reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately notify the code enforcement board and request a hearing. 
24.65. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  Upon request of the code inspector, or at such other times as may be necessary, the chairman, or in his absence the vice-chairman, of the code enforcement board may call a hearing of the code enforcement board. A hearing also may be called by written notice, signed by at least three (3) members of the code enforcement board. 
(b)  Minutes shall be kept of all hearings by the code enforcement board, and all hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. The city council shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by the code enforcement board for the proper performance of its duties. 
(c)  Each case before the code enforcement board shall be presented by the city attorney unless the city attorney is acting as counsel to the code enforcement board, in which event the case shall be presented by a member of the administrative staff of the city. 
(d)  The code enforcement board shall proceed to hear the case on the agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The code enforcement board shall take testimony from the code inspector, alleged violator and any witnesses. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(e)  Irrelevant, immaterial and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded, but all other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible, whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a trial in the courts of this state. Fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. The burden of proof shall be upon the code inspector to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a violation exists. 
(f)  Any member of the code enforcement board, or the counsel to the code enforcement board, may inquire of any witness before the code enforcement board. The alleged violator or his attorney, and the code inspector or counsel to the board, shall be permitted to inquire of any witness before the code enforcement board and to present brief opening and closing statements. 
(g)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the code enforcement board shall issue findings of fact, based on evidence of record, and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with powers granted in this section. The finding shall be by motion approved by a majority of those members present and voting, except that at least four (4) members of the code enforcement board must vote in order for the action to be official. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date, and that a fine may be imposed if the order is not complied with by said date. 
24.70. - Powers of the code enforcement board. 
    The code enforcement board shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings. 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may be served by the sheriff or any deputy sheriff of Brevard County, or by any police officer of the city. 
(3)  Subpoena evidence. 
(4)  Take testimony under oath. 
(5)  Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance. 
24.75. - Administrative fines; liens. 
(a)  The code enforcement board, upon notification by the code inspector that an order of the code enforcement board has not been complied with by the set time or upon finding that the same violation has been repeated by the same violator, may order the violator to pay a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each day the violation continues past the date set for compliance or for each time the violation has been repeated, and a hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order. 
(b)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the code enforcement board shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation; 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(c)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records of Brevard County and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator; and it may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the personal property, but shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. After six (6) months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the code enforcement board may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this section may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under Section 4, Article X, of the State Constitution. 
24.80. - Duration of lien. 
    No lien provided under this section shall continue for a period longer than five (5) years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against credits or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
24.85. - Appeals. 
    An aggrieved party, including the city council, may appeal a final administrative order of the code enforcement board to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo, but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the code enforcement board. An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
24.90. - Notices. 
(a)  All notices required by this section shall be provided to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt requested; by hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer, code inspector or other person designated by the City Council; or by leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with some person of his family above fifteen (15) years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice. 
(b)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in paragraph (a), at the option of the code enforcement board, notice may also be served by publication or posting, as follows: 
(1)  Such notice shall be published once during each week for four (4) consecutive weeks (four (4) publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in Brevard County. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under Chapter 50, Florida Statutes, for legal and official advertisements. Proof of publication shall be made as provided in Section 50.041 and 50.051, Florida Statutes. 
(2)  If there is no newspaper of general circulation in Brevard County, three (3) copies of such notice shall be posted for at least twenty-eight (28) days in three (3) different and conspicuous places in the county, one of which shall be at the front door of the courthouse in said county. Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. 
(3)  Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under paragraph (a). 
(c)  Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in paragraph (a), together with proof of publication or posting as provided in paragraph (b), shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this section have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
24.95. - Provisions of section supplemental. 
    It is the legislative intent of the city council in enacting this section to provide any additional or supplemental means of obtaining compliance with city codes and ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the City of Rockledge from enforcing its codes and ordinances by any other means provided by law. 
SECTION 25.00. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

25.10. - Findings. 
(a)  Whereas, there are located within the City of Rockledge, which is the oldest incorporated city in Brevard County, certain buildings, districts, and sites, both public and private, which are reminders of eras, events, and persons important in local history, and which are unique to the city and its neighborhoods, and that provide present and future generations with examples of the physical surroundings in which past generations lived; and 
(b)  Whereas, such historic resources contribute to the health, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the City of Rockledge by enhancing the cultural environment for residents, tourists, and visitors; and 
(c)  Whereas, the preservation of these resources will expand the educational and cultural opportunity available within the City of Rockledge and for its residents; and 
(d)  Whereas, the City Council of the City of Rockledge has adopted a comprehensive plan recommending protection of designated historic resources to the extent that said city council deems appropriate in the premises; and 
(e)  Whereas, the City of Rockledge has engaged the professional services of Historic Property Associates, Inc., as a consulting firm to aid the city in the preparation and adoption of an appropriate historic preservation ordinance, and the Rockledge Planning Commission has held two well advertised public hearings on a proposed historic preservation ordinance prepared by said consulting firm, and said planning commission has submitted its recommendations to the Rockledge City Council; and 
(f)  Whereas, the recommendations of the Rockledge Planning Commission, supported by the great weight and tide of public sentiment in the City of Rockledge, indicates to the Rockledge City Council that the overwhelming majority of Rockledge citizens are opposed to mandatory and compulsory regulations and restrictions for the protection and preservation of historic properties and resources, but favor encouragement of voluntary participation by property owners in the designation and preservation of historic properties and resources; and 
(g)  Whereas, it is the conclusion of the Rockledge City Council that the protection of significant historic resources in the City of Rockledge will be adequately and appropriately achieved through voluntary action and participation on the part of individual owners of historic structures and resources within the city, without mandatory and compulsory compliance requirements; and 
(h)  Whereas, the Rockledge City Council hereby determines that the provisions of this section are consistent and in compliance with the provisions of the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan pertaining to the development and enactment of an historic preservation ordinance. 
(i)  Therefore, the Rockledge City Council deems it to be in the public interest, and for a valid public purpose, to enact the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.15. - Purpose. 
(a)  This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Rockledge Historic Preservation Ordinance." 
(b)  It is hereby declared that as a matter of public policy the protection, enhancement, and preservation of historic resources are in the interests of the health, prosperity, and welfare of the people of the City of Rockledge. Therefore, this section is intended to: 
(1)  Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of buildings, improvements, landscape features, and archaeological resources of sites and districts that represent distinctive elements of the city's historical, cultural, archaeological, aesthetic, and architectural heritage through educational means designed to encourage, inspire and promote public awareness and appreciation of the value of such heritage and the need for the voluntary preservation of historic properties. 
(2)  Safeguard the city's historical, cultural, archaeological, and architectural heritage, as embodied and reflected in individual historic buildings, sites, and districts through public enlightenment of the value of preserving historical resources. 
(3)  Foster civic pride through neighborhood conservation; 
(4)  Protect and enhance the city's attraction to visitors and residents and thereby stimulate its economic potential; 
(5)  Stabilize and improve property values in neighborhoods and throughout the City; 
(6)  Promote the use of individual sites and districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the City of Rockledge; and 
(7)  Protect the rights of property ownership that are extended by federal, state, and municipal law and regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.20. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this section its most reasonable application. 
(1)  Archaeological site: A location that has yielded or may yield information on history or prehistory. An archaeological site contains physical remains of the past. An archaeological site may be found within archaeological zones, historic sites, or historic districts. 
(2)  Archaeological zone: A geographically defined area, designated pursuant to this section, which may reasonably be expected to yield information on local history or prehistory based upon broad prehistoric or historic settlement patterns. 
(3)  Building: an edifice created to shelter any form of human activity. This may refer to a house, barn, garage, church, hotel, or similar building. Buildings may refer to a historically or architecturally related complex, such as a house, jail, or barn. 
(4)  Certificate of approval: A certificate issued by the City of Rockledge Historic Preservation Board indicating its approval of plans for major alteration, construction, removal, or demolition of a landmark or of a building within a historic district. 
(5)  Contributing building: A building in a historic district that contributes to the district's historical significance through location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association, and which shall be afforded the same consideration as landmarks. 
(6)  Demolition: the complete or constructive removal of a building or any substantial part thereof when same will not be relocated to a new site and when same requires the issuance of a demolition permit. 
(7)  District: A geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, objects, or area, which are united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district also may be comprised of individual resources which are separated geographically but are thematically linked by association or history. 
(8)  Economic hardship: A condition resulting from failure to issue a certificate of approval, inflicting excessive financial burden upon the owner and amounting to the taking of the owner's property without just compensation. 
(9)  Historic preservation board: A board of citizens created by this section as described in Section 25.25 and referred to in this section as the "board." 
(10)  Historic property or historic resource: Any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, object, or other real or personal property of historical, architectural, or archaeological value, relating to the history, government, and culture of the City of Rockledge or the State of Florida. The historic property or historic resource must be specifically designated as such under ordinance by the City of Rockledge. 
(11)  Historic site: As designated under ordinance by the City of Rockledge, a single lot or portion of a lot containing an improvement, landscape feature, or archaeological site, or a historically related complex of improvements, landscape features or archaeological sites that may yield information on history or prehistory. 
(12)  Landmark: A building, object, site or structure of the highest historical, cultural, architectural, or archaeological importance and whose demolition or destruction would constitute an irreplaceable loss to the quality and character of the City of Rockledge. The property on which these are located shall be considered historic districts as defined in this section. 
(13)  Major alteration: Any significant construction or change to the exterior of a building, historic site, or historic object. Alteration shall not include ordinary repair and maintenance that does not require a building permit. 
(14)  Non-contributing building: A building, object, or site that neither adds to nor detracts from the sense of time and place and historical development of a historic district created under ordinance by the City of Rockledge. 
(15)  Object: A material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be by nature or design, movable, yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
(16)  Ordinary repairs or maintenance: Work done to prevent deterioration of a building or decay of or damage to a building or any part hereof by restoring the building as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay, or damage. Under the provisions of this section, ordinary repairs or maintenance shall apply only to the visible exterior of a building. 
(17)  Owner of record: The individual listed on the current tax rolls of the Brevard County Property Appraiser as the title holder of a specific property located in the City of Rockledge. 
(18)  Petition for designation: A petition or application submitted to the City of Rockledge Historic Preservation Board requesting designation by city resolution of a building, building site, district, or archaeological zone as historically or archaeologically significant. 
(19)  Preservation: The identification, evaluation, recordation, documentation, analysis, recovery, interpretation, curation, acquisition, protection, management, rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, maintenance, or reconstruction of historic properties. 
(20)  Reconstruction: The authentic reproduction of a building or site that once existed, but disappeared or was demolished. 
(21)  Rehabilitation: The act or process of returning a property to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the property that are significant to its historical, architectural, and cultural values. 
(22)  Relocation: The moving of a building from its existing location to a new location. 
(23)  Restoration: The creation of an authentic reproduction beginning with existing parts of an original object or building. 
(24)  Site: The location of an event, activity, building, structure, or archaeological resource where the significance of the location and any archaeological remains outweigh the significance of any existing structures. 
(25)  Structure: A work, constructed by man, made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a pattern of organization. It may be an engineering project large in scale, such as a bridge, wall, gate, or building, or small in scale, such as a monument or fountain. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.25. - Rockledge Historic Preservation Board. 
(a)  Establishment and appointments. There is hereby created the City of Rockledge Historic Preservation Board. The board shall consist of nine (9) members. In the first instance, three (3) shall be appointed for one year, three (3) for two (2) years, and three (3) for three (3) years. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for two (2) years. The city council shall appoint a member to fill a vacancy occurring on the board for the remainder of the unexpired term, at the earliest possible date. Upon designation of a historic district, the city council shall thereafter give priority consideration to appointment to the board of property owners from within the district or districts in both the original appointments to said board as well as in filling any vacancies that may occur. Members shall be eligible for reappointment and shall hold office until their successors have been duly appointed and qualified. The board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council and shall exercise its responsibilities under the direct jurisdiction and legislative control of the city council. 
(b)  Requirements for membership. Each member of the board shall be a resident of the City of Rockledge and shall hold office only for so long as he or she remains a resident and registered voter of the City of Rockledge, Florida. The city council shall make appointments to the board with due regard for their professional qualifications and for the need to achieve a balance among diverse interests within the city in order to encourage historic preservation actions that protect the interests of property owners. To that end, the city council shall consider candidates for the board who are architects, historians, historic archaeologists, real estate agents, real property appraisers, planners, engineers, building contractors, lawyers, landscape architects, or other individuals from the business, financial, and other segments of the community who, by virtue of profession or business, have demonstrated concern for or practical experience in historic preservation. Members of the board shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties, as shall be determined and approved by the city council. A member of the board may be removed from office only by a majority vote of the entire membership of the city council. should a member of the board fail to attend three (3) consecutive meetings, the chairman of the board shall certify the same to the city council. Upon such certification the member shall be deemed to have been removed and the city council shall fill the vacancy by appointment. 
(c)  Officers and staff. The members of the board shall select a chairman and other such officers as may be deemed necessary or advisable who shall serve at the pleasure of the board. The building department shall provide administrative and staff support for the board. Minutes of each board meeting shall be kept and prepared under the supervision and direction of the building official or his designee, and copies of such minutes shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(d)  Rules and regulations. The board shall make and prescribe such rules and regulations necessary and appropriate for the proper administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section. Such rules and regulations shall conform to the provisions of this section and shall not conflict with the Constitution and general laws of the State of Florida, and shall govern and control procedures, meetings, and actions of the board. No such rules and regulations shall become effective until a public meeting has been held upon the proposed rules and regulations, and any amendments or modifications thereto, and the same have been approved by the city council and filed with the clerk of the city council. Upon approval of the city council, such rules and regulations shall have the force and effect of law within the City of Rockledge, Florida. The board shall prescribe forms for use by applicants in compliance with the provisions of this section. In the proper discharge of its duties, the board may authorize any of its members to perform general functions to acquire information when deemed necessary, convenient, or appropriate by a majority of the board. 
(e)  Powers and duties. The City of Rockledge Historic Preservation Board shall have the following powers and duties, subject to the approval of the city council: 
(1)  Adopt its own procedural regulations. 
(2)  Conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically, architecturally, and archaeologically significant properties, buildings, and areas that exemplify the cultural, social, economic, political, or architectural history of the nation, state, or city. 
(3)  Recommend to the city council the designation of individual sites, districts, and archaeological zones that are historically or archaeologically significant, and as to which the property owner or owners have applied for and consented to such designation. 
(4)  Encourage the owners of individual sites, districts, and archaeological zones that are historically or archaeologically significant to make proper application for the designation thereof as such. 
(5)  Develop for approval by the city council design guidelines for alterations to landmarks or buildings within historic districts. 
(6)  Issue or deny certificates of approval in accordance with the terms of this section and thereby regulate major alterations, new construction, relocation, and demolitions affecting designated properties. 
(7)  Recommend proposed amendments to the Zoning and building codes and to the comprehensive plan for the City of Rockledge. 
(8)  Recommend for approval by the city council guidelines and criteria for issuance of certificates of approval. 
(9)  Promote public awareness of historical and archaeological preservation. 
(10)  To implement the authority of this section and fulfill the tasks set forth for this board by the city council in this and other ordinances. 
(11)  Maintain records of the board's actions and decisions. 
(12)  Assist citizens and groups in nominating landmark buildings, archaeological sites, and historic districts to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(13)  Keep a register of all landmarks, archaeological sites, historic districts, and contributing buildings within historic districts. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.30. - Designation of historic districts, landmarks, and sites. 
(a)  Criteria for designation. With the property owner's written consent, the board shall have authority to recommend to the city council the designation of areas, places, buildings, landscape features, archaeological sites, and other improvements or physical features, as individual sites, districts, or archaeological zones that: 
(1)  Are significant to the City of Rockledge's history, architecture, archaeology, or culture, and possess an integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, or association; or 
(2)  Are associated with distinctive elements of the social, political, economic, scientific, religious, prehistoric, and architectural history of the City of Rockledge, the state, or the nation; or 
(3)  Are identified with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the City of Rockledge; or 
(4)  Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, style, or method of construction or work of a master; or that possess high artistic value; or 
(5)  Have yielded or are likely to yield information about the prehistory or history of the City of Rockledge; or 
(6)  Are listed in the National Register of Historic Places. Certain properties, which include cemeteries, birthplaces, properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, buildings that have been removed from their original locations, properties commemorative in nature, and properties that have achieved significance within the last fifty years, will not normally be considered for designation. Such properties will qualify, however, if they are integral parts of districts that do meet the criteria or if they fall within the following categories: 
(7)  A religious property deriving primary significance from architectural or artistic distinction of historical importance. 
(8)  A building removed from its location but which is primarily significant for architectural value, or is the surviving building most importantly associated with a historic event or person. 
(9)  A birthplace or grave of a historical figure of outstanding importance if there is no other appropriate site or building directly associated with that figure's productive life. 
(10)  A cemetery that derives its primary significance from graves of persons of transcendent importance, from age, distinctive design features, or from association with historic events. 
(11)  A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age, tradition or symbolic value has invested it with its own historical significance. 
(12)  A property or district achieving significance within the past fifty years if it is of exceptional importance. 
(b)  Procedures for petition of designation. The following procedure shall apply in the petitioning for designation of buildings, districts or sites pursuant to this section: Petition for designation shall be made to the City of Rockledge Historic Preservation Board on a form prepared by it and may be initiated only upon verified application in writing by the owner(s) of the property to be designated or their authorized agents. The board shall hold a public meeting on the petition and shall notify the property owner by certified mail at least ten (10) days in advance of the meeting. The petition for designation shall contain the following: 
(1)  The historical, cultural, architectural, and archaeological significance of the property or properties recommended for designation; 
(2)  A drawing or survey identifying all buildings and current setbacks from property lines within a proposed district or site, and classifying each building as contributing or non-contributing, with an explanation of the criteria used in developing the classification; 
(3)  A legal description of the boundaries of the site, building, district, or archaeological zone recommended for designation, an explanation of the reasons for those boundaries, and a map illustrating the boundaries. A map illustrating a historic district shall show contributing and non-contributing properties; 
(4)  Photographic documentation of individual sites and buildings recommended for designation. 
(c)  Notification. Upon preliminary approval by the board of a petition for designation, notice of the proposed designation shall be sent by mail to the owner(s) of record of the property proposed for designation and to each owner of record of property in a proposed district. The notice shall describe the property proposed for designation, shall explain the effect of said designation upon the property or structure, and shall announce a public meeting of the City of Rockledge Historic Preservation Board to further consider such petition for designation, to be held within thirty (30) days after mailing of such notice. Unless a property owner consents in writing to said designation at the conclusion of, or after, said public meeting, the board shall not approve the proposed designation and shall take no positive action on recommending it to the city council. 
(d)  Recommendation. Upon approval of the proposed designation and with the written consent of the property owner, the board may recommend the designation to the city council for approval by resolution. 
(e)  Public meeting. The City of Rockledge Historic Preservation Board shall hold a public meeting on petitions for designation. At such public meeting, any person may present testimony or documentary evidence concerning the significance of the property under consideration. At the close of the public meeting the board shall vote to recommend in favor of the proposed designation to the city council or shall vote against the proposed designation. 
    If the board votes to recommend in favor of the proposed designation, such action will be reported to the city council by way of official minutes accompanied by a copy of the property owners written consent, and shall be considered by city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting date or not more than sixty (60) days following action by the board. If the board votes against the proposed designation, the decision of the board shall be final and the property shall not be designated by the city council. The board shall take final action either to recommend in favor of the proposed designation or to deny the proposed designation within six (6) months after the petition for designation is filed. 
(f)  Procedures for designation by resolution. The following procedures shall apply to the designation by resolution of the Rockledge City Council of a historic site, building, district, or archaeological zone: 
(1)  After receiving a report from the chairman of the City of Rockledge Historic Preservation Board as provided in Section 4(D), the city council may direct the preparation of a resolution providing for the recommended designation. Alternatively, the city council may act to deny the proposed designation without further meeting. The city council shall follow normal procedures of public meeting in the adoption of a resolution providing for such historic designation. The owner or owners of property proposed for designation shall be given written notification, by mail, of the aforesaid public meeting a minimum of ten (10) days before the public meeting. 
(2)  After final adoption of a designation resolution by the city council, buildings, sites, districts, and archaeological zones shall remain designated as historically or archaeologically significant unless such designation is removed by subsequent resolution of the city council in accordance with Section 4(H) of this section. 
(3)  The resolution providing for designation of a building as historically significant shall pertain to the building and not to the site upon which the building is located. The designation resolution may, however, contain conditions to ensure the preservation of the setting in which the building exists if the setting was a significant consideration in the designation of the building. 
(g)  Recording of designated property. The building department shall maintain a historic sites map which shall show the location of sites and buildings designated as landmarks and shall show the boundaries of designated historic districts. Within such districts, the map shall identify contributing and non-contributing buildings. 
(h)  Procedures for removal of designation. The city council may remove the historic or archaeological designation from a building or site by resolution, provided that: 
(1)  The subject property no longer meets applicable criteria for designation found in Section 4(A). 
(2)  Additional information indicates that the subject property does not meet the applicable criteria for designation found in Section 4(A). 
(3)  An error in professional judgment was made in the petition for designation of the subject property. 
(4)  A procedural error occurred in the original designation process. 
(5)  It has been determined by the city council that the property owner has violated a term or condition of a certificate of approval or of a special exception pertaining to the designated property. 
(6)  The owner(s) of the designated property files a written request for removal of the property from designation. 
(i)  Notification of designation action. Within forty-five (45) days of enactment of a designation resolution, the city council shall file with the Brevard County Clerk of Court and property appraiser a certified copy of the designation resolution and a summary explanation of the effect of such designation. Such notification will also be sent to the owner or owners of property designated as landmarks or located within the boundaries of designated historic districts. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.35. - Certificate of approval. 
(a)  Actions requiring a certificate of approval. A certificate of approval shall be required before the following actions affecting a historic landmark or a property in a historic district may be undertaken: 
(1)  Construction and reconstruction. 
(2)  Restoration, rehabilitation, and relocation. 
(3)  Stabilization. 
(4)  Demolition of a building over sixty-five (65) years old. 
(5)  Major alteration. 
(b)  Exterior only. The provisions of Section 25.35 shall apply only to the visible exterior portions of a building that are visible from the public right-of-way and shall in no case apply to the interior of a building. 
(c)  Method of application. The application shall be made on a form provided by the building department and shall be accompanied by such plans, drawings, materials, or photographs as deemed appropriate to describe the proposed alteration and enable the building official to visualize the effect of the proposed alteration on the property and adjacent buildings and streetscapes. If such application involves a designated archaeological site the applicant shall provide full plans and specifications of work that may affect the surface and subsurface of the archaeological site. 
(1)  If the proposed work and materials employed in it, as described in the application, will not, in the building official's opinion, significantly change the exterior appearance of the building, the building official may issue a building permit without a certificate of approval. 
(2)  The appropriate departments of city government shall refer all permits for land or building alteration activity affecting property designated as historically or archaeologically significant pursuant to this ordinance to the building department for a determination of whether a certificate of approval is required. 
(3)  The building department shall develop procedures and forms for making application for a certificate of approval. 
(d)  Standards for review. In considering whether to recommend approval or disapproval of an application for a certificate of approval, the board shall be guided by its adopted standards and the standards of the secretary of the interior. The board shall adopt and may from time to time amend its adopted standards by which applications for a certificate of approval are to be measured and evaluated. In adopting its guidelines and standards, it shall be the intent of the board to promote maintenance, restoration, adaptive reuses appropriate to the property, and compatible contemporary designs that are harmonious with the exterior and landscape features of neighboring buildings, sites, and streetscapes. The guidelines and standards shall also serve as criteria for the board to make decisions regarding applications for certificates of approval. The board shall make a copy of its adopted standards and guidelines available through the appropriate office of city government. In reviewing an application for certificate of approval and in adopting its own standards and guidelines, the board shall consider the following architectural criteria: 
(1)  Building height. The height of any proposed alteration or new construction should be visually compatible with adjacent properties. 
(2)  Proportion of openings. The width and height of windows, doors, and entries should be visually compatible with the style and character of those found in surrounding buildings. 
(3)  Relationship of masses and spaces. The relationship of a building within a historic district to the open space between it and adjoining buildings should be visually compatible to the district. 
(4)  Roof shape. The shape of the roof should be compatible with the shape and type of roof found on neighboring buildings in the historic district. 
(5)  Scale. The size and mass (or shape) of the building after alteration or construction should be compatible with the character of surrounding buildings. 
(6)  Landscaping. Landscaping should be compatible with the architectural character and appearance of the historic district in which the landscaping occurs. 
(7)  Architectural details. Architectural details, including color, materials, and texture, should be treated so as to make the building compatible in its original architectural style and character and to preserve or enhance the architectural style and character of the historic district in which it is located. 
(e)  Determination by the board. Based on the guidelines and standards for preservation, the designation report, a complete application for certificate of approval, additional plans, drawings, or photographs that describe the proposed major alteration, and any other guidelines the board may deem necessary, the board shall, within thirty (30) days from the date a complete application has been filed, approve or deny the application for a certificate of approval by the owner or owners of a designated property or property within a designated district. The findings of the board shall be mailed to the applicant within seven (7) days of the board decision and shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval in case of an approval. 
(f)  Denial of a certificate of approval. A denial of a certificate of approval shall be accompanied by a statement of the reason(s) for such denial. The board shall make recommendations to the applicant concerning changes, if any, in the proposed action that would cause the board to reconsider its denial and shall confer with the applicant and attempt to resolve as quickly as possible the differences between the owner and the board. The applicant may resubmit an amended application or reapply for a building or demolition permit that takes into consideration the recommendations of the board; or the applicant may appeal the decision of the board to the city council, as provided for in Section 25.75 of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.40. - Archaeological site review. 
    If the Rockledge City Council shall hereafter deem it in the best interests of the city that a survey be conducted by a professionally qualified archaeologist to determine the existence of archaeological sites or zones within the city, and if such survey discloses the existence of any such archaeological sites or zones, the same shall be defined on an archaeological zone map to be maintained by the building department. The following procedures shall apply before a permit is issued for excavation, landscaping, or other below-grade activity requiring such a permit: 
(1)  A project undertaken within an archaeological zone shall require a preliminary study made by a qualified archaeologist to determine the effect that any such project may have on the site. Where no effect or adverse effect is found, the project shall proceed following other procedures set forth in the City Code. Where an effect or adverse effect is found, the building department shall refer the information to the Rockledge Historic Preservation Board at the board's next regularly scheduled meeting with a recommendation for treatment. In making its recommendation, the board shall consider measures to avoid, reduce, or mitigate the effect on cultural or historic sites while taking into consideration the current needs of the property owner and reasonable methods for carrying out the recommended plan. 
(2)  A project undertaken in an area not defined as an archaeological zone does not require review by a qualified archaeologist before a permit is issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.45. - Permit for demolition. 
    When passing upon a certificate of approval for the issuance of a permit for demolition of a building or structure that is designated as a historic building or structure, the City of Rockledge Historic Preservation Board shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The historic or architectural significance of the building. 
(2)  The importance of the building to the ambiance of a district, if applicable. 
(3)  The difficulty or impossibility of reproducing such a building because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
(4)  Whether the building is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or in the city. 
(5)  The future utilization of the site. 
(6)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building. 
(7)  Whether the building is capable of earning a reasonable economic return on its value and whether the perpetuation of the building, considering its physical condition, its located and the anticipated expense of rehabilitation would be economically feasible. 
(8)  Whether the condition of the building is deteriorated or damaged to an extent that its rehabilitation is not economically feasible. 
(9)  Whether denial of a demolition permit will present economic hardship to the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.50. - Maintenance and repair of landmarks, landmark sites and property in historic districts. 
(a)  Every owner of a designated landmark, designated landmark site, or property in a designated historic district, shall keep in good repair: 
(1)  All of the exterior portions of such buildings. 
(2)  All interior portions thereof which, if not so maintained, may cause such buildings to deteriorate or to become damaged or otherwise to fall into a state of disrepair. 
(3)  The archaeological integrity of the site, if the property is designated as a historic site by virtue of its archaeological significance. 
(b)  The board may refer violations of this section to the building official for enforcement proceedings on any building designated under this chapter to the end that such a building or buildings shall be preserved in accordance with the purposes of this chapter. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter shall be consistent with the provisions of the building code requiring such buildings to be kept in good repair, and the secretary of the interior's standards for rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.55. - Ordinary maintenance. 
(a)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior feature of a historic building that does not involve a significant change in its outer appearance or damage the building's historic integrity or character. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the alteration, construction, reconstruction, repair, or demolition of a designated building on an emergency basis when the appropriate City of Rockledge Building Official or his designee certified in writing that such work is necessary for the purpose of correcting conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health, or property. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.60. - Economic hardship. 
(a)  Application for a certificate of economic hardship shall be made on a form prepared by the board. The board shall schedule a public meeting concerning the application, and any person may testify at the meeting concerning economic hardship. 
(b)  The board may solicit expert testimony or require that the applicant for a certificate of economic hardship make submissions concerning any or all of the following information before it makes a determination of the application: 
(1)  Estimate by the owner of the property of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition, or removal and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the recommendations of the board for changes necessary for the issuance of a certificate of approval; 
(2)  Estimated market value of the property in its current condition; 
(3)  In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect, developer, engineer, real estate consultant, appraiser, or other real estate professional as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing building on the property; 
(4)  If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from the property for the previous two years; itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years; and depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period; 
(5)  Any appraisals obtained by the owner or applicant in connection with the purpose, financing, or ownership of the property; 
(6)  Assessed value of the property according to the two most recent assessments; 
(7)  Real estate taxes for the previous two years; 
(8)  Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, or other; or 
(9)  Any other reasonable information considered necessary by the board to a determination as to whether the property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owners. 
(c)  The board shall review all the evidence and information required of an applicant for a certificate of economic hardship and make a determination within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application whether the denial of a certificate of approval has deprived, or will deprive, the owner of the property of reasonable use of, or economic return on, the property. Written notice of the determination shall be provided in the same manner as required by Section 25.30(c). 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.65. - Incentives for preservation of historically significant buildings. 
    The following incentives shall apply to historically significant properties: 
(1)  Buildings which have been designated as historically significant pursuant to this article shall be exempt from the provisions of the zoning code concerning limitations upon the repair of nonconforming buildings. 
(2)  Buildings located in a district which has been designated as a historic district pursuant to this article shall be exempt from the provisions of the zoning code concerning limitations upon the repair of nonconforming buildings, provided that such buildings have been classified as contributing. 
(3)  Buildings designated as historic buildings or landmarks, and buildings which are located in a designated historic district and which have been classified as contributing, shall qualify for the exemption accorded to special historic buildings under the appropriate sections of the Southern Standard Building Code and accumulated revisions, provided that the building meets all other requirements of that section to the satisfaction of the City of Rockledge Building Official. This exemption shall be applied only to buildings described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.70. - Owner's consent required. 
    Anything in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, no piece, parcel or tract of land in the City of Rockledge shall be designated, classified, categorized nor deemed to be a landmark, historic site, historic property, historic resource or archaeological site, nor be included as part of any historic district or archaeological zone, unless all owners of the fee simple title to any such piece, parcel or tract of land shall first make application for such designation or inclusion in writing, by a verified petition signed by such owner or owners and filed with the Rockledge Historical Preservation Board, and also consent in writing to such designation or inclusion after the public meeting on said petition, as provided in Subsections 25.30(B) and 25.30(C). 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.75. - Appeals. 
    Within thirty (30) days of the written decision of the board, an aggrieved party may appeal the decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the clerk of the city council. The notice of appeal shall state the decision which is being appealed, the grounds for the appeal, and a brief summary of the relief which is sought. Within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal or the first scheduled meeting of the city council, whichever is later in time, the city council shall conduct a public meeting at which time it may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the board. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the city council from seeking additional information prior to rendering a final decision. The decision of the city council shall be in writing and a copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the board and the appealing party. 
    Within the time prescribed by the appropriate Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure, a party aggrieved by a decision of the Rockledge City Council may appeal an adverse decision to the Circuit Court in and for Brevard County, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
25.80. - Fees and penalties. 
    The City of Rockledge Historic Preservation Board may recommend for approval by the city council an appropriate schedule of reasonable processing fees for the review of applications for designation, certificates of approval, and certificates of economic hardship. Any person who undertakes or causes a major alteration, construction, demolition, or removal of any designated landmark or property within a designated historic district shall require a certificate of approval or a certificate of economic hardship. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be considered a violation of Rockledge Code of Ordinances and be enforced under Section 24.60 of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1030-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92) 
SECTION 26.00. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE (DRC) ESTABLISHMENT AND APPOINTMENTS 
(a)  [Established.] There is hereby created the City of Rockledge Development Review Committee (DRC). Development review committee means a committee formed by the city manager to review site plans, subdivision plats, or other development applications deemed necessary in his/her discretion. At a minimum, the DRC shall consist of a member of the following department/divisions of the city: Building, planning, public works, wastewater, police, and fire. On projects within the designated community redevelopment district, the redevelopment agency director shall be a participating member of the DRC. Other personnel may be added at the city manager's discretion. 
(b)  Officers and procedures. The chairman of the development review committee shall be the planning director/zoning official. The city manager shall appoint a secretary to the development review committee to keep a record of its findings, decisions and recommendations, which shall be maintained in the office of the chairman. The meetings of the development review committee shall be held at the call of the chairman upon receipt of applications for development orders as defined herein, or by the city manager or other department representatives, and/or at such times as the development review committee shall determine. The applicant shall be notified of the day and time of the meetings and shall be present when the project is being discussed. 
(c)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The development review committee shall have the power to review applications for subdivision plats, site plans, planned development projects, developments of regional impact, and other applications submitted for development order approval which in the opinion of the city manager should be reviewed by the committee. 
(2)  All proposed development order requests, specifically for site plans, planned developments, mixed use developments, rezoning/comprehensive plan amendments, developments of regional impact or other applications deemed appropriate for review by the city manager within the community redevelopment district shall be reviewed by the DRC. 
(3)  Proposed development order requests outside the community redevelopment district may, at the request of the developer, city manager, or other department representative, be submitted to the DRC for review and recommendation. 
(4)  In reviewing such applications, the development review committee shall make a recommendation for approval, denial or approval with conditions, amendments or modifications. 
(5)  The DRC shall transmit recommendations to the appropriate reviewing authority as necessary, including but not limited to, the planning commission and city council. 
(6)  The powers and duties of the development review committee shall include other responsibilities that may be assigned from time to time by the city manger or city council. 
(7)  The DRC shall have final approval authority of all applications for site plans for residential, commercial, or industrial development projects within the community redevelopment district that are on three (3) acres or less, except where bonuses are requested. 
(d)  General considerations by the development review committee. The development review committee has the authority to consider the following in its recommendations: 
(1)  Whether an application and/or a plan is consistent with applicable goals, objectives, policies, standard and proposals in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Whether all public facilities and services necessary to serve the proposed use shall be available concurrent with the actual impact of the use in question. 
(3)  Whether the established level of service of public facilities necessary to serve the development or phase thereof shall be adversely impacted by the proposed use or activity. 
(4)  Whether the project promotes or furthers special area plans for a district in which it is located. 
(5)  Whether the proposed project is entitled to receive density or height bonuses within the Redevelopment Mixed Use District as proscribed in the land development regulations. 
(6)  Whether the project is compatible with the adjacent surroundings. 
(7)  Whether the proposed project meets the requirements of the land development regulations. 
(e)  Application processing: 
(1)  The city manager shall cause an application form to be created that will outline the required submittal documents. 
(2)  Upon receipt of an application for subdivision plats, site plans, planned development projects, developments of regional impact and other applications submitted for development order approval outside of the community redevelopment district, the city manager, chair, or other department representative, or upon request by the developer shall cause a meeting of the DRC to occur no later than fifteen (15) working days of receipt of the application. For projects within the designated community redevelopment district, a meeting shall be called not later than ten (10) working days of receipt of an application. The results of the review shall be scheduled by the city manager for the planning commission and city council meetings. 
(Ord. No. 1376-2005, § 7, 5-4-05) 

26.01. - Review of eminent domain waivers, exceptions and variances by DRC. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The Rockledge City Council finds that the acquisition of private property by various governmental or public agency entities, so authorized by law through the eminent domain process through trial or negotiations prior thereto, is an extremely costly and burdensome process. Allowing the appropriate city staff, pursuant to established guidelines, procedures and criteria, to grant waivers and exceptions from certain city land development regulations or to apply for variances on behalf of affected property owners, serves a valid public purpose and promotes the general safety and welfare of the citizens and landowners of the city. 
(b)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish a fair procedure by which the appropriate city staff can grant waivers and exceptions to city land development, signage, and engineering regulations, or to seek such waivers or variances before the appropriate boards, in order that property owners who have been subjected to the condemnation process have a viable and fair alternative in preventing any adverse impact upon their property as a result of the condemnation process and allow the continued use of their property in a manner similar to its pre-condemnation condition. Further, it is the intent of this section to establish procedures which will reduce the cost of acquisitions of real property needed for public improvements. 
(c)  Authority of development review committee. The DRC, which oversees land development, signs and engineering codes, ordinances, regulations, or resolutions, shall have the authority to grant waivers or exceptions, or to seek variances on behalf of owners of property from applicable codes, ordinances, regulations, or resolutions. The chairman of the DRC shall provide a copy of the determination letter to the city attorney's office if the property is in a condemnation lawsuit, or to the real estate management department in pre-suit negotiations, that the waiver or exception does not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(d)  Application for waivers, exceptions and variances. 
(1)  The condemning authority, or the landowner, may apply in writing to the DRC for a determination that the granting of the waiver or exception will not result in a condition which adversely affects the health, safety or welfare of the general public. 
(2)  The DRC shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, issue a signed letter to all parties granting or denying the waiver or exception. 
(3)  If the waiver or exception is denied by the DRC, the owner or condemning authority may apply for, at no cost to the owner, a variance before the board of adjustment. 
(e)  Waivers, exceptions and variances. If, as a result of a governmental taking either by negotiation or condemnation, existing lots, parcels, structures, or uses of land become nonconforming with the provisions of the land development regulations, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Existing characteristics of use which become nonconforming or increase in nonconformity as a result of a taking, including, but not limited to, minimum lot size, setbacks, open space, off-street parking, landscape requirements, drainage and retention shall be required to meet code requirements to the greatest extent possible, to the satisfaction of the appropriate department manager or his designee. Thereafter, the existing characteristics of use shall be deemed conforming. Any further expansion or enlargement thereof shall be in accordance with all applicable code requirements. 
(2)  In granting any waiver or exception to code requirements, the DRC shall: 
a.  Determine that the requested exception or waiver will not adversely affect visual, safety, aesthetic or environmental concerns of neighboring properties. 
b.  Determine that the requested exception or waiver shall not adversely affect the safety of pedestrians or operators of motor vehicles. 
c.  Preserve code-required off-street parking requirements to the greatest extent practicable. The reconfiguration, reduction, or removal of landscape and/or open space requirements may be considered to preserve off-street parking. 
(3)  If any legally existing structures (principal or accessory) or vehicular use area must be relocated as a direct result of the governmental taking, or as a result of safety concerns, if allowed to remain after the taking, then the appropriate department manager, or his designee, and the building official may allow the relocation of the structure on the remaining property, so as to comply with all applicable regulations to the greatest extent practicable, as determined by the appropriate department manager or designee. If the relocation results in substandard characteristics of use, it shall be deemed thereafter to be conforming. Any future expansion or enlargement thereof shall be in accordance with all applicable code requirements. 
(4)  Legally existing structures (principal or accessory) or vehicular use areas that become nonconforming or increase in nonconformity according to subsection (1), which are thereafter damaged or destroyed, other than by voluntary demolition, to an extent of more than seventy-five (75) percent of assessed value at the time of destruction can be restored but only to pre-destruction condition. Any expansion or enlargement that does not increase the nonconformity of a characteristic of use shall be permitted in accordance with all applicable code requirements. Where expansion or enlargement increases the nonconformity of a characteristic of use, relief from appropriate city board(s) is necessary. 
(5)  If the structure to be relocated harbors a nonconforming use, DRC may permit the relocation pursuant to this section, if it is determined that public harm will not result. 
(6)  Where part of a principal structure is taken, the reconstruction of the taken structure (same size and use) may be permitted. The reconstruction must meet code to the greatest extent possible, to the satisfaction of the majority of the DRC. The reconstructed structure shall thereafter be deemed conforming. 
(7)  Any alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work necessitated by a governmental or public agency acquisition or condemnation of real property may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes, provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The DRC shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(f)  Signs. A sign which is located on a parcel that is subject to condemnation action by a governmental or public agency may be allowed to be relocated on the remaining portion of the parcel in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The sign is to be relocated on the remaining parcel in such a manner as to meet the setback and distance separation requirements. If, due to the size and/or configuration of the remaining parcel, setback and distance separation requirements cannot be met, subject to the discretion of the DRC, the sign may be relocated so as to comply with such regulations to the greatest extent practicable as determined by the DRC. 
(2)  Any existing nonconformity of a sign, other than setback or distance separation, shall not be increased upon relocation. 
(3)  If the sign to be relocated is a nonconforming sign, upon proof submitted by the applicant and subject to the determination by the DRC that public harm would not occur, then such sign may be relocated pursuant to this subsection. Such sign shall be considered conforming upon the granting of a waiver or variance. 
(g)  Authority for staff to testify at judicial proceedings on the likelihood of variances. 
(1)  The chairman of the development review committee is hereby authorized to testify in judicial proceedings as to the likelihood of whether a variance from city's land development regulations would be granted or the reasons the department manager has granted the waiver or exception. 
(2)  In testifying, the department manager or his designee is specifically authorized to employ the following criteria: 
a.  History of similar variances, waivers or exceptions being granted by the appropriate boards in and for the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
b.  Analysis of why the variance, waiver or exception would not adversely affect surrounding property owners. 
c.  Analysis of the hardship imposed by the condemnation action initiated by the governmental or public agency. 
d.  Analysis of any and all other criteria normally considered by the appropriate boards or departments in granting similar variances, waivers or exceptions and how those criteria relate to the subject and neighboring properties. 
e.  That the granting of a variance, waiver or exception would not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(h)  Code violations threatening public health, safety and welfare. 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall not be interpreted to allow for the continued existence of building or other safety code violations that are determined to be an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  The appropriate building officials and inspectors are hereby authorized to take any and all necessary steps to enforce all applicable building and safety codes, even though the subject property is part of a condemnation action. 
(Ord. No. 1549-2010, § 1, 5-19-10) 
Part III - PROCEDURES AND PROCESSES 
SECTION 30.00. - PERMITS/APPROVALS REQUIRED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 30.00 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. 

30.10. - Legislative approvals required. 
    The following actions require the approval of city council after review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission: 
(a)  Annexations; 
(b)  Amendments to adopted Goals, Objectives and Policies of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Rockledge; 
(c)  Amendments to the Future Land Use Map (Land Use Plan Amendment or LUPA); 
(d)  Amendments to the Future Traffic Circulation Map; 
(e)  Zoning or rezoning applications; 
(f)  PUD applications for: 
(1)  Conceptual plan; 
(2)  Preliminary plan and zoning; 
(3)  Final plan and plat; 
(g)  Major/minor subdivision approval for: 
(1)  Conceptual plan (optional); 
(2)  Preliminary plat; 
(3)  Final Plat; 
(h)  Development of any tract, piece or parcel of land consisting of five (5) acres or more of land in a commercial zoning district; 
(i)  The development of any tract, piece or parcel of land consisting of ten (10) or more acres of land in an industrial zoning district; 
(j)  Any structure [which] when completed will have over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of floor area; 
(k)  Any multi-family residential structure having twenty-five (25) or more units; 
(l)  Mixed use projects within the community redevelopment district; 
(m)  Projects seeking approval for density, floor area ratio and height bonuses in the community redevelopment district; 
(n)  Other actions as may be determined from time to time by resolution or ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1376-2005, § 1, 5-4-05) 
30.20. - Administrative approvals required. 
    The following activities require approval or issuance of a development order (permit) by the building department, and are under the implementation authority of the building Official: 
(a)  Building permits in compliance with these regulations; 
(b)  Sign permits; 
(c)  Determination of compliance and issuance of a certificate of occupancy (C.O.); 
(d)  Issuance of occupational licenses; 
(e)  Application and collection of fees. 
(Ord. No. 1376-2005, § 2, 5-4-05) 
30.21. - Activities requiring approval. 
    The following activities require approval or issuance of a development order (permit) by the City of Rockledge pursuant to procedures outlined within these land development regulations. They fall under the implementation authority of the city manager, who may delegate them as needed to the planning director/zoning official: 
(a)  Annexation requests; 
(b)  Site plans; 
(c)  Subdivision plats; 
(d)  Planned unit development projects; 
(e)  Mixed-use projects within the redevelopment district; 
(f)  Interpretation of land uses where deemed appropriate; appeals of decisions may be made to the city manager; 
(g)  Determination of consistency with the comprehensive plan and concurrency management system as an individual determination, or as part of the issuance of a development order; 
(h)  Fees shall be determined by resolution of the city council and collected by a designee of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1376-2005, § 3, 5-4-05) 
30.30. - Permits required. 
    No use of property or substantial change to same, including clearing, grubbing, grading or excavation, shall be commenced, nor shall buildings or other substantial structures be constructed, erected, moved or substantially altered without first obtaining a permit or approval as set forth in Section 30.10 and 30.20 above. 
30.35. - Issuance of building permits. 
    The following requirements must be complied with: 
(A)  Except as otherwise specifically authorized in this Code, no building permit shall be issued for, nor shall any building or structure hereafter be moved, erected, altered, added to or enlarged upon, any lot, tract of parcel of land in the City of Rockledge unless at least twenty-five (25) feet of such lot, tract or parcel of land abuts on a public street, road or easement which has been dedicated to the public or to the City of Rockledge for public road purposes and which has been accepted and specifically declared opened to the public for road and street by resolution of the City Council of the City of Rockledge, except that no such resolution shall be required with respect to the dedicated streets within any duly recorded subdivision. No more than two flag lots shall be located adjacent to each other. The minimum lot width for the narrow extension of a flag lot from the buildable lot area to the right-of-way shall be no less than twenty-five (25) feet. The length and the narrow extension shall not exceed four hundred (400) feet, and will not be included in measuring setbacks or lot area. 
    A building permit may be issued for improvement of a lot, plot, tract or parcel of land which does not abut on a public street, road, alley or easement dedicated and accepted as hereinabove provided, if said lot, plot, tract or parcel of land abuts upon a limited access private street and is located in a planned residential development, subject to the conditions outlined below; and provided, that the limited access private road on those instances meets all the requirements and specifications for paved roadways in the City of Rockledge, Florida. Once the private road is fully constructed and approved, or required surety provided to the Rockledge City Council, a building permit may be issued for construction on said lot, plot, tract or parcel which abuts said approved limited access private road. 
    In order for building permits to be issued for improvement of lots abutting a limited access private street in a planned residential development, the following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  The subdivision shall be a minimum of twenty (20) acres in size. 
(2)  The Rockledge City Council in determining the need for a limited access private street shall consider the following factors: 
(a)  The character and type of development and the adjacent area. 
(b)  Projected traffic flow on such street. 
(c)  Overall density of development of the subdivisions. 
(d)  Geological characteristics of the property and special need for the security of the residents. 
(3)  The Rockledge City Council shall find that the limited access private street, by virtue of its location, length or physical characteristics, would serve no purpose as a public right-of-way and would serve no purpose as a public right-of-way and would not prohibit public access to any parcel of property adjacent to the subdivision or access to any planned public street system in the area. 
(4)  Said limited access private street shall have the required right-of-way as specified in the Rockledge Subdivision Regulations deeded fee simple to a homeowners' association composed of the owners of lots in the subdivision who will be responsible for maintenance of said limited access private street. Furthermore, said street and other public utilities shall be constructed in accordance with the Rockledge Subdivision Regulations having periodic inspections during construction by the city subdivision inspector and a certificate of completion issued by the city subdivision inspector. 
(5)  Homeowners' documents providing for maintenance of the limited access private street by a homeowners' association shall be approved by the Rockledge City Council after receiving recommendations from the city attorney, but this provision for approval by the city council shall not create nor impose any duty upon the city with respect to the continued maintenance of said limited access private street or streets. 
(6)  Public officials, in the performance of their duties, public utilities, and emergency vehicles shall be granted use of said limited access private street at all times. 
(7)  No subdivision having a limited access private street shall have any public streets. 
(8)  The limited access private street, if approved, shall be maintained to city standards. If the limited access private street is ever offered to the city by dedication or otherwise, it shall be required that said street be brought to standards prior to dedication to the city. 
(B)  No building permit shall be issued for any building, structure or use on a lot, plot, tract or parcel in a subdivision unless the public street or road upon which said property abuts shall be constructed to grade height, and unless electric service and approved sanitary sewer system and potable water system are available and installed to the lot, plot, tract or parcel in a subdivision prior to the issuance of the building permit; subject, however, to the following exception, i.e., the foregoing restriction on the issuance of building permits shall be waived by the city in any instance wherein the proposed improvement is to be situate upon a lot, plot, tract or parcel in a subdivision which does not abut on a street, road or easement dedicated to and accepted by the City of Rockledge as described in subsection (A)(7) of this section, provided the stormwater treatment system and the road base and top coat are installed and substantially completed. The building official shall consult with the subdivision inspector before the issuance of any building permit. The builder, owner and developer of the subdivision shall enter into a written agreement with the city, in form and content satisfactory and acceptable to the city, providing as follows: 
(1)  The builder, owner and developer herein referred to collectively as the "applicants" bind themselves and their successors, heirs and assigns not to occupy nor permit any occupancy of the improvements described in the building permit prior to an approved and satisfactory final inspection of the improvements by the city building official and the issuance by the city of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  No final inspection or certificate of occupancy shall be requested by the applicants nor granted by the city until the public roads, streets or easements have been accepted by the city's subdivision inspector and a certificate of completion has been issued stating that all improvements have been completed in conformity with the requirements of the city subdivision ordinance and the approved construction plans and specifications. 
(3)  The applicants fully release the city from any and all damages which may ensue or be sustained by applicants, their successors, heirs or assigns, separately and severally, in consequence of the refusal and failure of the city to perform the final inspection and issue a certificate of occupancy prior to completion of the roads, streets, utilities and public improvements aforesaid. 
(4)  The applicants, separately and severally, shall indemnify and agree to hold harmless the city from any and all claims, damages, suits, actions, judgments, costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, in consequence of the city's failure or refusal to perform said final inspection or issue a certificate of occupancy prior to completion of the roads, streets, utilities and public improvements aforesaid. 
(5)  The applicant shall be limited to two (2) model homes per subdivision, before the issuance of the certificate of completion for the subdivision. 
(C)  No building or structure shall be constructed, altered, repaired, enlarged or moved until a building, plumbing, electrical and/or an HARV permit shall have been obtained from the building official and the appropriate fee paid. 
(D)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the building official shall ensure that such construction shall comply with these regulations, or any other applicable law, and may require a certified survey of said property. 
(E)  The acceptance of a building, plumbing, electrical or HARV permit by any person shall be deemed consent to the inspection of said property by any agent of the City of Rockledge at any time in order to ascertain compliance with these regulations, 
(F)  Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape and location of the building to be erected and such other information as may be necessary to provide the enforcement of this chapter. 
(G)  A record of such applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the building official. 
(H)  Where application is made to enlarge an existing nonconforming use, the application shall be accompanied by an affidavit giving the description of the premises owned at the date of passage of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1079-94, § 1, 6-15-94; Ord. No. 1186-99, §§ 1, 2, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 1308-2003, § 1, 6-18-03) 
30.40. - Permits applicable to land. 
    All development orders or permits shall be issued in the name of the applicant but shall apply to the land, lot, parcel or site described in said permit, except for the occupational licenses which apply to the individual. 
30.50. - Burden of presenting evidence; burden of persuasion. 
(a)  The burden of presenting a complete application to the permit-issuing body shall be upon the applicant. The building official shall determine if an application is complete before processing same. 
(b)  Once a completed application has been submitted, the burden of presenting evidence that the application should be denied for any reason shall be upon the party or parties urging this position. 
(c)  The burden of persuasion on the issues of whether the development will comply with the requirements of these regulations remains at all times on the applicant. The burden of persuasion on the issue of whether the applicant should be denied, rests on the party or parties urging that the requested permit should be denied. 
SECTION 31.00. - APPLICATION/FORMScustom>[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 31.00 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. 

31.10. - The applicant. 
    Application for a development order or permit approval will be accepted only from persons having the legal authority to take action in accordance with the permit or the development order approval sought. Application should be made by the owner or lessees of property, or their agents, or persons who have contracted to purchase property contingent upon their ability to acquire the necessary permits under this these regulations, or the agents of such persons (who may make application in the name of such owners, lessees, or contract vendees). The Building Official may require an applicant to submit evidence of his authority to submit the application whenever there appears to be a reasonable basis for questioning this authority. The application must also contain a legal description of the property seeking the development order, this may involve lot, block, section, parcel, township and range or a legal description prepared by a title company or surveyor. 
31.11. - Application must be complete. 
    Applications shall be made on forms provided by the Building Department and must be complete, including all plans and attachments required by these regulations, before the Building Official is required to consider said application. The Building Official shall receive all applications and have the authority to determine the completeness of an application based on whether it contains all the information that is necessary for the permit-issuing authority to decide whether or not the development, if completed as proposed, will comply with all of the requirements of these regulations. 
31.12. - Required information and forms. 
    The Building Official shall make every effort to develop application forms, instructional sheets, checklists, or other techniques or devices to assist applicants in understanding the application requirements and the form and type of information that must be submitted. Where a minimal amount of information is necessary to enable the Building Official to determine compliance with these regulations, such as applications for zoning concerning permits to construct single-family or two-family houses, or applications for sign permits, the Building Official shall develop standard forms that will expedite the submission of the necessary plans and other required information. 
31.13. - Reference to standards. 
    Detailed or technical design requirements and construction specifications relating to various types of improvements (streets, sidewalks, etc.) are set forth in the Performance Requirements, Part IV and V and in Part VII, Appendix/Illustration. It is not necessary that the application contain the type of detailed construction drawings that would be necessary to determine compliance with these appendices, so long as the plans provide sufficient information to allow the permit-issuing authority to evaluate the application in the light of the substantive requirements set forth in this text of these regulations. However, whenever these regulations require a certain element of requirements set forth in one or more of these regulations, then no construction work on such element may be commenced until detailed construction drawings have been submitted to and approved by the Building Official. Failure to observe this requirement may result in permit revocation, denial of final subdivision plat approval, or other penalty. 
31.14. - Staff consultation before application. 
(a)  In all circumstances when an application for development is submitted to the city, the applicant is encouraged to arrange for a preliminary staff consultation prior to actual submittal. This may be a simple review of the data and information on the forms provided or a required preliminary conceptual plan review. This action is intended to minimize development planning cost, avoid misunderstandings or misinterpretations and promote compliance with requirements of these regulations. 
31.14.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish procedures and standards for the preparation, review and approval of plans to construct, reconstruct or alter structures in all zoning districts. 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, former §§ 25-381-25-386 of the Code of Ordinances have been included herein as §§ 31.14.1-31.14.6. 
31.14.2. - Procedures. 
    The plans prepared according to the requirements presented herein shall be submitted to the building official for his review and approval. Plans may be disapproved if they do not meet the intent or the requirements of this section and of these regulations. 
Note- See the editor's note following § 31.14.1. 
31.14.3. - Site plan. 
    A site plan covering the entire tract proposed for ultimate development, indicating existing conditions and development for an additional area including at least three hundred (300) feet from the boundaries of such tract, or such greater distance as may be indicated by the circumstances of the case, shall be submitted to the building official. Before a permit is issued for construction, six (6) copies of the site plan of the area, at a scale no smaller than one inch to one hundred (100) feet, shall be filed with the building official setting forth, identifying and locating the following: 
(a)  A map indicating the property boundary and the proposed or existing lotting and street system. 
(b)  All public and private right-of-way and easement lines located on and adjacent to the property which are proposed to be continued, created, relocated or abandoned. 
(c)  Existing topography with a maximum of one-foot contour point intervals. 
(d)  The location of the proposed buildings, driveways, parking lots and other uses. 
(e)  A description of the uses proposed in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those uses on producing air pollution, water pollution, fire or safety hazards, or other factors detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the area. 
(f)  Engineering plans or description, prepared and sealed by a professional engineer, for the handling of any problems of the type outlined in subparagraph (e) above, including a designation of sewers to be used and necessary plans for controlling of smoke or other nuisances such as those enumerated in the same above-referenced paragraph. 
(g)  Location and dimension of all curb cuts, driving lanes, off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas including number of spaces. 
(h)  All walks, malls and other open area. 
(i)  Location of all walls, fences and screen planting. 
(j)  Size, height and orientation of all signs. 
(k)  All existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer lines with plans prepared at a scale no greater than one inch to one hundred (100) feet, sealed by a professional engineer. 
(l)  A drainage plan, prepared and sealed by a professional engineer, of the area showing size and location of each existing and proposed structure, the approximate volume of run-off generated by development of the subject area and the proposed method of managing said water. Provisions shall be included for retention of the first one inch of rainfall on-site and for adequate control of erosion sedimentation, indicating the proposed temporary and permanent control practices and measures. 
(m)  A copy of the restrictive covenants (if any) to be included in the deeds by the developer. 
(n)  Such other information with regard to the development area as may be required by the building official to determine conformance with these regulations. 
Note- See the editor's note following § 31.14.1. 
31.14.4. - Approval process. 
(a)  Except with respect to the developments and structures described in paragraph (b) hereof, the building official shall approve, or approve subject to conditions, or reject such plans. All development and/or site plans approved shall be binding upon the applicants, their successors and assigns, and shall limit the development of all conditions and limitations established in such plans. All unauthorized deviation from the approved site plan shall be deemed a violation of these regulations. Changes from the approved site plan shall be processed for approval in the same manner as the original approval. Any existing use of land or building that fails to meet the requirements of these regulations shall be considered to be nonconforming and shall be controlled by Section 60.05. 
(b)  With respect to the following described developments of land or erection of structures no building permit or development order shall be issued by the city until after the Rockledge Building Official has transmitted the required site plan and his recommendations with respect thereto to the Rockledge Planning Commission for said commission's study and recommendations to the city council with respect to the site plan's compliance with the Rockledge Code of Ordinances, and said site plan has been approved by the city council, to wit: 
(1)  The development of any tract, piece or parcel of land consisting of five (5) or more acres of land in a commercial zoning district. 
(2)  The development of any tract, piece or parcel of land consisting of ten (10) or more acres of land in an industrial zoning district. 
(3)  Any structure which when completed will have over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of floor space. 
(4)  Any multiple-family residential structure having twenty-five (25) or more units. 
Note- See the editor's note following § 31.14.1. 
31.14.5. - General conditions which may be attached. 
    In reviewing the proposed site plan, the building official may condition approval on specified changes in the proposal. Where conditions are attached, approval will be withheld except upon written agreement by the applicant to conform to such conditions. In particular, where the site plan indicates potential adverse effects on neighboring property, the building official may require rearrangement of the plan, increased yard width, walls, fences or other requirements. 
Note- See the editor's note following § 31.14.1. 
31.14.6. - Binding site plans voluntarily submitted with a request for a zoning district change or a special exception. 
(a)  An applicant for a change of zoning district or a special exception may voluntarily submit a binding site plan in support of such change or special exception request. Said binding site plan shall be submitted a minimum of five (5) days prior to the public hearings(s). Said binding site plan shall be deemed to have been relied upon by the boards and/or city council in rendering decisions on zoning changes and special exceptions. 
(b)  If the site plan is accepted as a condition of the zoning change or special exception, it shall be considered as binding upon the lot, parcel or tract of land affected by the site plan, even though said plan imposes greater or stricter standards on said lot, parcel or tract of land than do other provisions of this Code for other lots, tracts or parcels of land in like land use classifications. Such greater or stricter standards shall be deemed appropriate when unique or peculiar site development and locational characteristics are evident and shall be deemed to exist when such site plan is considered in rendering recommendations and decisions by the planning commission, board of adjustment, and the city council. A site plan voluntarily submitted will be deemed binding on the applicant, his assigns, heirs and successors in title or possession to the lot, tract or parcel of land, and the following shall apply to any such voluntarily submitted binding site plan: 
(1)  Site plans shall be prepared in accordance with Section 31.14.3, with exceptions as permitted by the building official. Conceptual plans may also be included, but only under guidelines established by the building official and approved by the board of adjustment, planning commission and city council. 
(2)  The provisions of this section authorizing the voluntary submission of a binding site plan in conjunction with an application for zoning, rezoning or a special exception shall be applicable and available in all zoning districts of the city. 
(3)  Minor deviations from the approved plans which result from a more detailed study or plan of drainage, topography, traffic flow or engineering requirements may be allowed by the building official. If such change to the binding site plan is deemed substantial by the building official, a new public hearing shall be required. 
Note- See the editor's note following § 31.14.1. 
31.15. - Site plan review procedure/responsibility. 
(a)  In all cases where a site plan submittal is necessary the following conditions apply: 
[(1)]  It shall be the responsibility of the owner, developer or other party submitting a site plan of a subdivision (commercial or residential), PUD, commercial, multifamily, or townhouse development to the City for review and approval, to progress and pursue with reasonable diligence the performance and completion of the various requirements for site plan approval and issuance of the building permit for the development within the time period herein specified. Any person or party submitting a site plan shall complete all procedures and requirements for final site plan approval, and obtain the issuance of a valid building permit for the improvements described on the site plan, within a period of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of initial submission of the site plan to the City and payment of the site plan review fee; provided however, that in any instance wherein final site plan approval and issuance of the building permit is delayed beyond said time period due to reason or cause beyond the applicant's control, and which is not the result of applicant's negligence, procrastination, inaction, or lack of due diligence, the Building Official may administratively extend said time period for not more than an additional sixty (60) days beyond the expiration of said one hundred eighty (180) day period. In any instance wherein an owner, developer, or other applicant fails to obtain final site plan approval and issuance of the building permit for the development within the time period herein specified, the site plan review process shall upon expiration of said period automatically terminate and development cease to be under consideration by the City unless, within ten (10) days after written notice of such termination to the applicant by the City, the applicant satisfactorily demonstrates to the Building Official that applicant's failure to complete the site plan review requirements and obtain the building permit was not due to applicant's neglect, procrastination, inattention, inaction, or failure to exercise due diligence. If the applicant makes such satisfactory demonstration to the Building Official within said ten (10) day period, the Building Official may administratively grant the applicant a reasonable extension of time to complete the process and obtain the building permit. Any owner, developer or other applicant for site plan review whose development has been terminated, must recommence a new site plan review process as an original proceeding, and pay another site plan review fee, as required, if such owner, developer, or applicant wishes to resubmit the same or a new site plan after termination of a prior site plan review procedure. 
[(2)]  Within thirty (30) days after the date of enactment of this section, the building official shall notify in writing each owner, developer or other party who has submitted a site plan which has not been approved, and for which a building permit has not been issued, that they must complete the site plan approval process and obtain a building permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of such written notice, or their application for site plan approval will be withdrawn from further consideration. 
31.20. - Required submittal for single-family and duplex permits. 
    [Required submittals for single-family and duplex permits are as follows:] 
(a)  All requirements of Sections 31.10 and 31.12. 
(b)  Names of sub-contractors with correct State Licensing Numbers (Certification/Registration) must be duly noted along with address and name. 
(c)  Letters of authorization from all the named sub-contractors must be attached, signed and notarized, on the Rockledge Authorization Form. 
(d)  Owner builder permits: Requires an Owner Builder Affidavit. 
(e)  Certificate of Insurance showing proof of Workers Compensation. 
(f)  Two (2) sets of building plans meeting the requirements of Section A103.2 of Appendix "A" of the Standard Building Code. 
(1)  If applying for a model home, attach one set of plans. 
(g)  Two (2) sets of site plans. Site plan may be hand drawn, but must show the location by noting all setbacks of proposed structure(s) and existing buildings or structures on the site or lot. 
(h)  A completed Rockledge Elevation and Drainage Plan Acknowledgement Form. 
(i)  Current Florida Energy Calculations. 
(j)  Brevard County Impact Form accompanied by a paid receipt for Impact Fees. 
(k)  Areas where individual sewage disposal systems are approved, a copy of Brevard County Septic Tank Permit is required. 
(l)  Areas where road side swales and culverts are required, an approval from the Rockledge Public Works Department is required before issuance of a building permit. 
(m)  For Timbers West, Phase I and River Ridge Subdivisions only: A courtesy letter of plan approval from the Homeowners Association is required. 
(n)  Approval of Historic District Review Design Committee (if applicable). 
    The Building Official may require additional information to confirm compliance to these regulations. 
31.21. - Required submittal for commercial permit (commercial, multi-family, hotel, motel, and industrial projects). 
    [Required submittals for commercial permits are as follows:] 
(a)  Completed Building Permit Application. 
(b)  Completed Concurrency Evaluation Form. 
(c)  Site Plan Review Fee to be paid prior to Site Plan Submittal. 
(d)  Sealed Site Plans, to include the following: A site plan covering the entire tract proposed for ultimate development, indicating existing conditions and development for an additional area including at least three hundred (300) feet from the boundaries of such tract, or such greater distance as may be indicated by the circumstances of the case, shall be submitted to the building official. Before a permit is issued for construction, six (6) copies of the site plan of the area, at a scale no smaller than one inch to one hundred (100) feet, shall be filed with the building official setting forth, identifying and locating the following: 
(1)  A map indicating the property boundary and the proposed or existing plotting and street system. 
(2)  All public and private right-of-way and easement lines located on and adjacent to the property which are proposed to be continued, created, relocated or abandoned. 
(3)  Existing topography with a maximum of one-foot contour point intervals. 
(4)  The location of the proposed buildings, driveways, parking lots and other uses. 
(5)  A description of the uses proposed in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those uses on producing air pollution, water pollution, fire or safety hazards, or other factors detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the area. 
(6)  Engineering plans or descriptions, prepared and sealed by a professional engineer, for the handling of any problems of the type outlined in subparagraph (e) above, including a designation of sewers to be used and necessary plans for controlling of smoke or other nuisances such as those enumerated in the same above-referenced paragraph. 
(7)  Location and dimension of all curb cuts, driving lanes, off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas including number of spaces. 
(8)  All walks, malls and other open area. 
(9)  Location of all walls, fences and screen planting. 
(10)  Size, height and orientation of all signs. 
(11)  All existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer lines with plans prepared at a scale no greater than one inch to one hundred (100) feet, sealed by a professional engineer. 
([11]a)  A drainage plan, prepared and sealed by a professional engineer, of the area showing size and location of each existing and proposed structure, the approximate volume of run-off generated by development of the subject area and the proposed method of managing said water. Provisions shall be included for retention of the first one inch of rainfall on-site and for adequate control of erosion sedimentation, indicating the proposed temporary and permanent control practices and measures. 
(12)  A copy of the restrictive covenants (if any) to be included in the deeds by the developer. 
(13)  Such other information with regard to the development area as may be required by the building official to determine conformance with these regulations. 
(e)  Two (2) sets of sealed Tree Surveys. 
(f)  Two (2) sets of sealed Landscaping Plans. 
(g)  Completed Erosion/Sedimentation Control Permit Application (See Public Works). 
(h)  Three (3) sets Erosion/Sedimentation Control Plans. 
(i)  Legal Description or Copy of Recorded Deed. 
(j)  Four (4) sets sealed Construction Plans. 
(k)  Two (2) sets sealed Construction Specifications. 
(l)  Two (2) sets sealed Energy Calculations. 
(m)  One (1) Condominium Document (if applicable). 
(n)  One (1) copy St. Johns River Water Management District Permit. 
(o)  Soil Test. 
(p)  D.E.R. Permit (if applicable). 
(q)  D.O.T. Permit (if applicable). 
(r)  Brevard County Consumer Health Department Permit (if applicable). 
(s)  Sub-Contractors Permit Authorization. 
(t)  Proof of Workers Compensation. 
(u)  Brevard County Impact Fee Form and a Prepaid receipt to be attached. 
    The Building Official may require additional information to confirm compliance to these regulations. 
31.25. - Subdivision submittal required. 
    See Part VII. 
31.30. - Required submittal for annexations. 
    Before submission of a petition for voluntary annexation the owner will be will advised to meet with the city manager, the building official and subdivision inspector, the city attorney, and such other personnel as may be necessary to determine the feasibility and suitability of the application. This step is encouraged so that the owner may obtain preliminary information and guidance from city personnel before incurring substantial expense. 
31.31. - Petition for consent of annexation; contents. 
    Every petition submitted to the City of Rockledge by a party seeking to have land annexed into the City of Rockledge pursuant to Section 171.044, Florida Statutes, 1981, shall be in writing and shall contain and include information and material, and be executed, as follows: 
(a)  The petition shall bear the original signature or signatures of all owners of the property involved, and describe their respective ownership interests. 
(b)  The petition shall include an accurate metes and bounds legal description of the property involved, said description to be drafted so that the courses and calls thereof can be coordinated into and with the legal description of the municipal boundaries of the city, and will proceed in directional sequences consistent with the direction in which the calls and courses of the legal description of the city boundary runs in areas contiguous to the property proposed to be annexed. 
(c)  The petition shall include a declaration of the type of development, if any, which petitioner proposes to make of the property if it is annexed, and a copy of the proposed plat of such development and engineer's drawings and architect's renderings applicable thereto, if such are in existence at the time of the filing of the petition. 
(d)  The petition shall include a statement of the particular zone district in which applicant desires the property to be classified, if any. 
(e)  The petition shall include a statement detailing, to the best of applicant's knowledge and belief, how the area involved is susceptible of municipal benefits, and why it is to the best interests of the City of Rockledge that such area should be annexed to the corporate limits thereof. 
31.32. - Additional information required for annexation. 
    [Petitions for annexations shall be accompanied by the following:] 
(a)  A boundary and topographical survey prepared by a surveyor licensed to do business in the State of Florida and bonded as required by law, which survey will include a legal description of the property proposed to be annexed, and will comply with the requirements of Subsection 31.31 of this section. 
(b)  An opinion in writing signed by an attorney at law licensed in the State of Florida, or a certificate of an abstract company or title insurance company engaged in business in Brevard County certifying the names of all of the owners of the fee simple title to the property sought to be annexed and their respective interests therein, as of a specific date not more than ten (10) days prior to presentation of the application and accompanying material to the city. 
31.33. - [Reports on impact on municipal services.] 
    Reports on impact on municipal services, which shall include the following information, [are required in accordance with this section.] Before any hearings are conducted with respect to any petition by either the city planning commission or city council, the Rockledge city manager shall prepare and submit to each [of] such boards the following: 
(a)  A written report describing the impact and effect the proposed annexation would have on the municipal services being rendered by the city. 
(b)  A written statement of the city's minimum elevation requirements, if any, for development of areas in the city immediately adjacent to the property sought to be annexed. 
(c)  A map showing current location of the property and what jurisdiction it is located in and what zoning provision the property has as well as its current identification on the Future Land Use Map of the jurisdiction involved. 
(d)  A map showing the nearest sewer trunk line, lift station, road access, police station, fire station, and water system trunk line. 
(e)  A completed Annexation Information Form, supplied by the City. 
31.40. - Submittal required for variances. 
    [Required submittals for variances are as follows:] 
(a)  A Variance Request form, supplied by the City. 
(b)  If the applicant is other than all the owners of the particular property, written consent signed by all owners of the particular real property shall be attached. 
(c)  An application for any variance shall be submitted in duplicate, on a form prescribed by the city and shall contain a complete legal description of the premises as to which the variance is requested. Each application shall be accompanied by a survey or plot diagram indicating setbacks and proposed construction; a list of the names and addresses of the owners of all properties within five hundred (500) feet of the periphery of the land for which the variance is requested; and a certified survey or that portion of the map maintained by the tax assessor showing the boundaries of each parcel of land within said five hundred (500) feet and the relationship of each of said parcels to the land for which the variance is requested. 
(d)  If an application is disapproved by the board of adjustment, thereafter the board shall take no further action on another application for substantially the same proposal on the same premise until after twelve (12) months from the date of such last disapproval. 
[(e)  Reserved.] 
(f)  Fees shall be paid per fee schedule established by the city council. 
31.41. - Time restraints for submittal of variances. 
    Completed variance request forms must be submitted to the building department by the last day of the month in order to be heard on the meeting following the next scheduled meeting (example: submittal on January 31, will be heard in mid-March). 
31.50. - Submittals required for special exceptions. 
    The petitioner shall fill out a form provided by the building department, the following steps are to be followed in applying for a special exception (conditional use): 
(a)  A petition for a special exception shall be submitted in duplicate containing an adequate legal description of the premises as to which the special exception is requested; the names and addresses of the owners or tenants in possession of such premises; the names and addresses of the owners of all properties within five hundred (500) feet of the periphery of the land for which the special exception is requested; a certified survey or that portion of the map maintained by the tax assessor showing the boundaries of each parcel of land within said five hundred (500) feet and the relationship of each of said parcels to the land for which the special exception is requested; a description of the special exception desired which shall specifically and particularly describe the type, character and extent of the proposed special exception; the reason for requesting the special exception; and any other pertinent data which may be requested by the board of adjustment. The petition shall be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent or attorney. 
(1)  The submitted map and names of property owners within five hundred (500) feet shall be numbered in correlation with each other. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such petition, the request will be placed on the agendas of the next meetings of the board of adjustment and the planning commission. The planning commission shall study each request for a special exception and make a report to the board of adjustment, in writing, including its recommendations pertaining to the application. The report of the planning commission shall state specific reasons and findings of fact upon which its recommendation is based. Said report and recommendation shall be presented to the board of adjustment within thirty (30) days. 
(c)  It will be the responsibility of the city clerk to publish the required legal notices of public hearing prior to the dates of such public hearings. 
(d)  Due public notice shall be given of the public hearing by the board of adjustment on an application for a special exception. 
(e)  The board of adjustment shall at such public hearing consider the application for special exception permit and the planning commission's report and recommendations thereon, as well as the comments of citizens attending such hearing and any other pertinent data and information available, and the board of adjustment shall either deny or authorize the issuance of such special exception permit. 
(f)  The board of adjustment may, as a condition precedent to the granting of an application for special exception permit, impose such conditions, restrictions or limitations in the use of such premises, or upon the special exception thereof as requested in the application, as the board of adjustment may deem appropriate and in the best interest of the city, taking into consideration matters of health, safety and welfare of the city, protection of property values and other considerations material to good zoning principles and concepts. 
(g)  Any special exception permit granted by the city shall permit only the specific use or uses described in the application as the same may be limited or restricted by the terms and provisions of the permit, and no other; any expansion or extension of the use of such premises beyond the scope of the terms of the special exception permit shall be unlawful and deemed a violation of these regulations. 
(h)  The board of adjustment may suspend or revoke a special exception permit at any time the board of adjustment determines that such special exception has become a public or private nuisance because of an improper, unauthorized or other unlawful use of such premises. 
(i)  If a petition for a special exception permit is denied by the board of adjustment, thereafter the board of adjustment shall take no further action on another petition for substantially the same special exception on the same premises until after twelve (12) months after the date of such last denial. 
(j)  Fees. For all petitions for a special exception, a fee schedule shall be established by the city council. 
31.51. - Public information. 
    This section is to provide the public with information regarding actions pending within the city involving real property. This is not intended to effect or attach additional requirements to any statutory or other public notice requirement. This section cannot be utilized to contest an ordinance in any way for failure to comply herewith. 
1.  Annexation. 
(A)  Notices. A notice setting forth the date(s), time(s), and place(s) of the planning commission hearing and the subsequent public hearing before the city council at which the annexation request will be considered, and including in the notice a map indicating the area to be affected, shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the planning commission meeting indicated in the notice to the last known address of owners of property whose land is within five hundred (500) feet of the periphery of the land that is the subject of the meeting or hearing. 
(1)  The petitioner shall provide the city clerk with a list of property owners, utilizing the records and map maintained by the tax assessor, showing the boundaries of each parcel of land within five hundred (500) feet of the periphery of the land that is the subject of the annexation. 
(2)  The city clerk shall provide certification of the date the notices were mailed. 
(B)  Advertisement. The notice prescribed in subsection (A) above, exclusive of the map, shall be published one time as a legal advertisement in a newspaper of general daily circulation in the area at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the first public meeting or hearing indicated in the notice. 
(C)  Posting. Posting of the property involved in the annexation shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection 7. of this section. 
2.  Comprehensive plan amendment. 
(A)  Notices. A notice setting forth the date(s), time(s), place(s) and purpose of public meetings and hearings, and including in the notice a map indicating the area to be affected, shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the first meeting or hearing indicated in the notice to the last known address of owners of property whose land is within five hundred (500) feet of the periphery of the land that is the subject of the meeting or hearing. 
(1)  The list of property owners shall be provided by the applicant, utilizing the records and map maintained by the tax assessor showing the boundaries of each parcel of land within said five hundred (500) feet. 
(2)  The city clerk shall provide certification of the date the notices were mailed. 
(B)  Reserved. 
(C)  Posting. Applications limited to site-specific amendments shall be subject to posting, which shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection 7. of this section. 
3.  Preliminary plat. 
(A)  Notices. A notice setting forth the date(s), time) (s), and place(s) of the planning commission public hearing and the subsequent city council meeting at which the preliminary plat will be considered, and including in the notice a map indicating the area to be affected, shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the planning commission hearing indicated in the notice to the last known address of owners of property whose land is within five hundred (500) feet of the periphery of the land that is the subject of the meeting or hearing. 
(1)  The list of property owners shall be provided by the applicant, utilizing the records and map maintained by the tax assessor showing the boundaries of each parcel of land within said five hundred (500) feet. 
(2)  The city clerk shall provide certification of the date the notices were mailed. 
(B)  Advertisement. The notice prescribed in subsection (A) above, exclusive of the map, shall be published one time as a legal advertisement in a newspaper of general daily circulation in the area at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the first public meeting or hearing indicated in the notice. 
(C)  Posting. Posting of the property involved in the preliminary plat shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection 7 of this section. 
4.  Special exception. 
(A)  Notice. A notice setting forth the date(s), time(s), and place(s) of the planning commission meeting and the subsequent public hearing before the board of adjustment at which the special exception will be considered, and including in the notice a map indicating the area to be affected, shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the planning commission meeting indicated in the notice to the last known address of owners of property whose land is within five hundred (500) feet of the periphery of the land that is the subject of the hearing. 
(1)  The list of property owners shall be provided by the applicant, utilizing the records and map maintained by the tax assessor showing the boundaries of each parcel of land within said five hundred (500) feet. 
(2)  The city clerk shall provide certification of the date the notices were mailed. 
(B)  Advertisement. The notice prescribed in subsection (A) above, exclusive of the map, shall be published one time as a legal advertisement in a newspaper of general daily circulation in the area at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the first public meeting or hearing indicated in the notice. 
(C)  Posting. Posting of the property involved in the special exception shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection 7. of this section. 
5.  Variance. 
(A)  Notices. A notice setting forth the date, time, and place of the board of adjustment hearing, and including in the notice a map indicating the area to be affected, shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the board of adjustment meeting indicated in the notice to the last known address of owners of property whose land is within five hundred (500) feet of the periphery of the land that is the subject of the hearing. 
(1)  The list of property owners shall be provided by the applicant, utilizing the records and map maintained by the tax assessor showing the boundaries of each parcel of land within said five hundred (500) feet. 
(2)  The city clerk shall provide certification of the date the notices were mailed. 
(B)  Advertisement. The notice prescribed in subsection (A) above, exclusive of the map, shall be published one time as a legal advertisement in a newspaper of general daily circulation in the area at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the board of adjustment meeting or hearing indicated in the notice. 
(C)  Posting. Posting of the property involved in the variance shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection 7. of this section. 
6.  Zoning district amendment. 
(A)  Notice. A notice setting forth the date(s), time(s), and place(s) of the planning commission hearing and the subsequent public hearing before the city council at which the zoning district amendment will be considered, and including in the notice a map indicating the area to be affected, shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the planning commission meeting indicated in the notice to the last known address of owners of property whose land is within five hundred (500) feet of the periphery of the land that is the subject of the hearing. 
(1)  The list of property owners shall be provided by the applicant, utilizing the records and map maintained by the tax assessor showing the boundaries of each parcel of land within said five hundred (500) feet. 
(2)  The city clerk shall provide certification of the date the notices were mailed. 
(B)  Advertisement. The notice prescribed in subsection (A) above, exclusive of the map, shall be published one time as a legal advertisement in a newspaper of general daily circulation in the area at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the first public meeting or hearing indicated in the notice. 
(C)  Posting. Posting of the property involved in the zoning district amendment shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection 7. of this section. 
7.  Posting requirements. 
(A)  Signs to be purchased from city. In order to maintain visual and regulatory consistency, signs to be used expressly for posting of property shall be purchased from the city by the applicant at the cost prescribed in Section 39.00. 
(B)  Signs. Signs shall be no smaller than three (3) square feet, with a minimum width of twenty-four (24) inches and a minimum height of eighteen (18) inches. 
(C)  Sign information. The sign shall contain large lettering indicating the type of change being considered; the assigned case number; the name of the owner(s) of the property; the action(s) requested; the dates and times of associated meetings and public hearings; and the city hall address and telephone number for acquisition of additional information. 
(D)  Posting location. One sign shall be posted on each portion of the property that is adjacent to an existing right-of-way. The sign shall be situated not less than five (5) feet from the right-of-way and at the approximate center of the right-of-way frontage. If it is determined by the city that a sign is not suitably located or negatively impacts traffic visibility, the applicant or property owner shall relocate the sign within twenty-four (24) hours of verbal notification. 
(E)  Posting period. Signs shall be posted by the applicant at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the meeting indicated on the sign(s), and must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the final disposition of the applicant's petition. 
(1)  Affidavit of compliance. Within twenty-four (24) hours of posting, the applicant shall deliver to the city a notarized "Affidavit of Compliance with Posting Requirements" on a form provided by the city. Accompanying each affidavit shall be a photograph of the posted sign(s) and a map indicating the location of the sign(s). 
8.  Noncompliance. Failure of the applicant to comply with any or all of the foregoing requirements shall result in withdrawal of the applicant's petition from the agenda until such time as compliance is achieved. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2002, § 1, 7-3-02; Ord. No. 1331-2003, § 1, 11-19-03; Ord. No. 1447-2007, §§ 1-3, 5-16-07) 
31.52. - Project procedures and submittals for the community redevelopment district (CRD). 
(a)  All persons desiring to perform improvement, rehabilitation/redevelopment, construction or other development projects within the community redevelopment district shall have a pre-application meeting with the redevelopment director and planning director. 
(b)  Applications for approval of those projects shall be submitted to the planning director/zoning official, who shall review and certify that all required documents are submitted and the applications are complete. 
(c)  Within no more than ten (10) working days, the planning director shall convene the development review committee (DRC) to review the application and all submittals and render a decision or recommendation. 
(d)  The DRC shall review said project and make recommendations for approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the project. 
(e)  The planning director shall schedule those projects required to obtain planning commission and city council review and approval for the next available meeting of the planning commission, upon receipt of any required supplemental information or changes based upon the recommendations of the DRC. 
(f)  For projects requesting waivers of provisions of the land development regulations, the planning director/zoning official shall convene the DRC within no more than five (5) working days from receipt of the request. 
(Ord. No. 1376-2005, § 9, 5-4-05) 
SECTION 32.00. - TREE REMOVAL PERMIT/REQUIREMENTS 
(1)  Generally: 
(a)  No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or move, or effectively destroy through damaging any tree located on any property within the City of Rockledge without first obtaining a permit, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  Tree permits authorized by this section may be obtained by making application for permit to the building official on a form to be supplied by the city, indicating the type tree and how it is proposed to be cut, destroyed or removed, who will perform the work, and such other information as may be required by the building official to effectively enforce the provisions of this section. A separate application shall be filed for each site upon which tree removal is requested. 
(2)  Exceptions. The following types of trees shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, and no permit or fees shall be required for the removal, cutting down or destruction of these trees: 
(a)  Melaleuca quinquenervia (Cajaput or Paperbark). 
(b)  Melaleuca leucadendra (Punk). 
(c)  Casuarina (spp), (Australian Pine), (Brazilian Oak). 
(d)  Schinus terebinthinfolius (Brazilian Pepper). 
(e)  Araucaria excelsa (Norfolk Island Pine). 
(f)  Eucalyptus (all varieties except Eucalyptus Cinerea). 
(g)  Bischofia javanica (Bishopwood, Bischofia). 
(h)  Ricinus communis (Castorbean). 
(i)  Metopium toxiferum (Poison Wood). 
(j)  Melaiceae asedarach (Chinaberry). 
(k)  Enterolobium (spp), (Eartree). 
(l)  Trees located in state-licensed and governmental plant or tree nurseries or botanical gardens in which the trees are planted and growing for the sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of business or for some public purpose and which are sold. 
(m)  Trees which are required to be removed by law. 
(n)  Trees which, due to natural circumstances, are no longer viable, are in danger of falling, are too close to existing structures so as to endanger such structures, interfere with utility services, create unsafe vision clearance or constitutes a safety hazard. 
(o)  Trees located within three (3) feet of a survey line cut or cleared by a licensed land surveyor acting in the course of his profession or located within three (3) feet of any public utility main, pipe, wire, line or conduit. 
(p)  Trees on a single-family residential lot or on a two-family residential lot; provided, that after such removal the lot will contain a minimum of at least four (4) trees of any type or types listed in Appendix A of Ordinance No. 929-89; or, if after the removal the lot will contain less than four (4) trees listed on Appendix A, a substitute tree of any type or types listed on Appendix A, of Ordinance 929-89, is planted for each tree to be removed, such planting to be performed within thirty (30) days prior to the removal. 
(3)  Application for tree removal permit: 
(a)  Predevelopment: The removal of any tree or trees from real property in the City of Rockledge which has not been previously developed pursuant to an approved site plan is hereby prohibited, except that no tree removal permit shall be required for removal of any of the exempt and excepted trees described in subsection (2) of this section. An application pursuant to the requirements in subsection (2) shall be completed and a permit required. 
(b)  During construction: Application for a tree removal permit during construction shall be required as a part of the site plan submittal, except that no tree removal permit shall be required for removal of any of the exempt and excepted trees described in subsection (2) of this section. The applicant shall submit a legible, reproducible plan, drawn to scale and indicating the following information for the entire site: 
1.  Location, shape and spatial arrangements of all existing and proposed buildings, walls or fences, or other improvements and structures. 
2.  Identification of uses on adjacent properties. 
3.  Location, shape and spatial arrangement of all parking areas and access roads. 
4.  Existing and proposed utility services. 
5.  Existing and proposed elevations. 
6.  Setbacks, yard requirements and location of easements. 
7.  Existing and proposed wells. 
8.  All sink holes, rock outcroppings and historical sites. 
9.  A tree survey certified by a landscape architect, land surveyor or land planner overlaid directly upon the site plan, and indicating the location referenced to structures, of all protected trees as defined in this section. The survey shall distinguish existing trees which are proposed to be destroyed, relocated, replaced or preserved at their present location. Said survey shall show the location of all existing trees as defined in this section. Tree information shall be summarized in a legend form and shall contain the variety, trunk diameter, height and location referenced to structure of all trees shown on the survey. Groups of trees less than three (3) feet apart may be designed as clumps, with the exception that any tree with a trunk diameter of eight (8) inches or more must be specifically designated. For sites on which tree removal activity is to occur on less than the entirety of the site, the building official shall provide that the tree survey may exclude those portions of the site which it determines will not be affected by the tree removal or clearing activity. 
10.  Trees not affected by tree removal or clearing activity shall be properly identified by means of surveying tape or noninjurious painting. 
(c)  Post-development. An application for a tree removal permit shall be required for removal of any tree on real property previously developed and for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued, except that no tree removal permit shall be required for removal of any of the exempt and excepted trees described in subsection (2) of this section. The following information shall be required on an application for removal of a nonexempt tree from such previously developed property: 
1.  Site plan showing all structures, sidewalks, driveways, etc. 
2.  Location on site plan of trees to be removed, and replacement location of tree from Appendix A or B to Ordinance No. 929-89. 
(4)  Criteria for issuance of tree removal permits. Tree removal permits shall be issued in accordance with this subsection (C) when the building official has been satisfied that the application meets all of the following criteria: 
(a)  The subject tree is located within the area where any building, roadway, pavement, retention pond or other improvement is proposed to be constructed, or where a grade change necessary to proposed development of the site will be made which is too severe for the tree to survive, and such proposed improvements or grade change cannot be relocated upon the site so as to further maximize the preservation of the existing trees upon the site while not unreasonably restricting the permitted use of the property. 
(b)  If it is in the welfare of the general public that the tree be removed for a reason other than set forth above. 
(c)  Appropriate arrangements for disposal of trees and tree parts have been provided that will comply to the Landfill Ordinance (Ordinance No. 922-89, adopted August 2, 1989) [Section 43.00]. 
(5)  Relocation or replacement: 
(a)  As a condition to the granting of a tree removal permit under this section, the applicant may be required, where practical, to: 
1.  Relocate those trees which would otherwise be destroyed to another location upon the site; or 
2.  Replace those trees which will be destroyed with suitable replacement trees elsewhere within the site. Such replacement trees shall be of a variety listed in Appendix A of Ordinance No. 929-89, or of any other variety approved by the building official. 
(b)  In determining the required relocation or replacement of trees, the building official or agency shall consider the needs of the intended use of the property, including all lands dedicated to public use, together with an elevation [evaluation] of the following: 
1.  Existing tree coverage on the site and in the immediate surrounding area. 
2.  Number of trees or trees to be removed on the entire site. 
3.  The type, size and condition of the tree or trees to be removed. 
4.  The feasibility of relocating that particular tree or trees. 
5.  Topography and drainage of the site. 
6.  The extent to which the tree or trees contribute to the aesthetic, economic and environmental integrity of the surrounding area. 
7.  No person shall plant or transplant any tree or shrub within the area or space between a sidewalk and the adjacent street, in any parkway or right-of-way, without first obtaining a written permit from the city manager, subject to the list of prohibited species of trees. 
(6)  Procedure for permitting tree removal: 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application containing all the information as required by this section, the building official shall review said application. The review procedure shall determine the adequacy and accuracy of content, and determine whether the application meets the requirements of this subsection, and whether the applicant has taken all necessary and reasonable steps to preserve existing trees and to otherwise enhance the aesthetic appearance of the proposed development by incorporation of trees into the design process. 
(b)  Following approval of the application, the building official shall issue the appropriate permits. 
(c)  Upon the issuance of a tree removal permit under this subsection, a copy of said permit shall be prominently displayed on the site prior to the removal, relocation or replacement of any trees. Tree removal permits shall be included with all other permit cards and shall be displayed alongside them on the site. 
(d)  No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued nor electrical power connection authorization given until any relocation or replacement of trees required by the tree removal permit has been completed and a final tree inspection approval has been given by the building official. Trees relocating from one portion of the site to another which do not survive transplantation for at least one year shall be replaced by the owner of the site with a suitable replacement tree. 
(7)  Protection of trees not approved for removal, relocation or destruction. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, materials, machinery or temporary soil deposits within the drip line of any tree protected by this section and not permitted for removal or destruction, to fail to erect barriers necessary to protect such tree, or to attach anything other than protective wires, braces or other similar noninjurious materials to such tree. Furthermore, no structure or impervious paving shall be located within a three-foot radius of the trunk perimeter of any such tree. A tree of two and one-half (21/2) feet or more in diameter shall require additional space as may be determined by the building official. 
SECTION 35.00. - ZONING/REZONING APPLICATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 35.00 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. 

35.01. - Change of zoning classification procedure. 
(a)  All applications for change of a zoning classification shall be filed with the zoning official on the proper form which can be obtained at the office of the zoning official, along with the required Rockledge Development Fact Sheet, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A statement of the name, residence address and mailing address, if different from the residence address, of each owner of the fee simple title to the real property proposed to be rezoned, accompanied by a copy of such owners' recorded deed, title insurance policy, attorney's opinion of title, or other evidence of ownership. 
(2)  Every application shall be signed by each owner of the property proposed to be rezoned, or by the duly authorized agent or attorney of said owner. As to any agent or attorney signing the application on behalf of the owner, a written power of attorney, or other instrument in writing signed by the owner and authorizing such agent or attorney to apply for the proposed rezoning in behalf of such owner, shall accompany the application for rezoning. 
(3)  The legal description of the particular real property, accompanied by a certified survey or that portion of the map maintained by the tax assessor reflecting the boundaries of the particular real property. 
(4)  The current land use classification, special use classification, with any specified conditions, or conditional use designation, as recorded on the official zoning map. 
(5)  The requested land use classification that constitutes an amendment to the official zoning map. 
(6)  Names and addresses of all property owners within five hundred (500) feet, accompanied by a certified survey or that portion of the map maintained by the tax accessory reflecting the boundaries of the parcels affected. 
(b)  After the duly signed application with all attachments, exhibits, fees and information herein required has been filed with the city and approved as to form and content by the city manager, the request for rezoning and a copy of said application and supporting material will be placed on the agenda of the next meeting of the city council, and the city council shall refer it to the planning commission. The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, with due public notice, and shall submit in writing its recommendation on the proposed change to the city council for official action. The recommendation of the planning commission shall state the relationship of the proposed change to the comprehensive plan of the City of Rockledge and shall be made within a reasonable time but no later than within two (2) months after the time of reference. If a recommendation is not made within two (2) months after the time of reference, then the city council may act on the adoption. 
(c)  The city council shall review the recommendations made by the planning commission and hold a public hearing to consider the request. It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to give due public notice of such public hearing. 
(d)  Following said public hearing, the city council, by ordinance, may modify or change the existing zone classification for the lands of said petitioners or it may deny said petition. In the case of denial of said petition, the city council shall thereafter taken no further action on another application for substantially the same proposal on the same premises until after twelve (12) months from the date of last such disapproval. 
35.02. - Application procedures generally. 
    The city council may from time to time amend, supplement, change or repeal the zoning regulations, restrictions or district boundaries as set out in these regulations. Proposed changes and amendments may be suggested by the city council, the planning commission or by petition of the owners of fifty-one (51) per cent or more of the area involved in a proposed district boundary change. 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, former § 25-331 of the Code of Ordinances has been included herein as § 35.02. 
SECTION 36.00. - WORK AFFECTING PUBLIC WAYS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 36.00 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. 

36.01. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful to open, grade, pave, construct, make any excavation in, disturb the surface of, or do any other work affecting any street, sidewalk, or public way, or any curb or structure or fixture appurtenant to any street, sidewalk, or public way, or to install or construct any underground pipes, sewers, lines or utility installations of any character, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director of public works. Sidewalks, curbs and driveway aprons located in city-owned rights-of-way shall not be painted or etched or use alternative construction materials or be otherwise modified from existing standards without the express approval of the Rockledge City Manager. 
(1240-2000, § 1, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1268-2002, § 2, 4-3-02) 
36.02. - Separate permit required for each excavation. 
    An excavation permit shall be obtained for each individual cut. 
36.03. - Application for permit. 
    Any person desiring a permit pursuant to this section shall make written application to the director of public works stating the public way involved, the work to be done, and the time and place when the applicant desires to do the work described in the application. Except in the case of an emergency, said application must be made no less than forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the time of commencement of the work, as stated in the application. 
36.04. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Excavations. Permits for excavation shall be issued by the director of public works after payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or an amount equal to two (2) per cent of the cost of labor and materials anticipated to be extended in completing such work, whichever is greater. The director of public works may require verification of the amount of such construction cost by a certified estimate from the city's consulting engineer, the cost of such certified estimate to be borne by the permittee. 
(b)  For permits applied for after commencement of excavation. The fee for any permit applied for after commencement of an excavation shall be double the amount of the ordinary fee specified in this section. 
(c)  Exemptions. Although a permit will be required in every instance of an excavation, entities that are duly franchised to use the public streets, alleys and ways shall be exempt from payment of the excavation permit fee. 
36.05. - Bond. 
    Prior to obtaining a permit for excavation, a bond shall be posted with the city clerk in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or twenty-five (25) per cent of the cost of labor and materials anticipated to be expended in completing such work, whichever is greater. The director of public works may require verification of the amount of such construction cost by a certified estimate from the city's consulting engineer, the cost of such certified estimate to be borne by the permittee. Said bond shall be refunded only after completion and restoration of the public way, and after inspection and approval by the City of Rockledge. If the work and restoration is not completed according to the terms of the application, and in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city applicable to the type of working being done, and to the satisfaction of the City of Rockledge, then the city may use all or such part of said bond as is necessary to properly complete the work in accordance with applicable city standards and specifications. 
36.06. - Permit issuance. 
    The director of public works, after being satisfied that the work described in the application and the method of performing such work will not be adverse to the public interest, shall thereupon issue a permit to the applicant. 
36.07. - Conformity to application and permit. 
    All work performed pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with the application and permit. 
36.08. - Supervision of work; specifications. 
    All work for which a permit is required by this section shall be done under the supervision of an inspector or engineer appointed by the city for that purpose, and shall be done in compliance with minimum specifications set by law in the city. 
36.09. - Inspection, approval required. 
    All work for which a permit is required by this section shall be subject to inspection and approval by the City of Rockledge, and no such work shall be covered or concealed until such inspection and approval have been requested and obtained. 
36.10. - Inspection authority; interfering with. 
(a)  The authorized representatives of the City of Rockledge shall have the right and duty to go upon any property in the city for the purpose of making inspections required by this section. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with the action of the inspecting official in the proper performance of such duty. 
36.11. - Barricades and lighting required. 
    Any person carrying on or doing any work pursuant to a permit required by this section shall erect and maintain proper, safe and sufficient barricades, and during that period of time between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise shall maintain sufficient lights or flares around such barricades, work or excavations to warn persons of the presence of such excavations and work and to prevent injury to persons and property. 
36.12. - Restoration required. 
    Upon the expiration of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this section, the permit holder shall replace the public way or part of public way upon which such construction, excavation or repair work has been performed in the same condition as the public way or part of public way existed prior to the construction, excavation or repair work; and failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor against the city by the permit holder. 
36.13. - Authority to stop work. 
    The director of public works may have the work stopped at any time, regardless of the fact that a permit therefor has been issued, if, in his opinion, the manner in which the work is being performed shall result in unforeseen injury to any public way or property. 
SECTION 37.00. - APPEALS/INTERPRETATIONScustom>[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Section 37.00 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. 

37.11. - Forms. 
    Appeals from a Building Code interpretation decision of the Building Official shall be filed on forms provided by the secretary of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. Any affected property owner or his agent may file an appeal. 
37.12. - Adopted construction code interpretations. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the building official in construing, interpreting or applying any of the terms and provisions of the adopted building codes (Southern Building Code, Standard Plumbing Code, Electrical Code, Fire Safety Code, etc.) of these regulations; or elevation questions; or any of the terms and provisions of any code or codes adopted in these regulations, shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Building Code Board of Adjustments and Appeals established under the provisions of the Standard Building Code. The procedure in all such cases shall be the same as is provided by said Standard Building Code for appeals thereunder to said building code board of adjustments and appeals (example: a disagreement on what is a penthouse and how it should be used to determine the height of a building). 
37.20. - Appeals for the interpretation of Rockledge's land development regulations by any administrative official. [(Reserved)] 
37.30. - Board of adjustments shall hear appeals. 
    In exercising its powers, the board of adjustment may, upon appeal and in conformity with provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any Zoning Ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant to these regulations, and may make any necessary order, requirement, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of a majority of all the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the board is required to pass under any such ordinance. 
37.31. - Appeals procedure. 
(a)  From decision of administrative official. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, board or bureau of the city council affected by any decision of an administrative official under any Zoning Ordinance enacted pursuant to these regulations. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after rendition of the order, requirements, decision or determination appealed from by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The appeal shall be in the form prescribed by the rules of the board. The administrative official from whom the appeal is taken shall, upon notification of the filing of the appeal, forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the documents, plans, papers or other materials constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Hearing of appeals. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. In every appeal for a variance or special exception (conditional use) written notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to the last known address of the owner of each lot, piece parcel or tract of land within five hundred (500) feet of the periphery of the premises which is the subject of the appeal. Written notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the owners of adjacent property as herein required, even though such adjacent properties are located outside the municipal limits of the City of Rockledge. Appellants may be required to assume such reasonable costs in connection with appeals as may be determined by the city council through action in setting of fees to be charged for appeals. For procedural purposes, an application for a special exception (conditional use) shall be handled by the board of adjustment as for appeals. A fee established by the city council shall be paid to the city clerk at the time any notice of appeal is filed with the board of adjustment. 
37.32. - Stay of work and proceedings. 
    An appeal to the board of adjustment stays all work on the premises and all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the official from whom the appeal was taken shall certify to the board of adjustment that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings or work shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
37.33. - Hearing. 
    The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. Appellants may be required to assume such reasonable costs in connection with appeals as may be determined by the city council through action in setting of fees to be charged for appeals. For procedural purposes, an application for a special exception shall be handled by the board of adjustment as for appeals. 
37.34. - Judicial review of decisions of the board of adjustments or board of adjustment and appeals. 
    Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment, or any officer, department, board, commission or bureau of the city council may apply to the circuit court of Brevard County, Florida, for relief within thirty (30) days after rendition of the decision by the board of adjustment. Review in the circuit court shall be either by trial de novo, which shall be governed by the Florida rules of civil procedure or by petition for writ of certiorari, which shall be governed by the Florida appellate rules. The election of remedies shall lie with the appellant. 
SECTION 39.00. - FEES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Section 39.00 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. The reserved section originally numbered as § 39.00 has been renumbered as § 39.01. 

39.01. - Land development regulation fees. (Reserved) 
Note- See the editor's note to the title of § 39.00. 
39.06. - Building permit fees. 
(A)  On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the schedule set forth in Appendix B of the Standard Building Code, as said Appendix B is hereinafter modified, or in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in such other appendix said Code as may be applicable to the particular work to be performed. 
(B)  Appendix B to said Standard Building Code is hereby amended only in the following specific respects: 
B101 Permit Fees 
Minimum fee for fences, sheds and reroofing building permits ..... $20.00 
Minimum fee for all other building permits ..... $40.00 
Total Valuation Fee $1,000.00 or less No fee, unless inspection required, in which case a $20.00 fee for each inspection can be charged $1,001.00 to $50,000.00 $20.00 for the first $1,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00 $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $265.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00 $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $465.00 for the first $100,00.00 plus $3.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00 $500,000.00 and up $1,665.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $2.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof.  
B102 Moving Fee 
For the moving of any building or structure, the fee shall be $50.00. 
(C)  For the following buildings, structures, alterations or services the following fixed fees shall be paid at the time of filing application for the building permit, to-wit: 
Driveways, per square foot ..... $0.05 
Fences and sheds ..... $0.00 
Manufactured home (mobile home) set-up ..... $40.00 
Modular building ..... Fee to be determined on an individual basis 
Roofing, per square (100 sq. ft.) ..... $1.00 
Street cuts, each ..... $25.00 
Site plan-checking fees: 
For all residential projects associated with a single-family dwelling; or a two-family dwelling (duplex); or a multifamily structure requiring a site plan submittal ..... $25.00 
For any site plan which includes a swimming pool or spa ..... $50.00 
For commercial projects not requiring multi-departmental review ..... $25.00 
Reinspection: 
For the first reinspection of each type ..... $25.00 
For each subsequent reinspection for failure to correct any item found to be in violation on any previous reinspection ..... $50.00 
(D)  In determining the valuation of the following improvements for building permit purposes, the rate schedule set forth below may be utilized: 
Construction Valuations: 
Accessory or utility building, per sq. ft. ..... $17.50 
Alterations (remodeling or repair) ..... Contract price or estimate 
Boat docks, per sq. ft. ..... 10.00 
Carports, open porches, screen-enclosed pool or patio, per sq. ft. of covered area ..... 8.00 
Certificate of occupancy replacement or for change of use ..... 20.00 
Dwelling or addition shall use the valuation data as provided by the Southern Building Code Congress International for use by its members International Building Code Type VB Good Category, valuation to be multiplied by the total structures under roof area to obtain value of a SFR for permitting: 
Screen enclosure only, per sq. ft. of covered area ..... $4.50 
Existing carport or open porch into living area, per sq. ft. of covered area ..... $30.00 
Carport into garage or accessory, per sq. ft. of covered area ..... $8.00 
Garage, per sq. ft. ..... $21.00 
Patio slab, per sq. ft. ..... $5.00 
Patio slab with roof, per sq. ft. ..... $8.00 
Patio slab with roof, per sq. ft. ..... $8.00 
Paving for off-street parking per sq. ft. ..... $0.50 
Seawall or bulkheads, per linear ft. ..... $15.00 
Wall, concrete or block, per linear ft. ..... $10.00 
    Any construction not listed will be evaluated by contract price or building official estimate. 
(E)  Refunds. Building permit fees may upon application be refunded when the permitted construction has not been, and will not be, commenced and an inspection has not been requested, except that the first twenty-five dollars ($25.00) of the fees and one hundred per cent (100%) of the plan review fee shall be retained. In such cases the building permit will be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1014-91, § 8, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 1048-93, § 14, 4-21-93; Ord. No. 1120-96, § 2, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1144-97, § 1, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1186-99, §§ 3, 4, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 1321-2003, §§ 1-3, 9-17-03) 
39.07. - Building permit valuations. 
    Building permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and other systems, including materials and labor. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration or structure appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the application can show detailed cost to meet the approval of the building official. The building official may estimate the permit valuations by using the most current Building Valuation Data Worksheet published by the Southern Building Code Congress International (SBCCI) and the applicable technical code appendices (i.e., plumbing, mechanical, gas, etc.) for suggested fee schedules, or the use of signed contracts, appraisals, and/or other methods approved and allowed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1014-91, § 8, 10-18-91; Ord. No. 1120-96, § 3, 8-14-96) 
39.10. - Board of adjustment (fees). 
    [Fees for proceedings before the board of adjustment are as follows:] 
(1)  Special exception (conditional use)-Three hundred dollars ($300.00) 
(2)  Variance-Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) 
(3)  Appeal from administrative decision of the zoning official-Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) 
(4)  Any other application for a development order that requires newspaper publication or mailing of a notice of public hearing-Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
39.12. - Site plan review fee. 
(a)  Any owner, developer, or other party submitting to the city building department for review or approval a site plan of a commercial, multifamily, or townhouse development, other than a site plan of a subdivision (residential or commercial) or PUD development, shall pay the city at the time of submission of the site plan a non-refundable site plan review fee of one-half (1/2) of the building permit fee for the development, or the sum of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) whichever is the lesser amount. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner, developer or other party submitting a site plan of a subdivision (commercial or residential), PUD, commercial, multifamily, or townhouse development to the City for review and approval, to progress and pursue with reasonable diligence the performance and completion of the various requirements for site plan approval and issuance of the building permit for the development within the time period herein specified. Any person or party submitting a site plan shall complete all procedures and requirements for final site plan approval, and obtain the issuance of a valid building permit for the improvements described on the site plan, within a period of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of initial submission of the site plan to the City and payment of the site plan review fee; provided however, that in any instance wherein final site plan approval and issuance of the building permit is delayed beyond said time period due to a reason or cause beyond applicant's control, and which is not the result of applicant's negligence, procrastination, inaction, or lack of due diligence, the Building Official may administratively extend said time period for not more than an additional sixty (60) days beyond the expiration of said one hundred eighty (180) day period. In any instance wherein an owner, developer, or other applicant fails to obtain final site plan approval and issuance of the building permit for a development within the time period herein specified, the site plan review process shall upon the expiration of said period automatically terminate and the development cease to be under consideration by the City unless, within ten (10) days after written notice of such termination is furnished to the applicant by the City, the applicant satisfactorily demonstrates to the Building Official that applicant's failure to complete the site plan review requirements and obtain the building permit was not due to applicant's neglect, procrastination, inattention, inaction, or failure to exercise due diligence. If the applicant makes such satisfactory demonstration to the Building Official within said ten (10) day period, the Building Official may administratively grant the applicant a reasonable extension of time to complete the process and obtain the building permit. Any owner, developer or other applicant for site plan review whose development has been terminated, must recommence a new site plan review process as an original proceeding, and pay another site plan review fee, as required in this Section, if such owner, developer, or applicant wishes to resubmit the same or a new site plan after termination of a prior site plan review procedure. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days after the date of enactment of this Section, the Building Official shall notify in writing each owner, developer or other party who has submitted a site plan which has not been approved, and for which a building permit has not been issued, that they must complete the site plan approval process and obtain a building permit for their development within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of such written notice, or their application for site plan approval will be withdrawn from further consideration. 
(Ord. No. 1240-2000, § 2, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1325-2003, § 1, 10-15-03) 
39.13. - Subdivision site plan review fee. 
(a)  Any owner, developer, or other party submitting to the city building department for review or approval a site plan of a subdivision (residential or commercial) or PUD development shall pay the city at the time of submission of the site plan a non-refundable site plan review fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1325-2003, § 2, 10-15-03) 
39.14. - Zoning change fee. 
    The fee for a petition for change of zoning classification is five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 4, 8-14-96) 
39.15. - Voluntary annexation fee. 
    [Voluntary annexation fees are as follows:] 
(a)  A one hundred dollar ($100.00) application fee. 
(b)  A five hundred dollar ($500.00) cost deposit from which the city will draw to pay the costs of publishing the annexation ordinance, notices of public hearings, and all other expenses necessary to comply with statutory and ordinance requirements applicable to the proposed annexation. If, in any given instance, the five hundred dollars ($500.00) cost deposit is insufficient to pay all of the aforesaid costs and expenses, the applicant shall furnish the city with the additional funds necessary to complete payment of the same before the final public hearing by the city council on the adoption of the proposed annexation ordinance. Any unexpended portion of a cost deposit remaining in the hands of the city treasurer after completion of the annexation and payment of all costs and expenses applicable thereto, shall be refunded to the applicant making such deposit. Applicants for voluntary annexations shall bear all costs and expenses applicable to the proceeding regardless of whether the annexation is approved or denied by the city council. 
39.16. - Tree removal permit fee. 
(A)  Application fee: The nonrefundable application fee for the tree removal permit authorized under this part shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the first tree and five dollars ($5.00) for each additional tree for which removal is requested on said application, with a maximum fee not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). An applicant may apply for a fee waiver when the tree to be removed is to be replaced and/or relocated by a tree of any of the types described in Appendix A Ordinance No. 929-89. 
39.17. - Impact fees. 
    [Impact fees are as follows:] 
A.  Transportation/correctional as required by interlocal agreement with Brevard County or hereby amended by the City of Rockledge, as of September 30, 2001. 
Incorporated Impact Fee Schedule for Brevard County 
Land Use Type Unit Transportation Correctional Total Residential: Single family Dwelling $1,197.08 $ 71.99 $1,269.07 Low rise 1 or 2 stories Dwelling 736.18 62.73 798.91 High rise 3+ stories Dwelling 654.78 41.25 696.03 Residential condominium or townhouse (1 or 2 stories) Dwelling 736.18 65.61 801.79 Residential condominium 3 + stories Dwelling 654.78 43.13 697.91 Mobile home Dwelling 451.55 56.65 508.20 Industrial/manufacturing: General industry 1,000 sq. ft. 859.10 17.37 876.47 Manufacturing 1,000 sq. ft. 470.80 13.63 484.43 Warehouse 1,000 sq. ft. 611.33 9.60 620.93 Mini-warehouse 1,000 sq. ft. 149.33 0.48 149.81 Commercial: Hotel Room 752.13 20.22 772.35 Motel Room 407.00 20.22 427.22 Resort hotel Room 1,793.55 20.22 1,813.77 Office under 10,000 GSF 1,000 sq. ft. 2,373.25 50.85 2,424.10 Office 10,000 GSF and over 1,000 sq. ft. 1,390.95 29.80 1,420.75 Office park 1,000 sq. ft. 1,712.70 29.80 1,742.50 Medical office 1,000 sq. ft. 3,581.60 30.71 3,612.31 Bank 1,000 sq. ft. 3,785.65 24.86 3,810.51 Bank with drive-through 1,000 sq. ft. 6,416.03 24.95 6,440.98 Retail under 50,000 GSF 1,000 sq. ft. 1,596.10 63.13 1,659.23 Retail 50,000 to 99,999 GSF 1,000 sq. ft. 1,758.90 63.13 1,822.03 Retail 100,000 to 299,999 GSF 1,000 sq. ft. 1,449.25 63.13 1,512.38 Retail 300,000 to 499,999 GSF 1,000 sq. ft. 1,604.08 63.13 1,667.21 Retail 500,000 GSF and over 1,000 sq. ft. 1,604.35 63.13 1,667.48 Quality restaurant 1,000 sq. ft. 4,646.95 257.28 4,904.23 Restaurant 1,000 sq. ft. 6,383.58 325.04 6,708.62 Restaurant w/drive-through 1,000 sq. ft. 9,842.53 259.52 10,102.05 Auto repair 1,000 sq. ft. 2,118.33 26.75 2,145.08 New and used auto sales 1,000 sq. ft. 3,006.58 35.53 3,042.11 Gas station Fuel position 11,173.98 59.20 11,233.18 Car wash Wash stall 3,170.75 347.67 3,518.42 Supermarket 1,000 sq. ft. 2,214.00 109.22 2,323.22 Convenience market 1,000 sq. ft. 9,499.05 79.26 9,578.31 Convenience store with gas and fast food 1,000 sq. ft. 6,204.83 79.26 6,284.09 Furniture store 1,000 sq. ft. 366.30 6.46 372.76 Recreation: Marina Berth 385.00 acre 2.46 387.46 Golf course Hole 3,162.78 32.83 3,195.61 Racquet club/health spa 1,000 sq. ft. 1,584.28 6.27 1,590.55 Tennis court court 2,622.13 2,622.13 Movie theater with matinee Screen 12.10 per seat 241.20 Institutional: Church 1,000 sq. ft. 696.30 8.19 704.49 ACLF or retirement home Dwelling 103.95 60.52 164.47 Nursing home Bed 129.80 47.00 176.80 Day care center 1,000 sq. ft. 3,236.48 51.93 2,388.41 Elementary school Student 75.08 0.58 75.66 Middle school Student 84.43 0.54 84.97 High school Student 118.25 0.67 118.92 Junior college Student 231.55 1.94 233.49 College Student 347.33 0.47 347.80 Veterinary clinic 1,000 sq. ft. 976.80 976.80 Hospital 1,000 sq. ft. 1,472.35 33.88 1,506.23  
    On January 1st of each year, the impact fee rate for each land use category shown in the transportation column above shall increase by the amount shown in the table below: 
Land Use Type Unit Transportation Residential: Single family Dwelling $43.53 Low rise 1 or 2 stories Dwelling 26.77 High rise 3+ stories Dwelling 23.81 Residential condominium or townhouse (1 or 2 stories) Dwelling 26.77 Residential condominium 3+ stories Dwelling 23.81 Mobile home Dwelling 16.42 Industrial/manufacturing: General industry 1,000 sq. ft. 31.24 Manufacturing 1,000 sq. ft. 17.12 Warehouse 1,000 sq. ft. 22.23 Mini-warehouse 1,000 sq. ft. 54.30 Commercial: Hotel Room 27.35 Motel Room 14.80 Resort hotel Room 65.22 Office under 10,000 GSF 1,000 sq. ft. 86.30 Office 10,000 GSF and over 1,000 sq. ft. 50.58 Office park 1,000 sq. ft. 62.28 Medical office 1,000 sq. ft. 130.24 Bank 1,000 sq. ft. 137.66 Bank with drive-through 1,000 sq. ft. 233.81 Retail under 50,000 GSF 1,000 sq. ft. 58.04 Retail 50,000 to 99,999 GSF 1,000 sq. ft. 63.96 Retail 100,000 to 299,999 GSF 1,000 sq. ft. 52.70 Retail 300,000 to 499,999 GSF 1,000 sq. ft. 58.33 Retail 500,000 GSF and over 1,000 sq. ft. 58.34 Quality restaurant 1,000 sq. ft. 168.98 Restaurant 1,000 sq. ft. 232.13 Restaurant w/drive-through 1,000 sq. ft. 357.91 Auto repair 1,000 sq. ft. 77.03 New and used auto sales 1,000 sq. ft. 109.33 Gas station Fuel position 42.69 Car wash Wash stall 115.30 Supermarket 1,000 sq. ft. 112.58 Convenience market 1,000 sq. ft. 345.42 Convenience store with gas and fast food 1,000 sq. ft. 225.63 Furniture store 1,000 sq. ft. 13.32 Recreation: Marina Berth 64.30 Golf course Hotel 115.01 Racquet club/health spa 1,000 sq. ft. 57.61 Tennis court Court 95.35 Movie theater with matinee Seat 7.34 Institutional: Church 1,000 sq. ft. 25.32 ACLF or retirement home Dwelling 3.78 Nursing home Bed 4.72 Day care center 1,000 sq. ft. 117.69 Elementary school Student 2.73 Middle school Student 3.07 High school Student 4.30 Junior college Student 8.42 College Student 12.63 Veterinary clinic 1,000 sq. ft. 35.52 Hospital 1,000 sq. ft. 53.34  
B.  Water as required by the City of Cocoa by interlocal agreement or hereby amended by the City of Rockledge. 
C.  Sewer/waste water as follows: Each and every owner, agent or party making connection with the city sewer system shall make such connection at his own expense after securing a permit from the city and paying the following sewer connection charge: 
(a)  Residential: 
(1)  For detached single-family residences, and mobile homes in mobile home subdivisions having: 
Not more than one bathroom ..... $2,000.00 
Not more than one bathroom in Zone A ..... 2,400.00 
Each bathroom in excess of one ..... 1,000.00 
(A half-bathroom or partial bathroom shall, as pertains to the applicable sewer connection charge, be deemed a full bathroom.) 
(2)  For additions to and remodeling of existing residential buildings involving additional bathroom facilities, the party making the connection shall pay the costs of any additional laterals required to be installed, and, in addition thereto, for each additional bathroom ..... 1,000.00 
(3)  For multiple-dwelling units, such as duplexes, triplexes, apartments and condominiums, per dwelling unit having: 
Not more than one bathroom ..... 2,000.00 
Not more than one bathroom in Zone A ..... 2,400.00 
Each bathroom in excess of one ..... 1,000.00 
(4)  For travel trailer parks: 
For each trailer lot ..... 700.00 
For each trailer lot in Zone A ..... 1,100.00 
Plus the established commercial charge for each other facility within the complex receiving sewer service. 
(5)  For motels and hotels: 
Per living unit (motel or hotel unit) ..... 2,000.00 
Per living unit (motel or hotel unit) in Zone A ..... 2,400.00 
Plus the established commercial charge for each other facility within the complex receiving sewer service. 
(b)  Commercial: 
(1)  For restaurants, without cocktail lounges: 
Per seat, on the basis of individual seating capacity in the restaurant ..... 180.00 
(2)  For restaurants, with cocktail lounges: 
Per seat, on the basis of individual seating capacity in the restaurant ..... 180.00 
(3)  For cocktail lounges (whether or not in connection with a restaurant): 
Per seat, on the basis of individual seating capacity in the cocktail lounge ..... 100.00 
(4)  For laundry facilities: 
Per washing machine ..... 700.00 
Plus the established commercial charge for each other facility within the complex receiving sewer service. 
(This connection charge applies to each washing machine situated outside and apart from an individual living unit in condominiums, apartments and multiple-dwelling units.) 
(5)  For office, retail stores: 
Per water closet ..... 2,000.00 
For the first water closet in Zone A ..... 2,400.00 
For each additional water closet in Zone A ..... 2,000.00 
(6)  For other commercial units: 
Per water closet ..... 2,000.00 
For the first water closet in Zone A ..... 2,400.00 
For each additional water closet in Zone A ..... 2,000.00 
In addition, for those uses which generate additional effluent discharge the following fees will be added to the water closet fee: The amount of the connection charge will be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for the first three hundred (300) gallons per day of the commercial sewage flow, plus one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional two hundred (200) gallons per day, as determined from actual daily flow of water, or the daily flow as estimated by the building official. 
If the connection charge is based upon an estimate of the daily flow, the building official shall take into consideration such factors as meter size, the nature and extent of plumbing facilities, the type of business involved and the experience of comparable users; and the owner or agent shall have the right to appeal the estimate of the building official to the city council whose decision shall be final. 
An additional four hundred dollars ($400.00) (per equivalent residential unit, based on three hundred fifty (350) gpd rate), based upon an engineer's estimate of flow, will be added to the total sewer connection charge for all commercial facilities built in Zone A. 
(c)  Industrial: 
Per water closet ..... 2,000.00 
For the first water closet in Zone A ..... 2,400.00 
For each additional water closet in Zone A ..... 2,000.00 
In addition, for those uses which generate additional effluent discharge the following fees will be added to the water closet fee: two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for the first three hundred (300) gallons per day of industrial waste equivalent to domestic sewage, plus one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional two hundred (200) gallons per day, as determined from the actual daily flow of water, or the daily flow as estimated by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1013-91, § 1, 10-2-91; Ord. No. 1098-95, §§ 1-4, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 1120-96, § 5, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1268-2002, § 3, 4-3-02) 
39.17.1. - Exemption from connection charge. 
(a)  [Generally.] No sewer connection charge shall be required with respect to the following: 
(1)  Property or structures for which a sewer connection charge has already been paid. 
(2)  Residential structures replaced with similar residential structures or commercial units replaced with similar commercial units. 
(3)  A structure located on property hereafter annexed to the city which structure is connected to an existing sewer system, either city owned or subsequently acquired by the city. 
(b)  Connection charge for property already paying service charges. With respect to existing structures as to which the owner or occupant has paid the regular monthly sewer service charge imposed pursuant to Section 17-44 [of the Code of Ordinances], the connection charge shall be one-half (1/2) of the connection charge required under Section 39.17 of this Code. 
(c)  Additional charge when use of property changed. If the use of any property served by the city sewer system changes so as to change its classification for the purpose of computation of the connection charge, or so as to increase the number of equivalent units over the number of such units at the time of payment of the last connection charge or February 6, 1974, whichever is later, then an additional charge resulting from the change in property use shall be due and payable at the time of the change in property use, regardless of whether any connection charge was ever imposed or paid at the time of initial connection to the system. The increased charge imposed by this section shall be included on and payable as part of the property owner's next sanitary sewer service bill. 
(d)  Payment of sewer connection charge. 
(1)  At or prior to the time of approval by the Rockledge City Council of the plat of any residential subdivision after May 8, 1986, the owner of the proposed subdivision will pay to the City of Rockledge, and the city clerk shall collect, a sum equal to the product obtained by multiplying one-half of the sewer connection charge required for a one bathroom dwelling unit in the zoning district where the proposed subdivision is located, times the total number of sewer connections that are allocated by the city and Florida Department of Environmental Regulation for the proposed subdivision, which payment shall be referred to as the "sewer connection deposit," and such deposit shall be ratably apportioned among all buildable lots in the subdivision, with the part of such deposit that it allocated to each separate lot being credited as part payment of the sewer connection charge for the dwelling unit to be constructed on that lot, and the owner or developer shall pay to the city, and the city clerk shall collect, the remaining part of the sewer connection charge required for each dwelling unit thereafter constructed in the subdivision at or prior to the time of issuance of the building permit for construction of the dwelling unit. 
(2)  For improvements other than dwellings in platted residential subdivisions, and for which improvements the owner or developer is required to obtain a Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (DER) permit to connect the proposed improvements to the Rockledge sewer system, one-half (1/2) of the total sewer connection charge applicable to said improvements, which payment shall be referred to as the "sewer connection deposit," shall be paid to the city prior to the city's endorsement of the application to the Florida Department of Environmental regulation for such permit, and the remaining one-half (1/2) of the sewer connection charge shall be payable at the time of application to the city for a building permit for the improvements. 
(3)  As to all premises other than those described in subsections (a) and (b) above, the city clerk shall collect the required sewer connection charge in full prior to issuance of a building permit, and no building permit will be issued until after the connection charge has been paid in full. 
(4)  All sewer connection deposits paid with respect to residential subdivisions at the time of plat approval, and all sewer connection deposits paid at the time of making application for a Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (DER) wastewater treatment connection permit, shall be deposited in the sewer capital improvement fund and used for the purposes described in this Code. All sewer connection charges collected at the building permit stage shall be allocated between the sewer capital improvement fund account and the renewal and replacement fund account and deposited in the relative proportions specified in subsection 39.17.1(h)(5). 
(e)  Expiration of sewer connection reservations. Any reservation of sewer connections made by the city in conjunction with approval of a residential subdivision plat shall expire one year after the date of approval of such plat by the Rockledge City Council unless within said one-year period construction of the streets, sewer lines, water lines, and other public improvements for said subdivisions have been completed and accepted by the city. Said expiration date may be extended by the city council for successive periods, each period not to exceed one year, if the owner or developer demonstrates to the city council that his failure to complete the public improvements within the prescribed time is due to hardship caused by war, act of God, market conditions, governmental restrictions, supply shortages, unavailability of necessary utilities, or other such reasonable cause for granting the extension. An application for continuance or extension of a sewer connection reservation must be made to the city prior to the expiration date of the reservation. The city shall have no responsibility, obligation or duty to make any sewer connection or to provide municipal sewer service for any improvement for which a sewer connection reservation has expired. 
(f)  Refund of sewer connection deposit in certain cases. Within one year after date of expiration of any sewer connection reservation, an owner may obtain a refund of his sewer connection deposit previously paid provided such owner shall first complete to the satisfaction of the city the following: 
(1)  File with the city a written application for refund annexing thereto evidence of the completion of these requirements for refund. 
(2)  Vacate the official plat of the subdivision for which the deposit was made. 
(3)  Obtain from the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation a written release and cancellation of the sewer connections that said department has charged off against the capacity of the city's wastewater treatment plant. 
(4)  Evidence in writing of such owner's intention not to proceed with the subdivision development. 
(5)  Furnish the city satisfactory evidence of such owner's entitlement to the refund. 
(6)  Adequately indemnify the city against loss resulting directly or indirectly because of the payment of such refund to the owner. 
    No interest shall accrue in favor of any owner, developer or other person with respect to any sewer connection deposit paid to or held by the city. 
(g)  Forfeiture of sewer connection deposit. Unless an owner or developer demonstrates his entitlement to a refund of his sewer connection deposit as provided above within one year following the date of expiration of the sewer connection reservation, the sewer connection deposit applicable to the sewer connection reservation that has expired shall stand and be deemed forfeited in full to the city by such owner or developer, and such owner or developer shall have no further right to a refund or other rights or entitlement with respect to the deposit, and the deposit shall be used by the city as other sewer connection fees are used. 
(h)  Application and use of sewer connection charges. 
(1)  The term "sewer connection charge," as used in this section, means the charge payable under the provisions of this section and for each separate and individual unit or facility for which a connection charge is specified. 
(2)  The city has established and shall continue to maintain an account designated "sewer capital improvement fund," and all funds now and hereafter deposited in said account, and any interest or income thereon, shall be expended and used only for the expansion and enlargement of the capacity of the existing sewer plant and wastewater treatment facility, or for the construction of a new sewer plant and wastewater treatment facility, as authorized by the city council, or to retire debts, including principal and interest, incurred in funding same. No part of such revenue shall be budgeted nor used for the operating expenses of the sewer system. 
(3)  The city has established and shall continue to maintain an account designated as the "renewal and replacement fund," and, except as provided in paragraph (4) hereof, all funds now and hereafter deposited in said account, or any interest or income thereon, shall be expended and used only for renewals and replacements to the existing sewer plant and for such acquisitions, additions and extensions of sewer lines and apparatus pertaining to the existing sewer system as will enhance the effectiveness, efficiency and operation of said system and wastewater treatment plant, as authorized by the city council. No part of such fund shall be budgeted nor used for the operating expenses of the sewer system. 
(4)  At any time that the balance in the renewal and replacement fund exceeds the sum of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), then, in such event, the Rockledge City Council may authorize funds in the renewal and replacement fund account exceeding two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) to be transferred to and deposited in the sewer capital improvement fund account and appropriated by the city council to defray necessary capital improvement costs and debt services, including principal and interest. 
(5)  Of each sewer connection charge involving a new or additional connection (tap in) into the sewer collection system, $500.00 thereof shall be deposited in the Renewal and Replacement Fund, and the portion in excess thereof shall be deposited in the Sewer Capital Improvement Fund. In situations involving additions to or remodeling of an existing structure where additional bathroom facilities are installed, for which a connection charge is imposed by the provisions of this Code, but no new or additional connection (tap in) is made into the sewer collection system, the entire connection charge shall be deposited in the Sewer Capital Improvement Fund. 
(6)  Of each sewer connection charge involving a new or additional connection (tap-in) into the sewer collection system in Zone A as shown on Exhibit "A" to this chapter, nine hundred dollars ($900.00) thereof shall be deposited in the renewal and replacement fund, and the portion in excess thereof shall be deposited in the sewer capital improvement fund. In situations involving additions to or remodeling of an existing structure where additional bathroom facilities are installed, for which a connection charge is imposed by the provisions of this Code, but no new or additional connection (tap-in) is made into the sewer collection system, the entire connection charge shall be deposited in the sewer capital improvement fund. The city council may amend this tap-in provision and fees for Zone A from time to time by resolution, as it sees fit. 
(i)  Effect of conflict with bond ordinances. In the event any provision of this section shall conflict with any provision of any current bond ordinance of the city then the provisions of such bond ordinance shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1013-91, § 2, 10-2-91; Ord. No. 1098-95, § 5, 5-3-95) 
39.18. - Application fee for comprehensive plan amendment. 
    Application for amendment of the Comprehensive Plan, or for other action which necessitates amendment of the Comprehensive Plan shall require a one thousand five hundred dollar ($1,500.00) deposit for Small Scale Comprehensive Plan amendments and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for regular Comprehensive Plan amendments to cover costs of newspaper advertisements, postage, printing and other costs of processing the proposed amendment. If the deposit is insufficient to cover all costs the applicant shall pay the city the balance of the costs exceeding the deposit. If separate amendments proposed by two (2) or more applicants are combined and processed in a single proceeding for the amendment of a regular Comprehensive Plan Amendment, a two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) cost deposit shall be paid by each applicant and costs incurred in the amendment process shall, insofar as possible, be allocated and apportioned equitably between the different applicants by the city clerk's office for the purpose of determining the amount of refund or additional payment required." 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 6, 8-14-96) 
39.19. - Concurrency review fee. 
    The City of Rockledge has the right to set fees for concurrency review on all facilities it operates or monitors. All other service providers and monitors have the right to set review fees only with agreement with the Rockledge City Council. 
39.20. - Burn permit required. 
    The burning of garbage, trash, yard trash or any other open or containerized burning is prohibited in the city limits, except as approved by the city council on recommendation of the fire chief. If such approval is granted, there shall be a one hundred dollar ($100.00) administrative fee payable in advance of the issuance of a burning permit. 
Part IV - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION 
General Provisions Ensuring Environmental Protection 
GENERAL PROVISIONS ENSURING ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
A.  [City declared bird and wildlife sanctuary.] The City of Rockledge has been declared a bird and wildlife sanctuary. All property within the city is hereby declared to be a bird and wildlife sanctuary. 
B.  Polluting Indian River generally. No person shall deposit, place or throw, wrapped or unwrapped, in packages or in boxes or in any other manner or method into the waters of the Indian River or upon the shores or banks thereof within the city, any dead animals, fowls, fish or parts thereof, or any vegetables or parts thereof, or any fruit or parts thereof, or any rubbish, filth, trash, waste, weeds or any noxious matter whatsoever. 
C.  Sewage pipes draining into Indian River. No person shall construct or maintain any sewage pipes which drain into the Indian River. 
D.  Wetlands or hydrologically sensitive areas. No person or persons shall in any single or successive land filling, excavation or site preparation work or operation affect any change in elevation of land to the extent described in these regulations, nor be entitled to a building permit for the improvement of said property unless they have first complied with the following requirements: 
(a)  The property owner(s) or his/their representative shall submit documentation certifying the subject parcel is not considered to be either a wetland or hydrologically sensitive area, as defined by any of the following authorities that have jurisdiction to make such a determination over the property, i.e., St. Johns River Water Management District (SJRWMD), Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (DER), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (ACOE) or Florida Department of Natural Resources (DNR); or 
(b)  If the parcel contains wetlands or hydrologically sensitive areas, the property owner(s) or his/their representative shall submit a copy of the required permits indicating regulatory agency approval of the project and the scope of work. 
SECTION 40.00. - PROTECTION OF AND REMOVAL OF TREES AND OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION 
(A)  Purpose and intent: 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to provide protective regulations for trees, landscaping, open space and soil conservation in the City of Rockledge. 
(2)  It is the intent of this section to promote the community appearance and assist in the natural control of solar heat, soil conservation, flooding, water conservation and recharge, air pollution and noise. In addition, trees offer a haven for community wildlife and provide citizens with psychological relief from the increasing complexities of a man-made urban environment. Further, it is the intent of this section to enhance the community and its citizenry, not to be punitive or to cause a hardship to any individual or public or private company which uses reasonable care and diligence to protect trees and indigenous plants and open space within the City of Rockledge. 
(B)  Tree protection: 
(1)  Generally: 
(a)  No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or move, or effectively destroy through damaging any tree located on any property within the City of Rockledge without first obtaining a permit, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  Tree permits authorized by this section may be obtained by making application for permit to the building official on a form to be supplied by the city, indicating the type tree and how it is proposed to be cut, destroyed or removed, who will perform the work, and such other information as may be required by the building official to effectively enforce the provisions of this section. A separate application shall be filed for each site upon which tree removal is requested. 
(2)  Exceptions. The following types of trees shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, and no permit or fees shall be required for the removal, cutting down or destruction of these trees: 
(a)  Melaleuca quinquenervia (Cajaput or Paperbark). 
(b)  Melaleuca leucadendra (Punk). 
(c)  Casuarina (spp), (Australian Pine), (Brazilian Oak). 
(d)  Schinus terebinthinfolius (Brazilian Pepper). 
(e)  Araucaria excelsa (Norfolk Island Pine). 
(f)  Eucalyptus (all varieties except Eucalyptus Cinerea). 
(g)  Bischofia javanica (Bishopwood, Bischofia). 
(h)  Ricinus communis (Castorbean). 
(i)  Metopium toxiferum (Poison Wood). 
(j)  Melaiceae asedarach (Chinaberry). 
(k)  Enterolobium (spp), (Eartree). 
(l)  Trees located in state-licensed and governmental plant or tree nurseries or botanical gardens in which the trees are planted and growing for the sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of business or for some public purpose and which are sold. 
(m)  Trees which are required to be removed by law. 
(n)  Trees which, due to natural circumstances, are no longer viable, are in danger of falling, are too close to existing structures so as to endanger such structures, interfere with utility services, create unsafe vision clearance or constitutes a safety hazard. 
(o)  Trees located within three (3) feet of a survey line cut or cleared by a licensed land surveyor acting in the course of his profession or located within three (3) feet of any public utility main, pipe, wire, line or conduit. 
(p)  Trees on a single-family residential lot or on a two-family residential lot; provided, that after such removal the lot will contain a minimum of at least four (4) non-noxious non-invasive trees of any type or types listed in the City of Rockledge recommended tree species, use and characteristics list (Tree list) if after the removal the lot will contain less than four (4) trees listed on the tree list, a substitute tree of any type or types listed on the tree list is planted for each tree to be removed, such planting to be performed within thirty (30) days of the removal. PUD (Planned Unit Development) zoned lots having fifty (50) feet or less of width will be required to have only three (3) trees. 
(q)  The relocation of existing trees on-site. 
(3)  Application for tree removal permit: 
(a)  Predevelopment. The removal of any tree or trees from real property in the City of Rockledge which has not been previously developed pursuant to an approved site plan is hereby prohibited, except that no tree removal permit shall be required for removal of any of the exempt and excepted trees described in subsection (B)(2) of this section. An application pursuant to the requirements in subsection (B)(2) shall be completed and a permit required. 
(b)  During construction. Application for a tree removal permit during construction shall be required as a part of the site plan submittal, except that no tree removal permit shall be required for removal of any of the exempt and excepted trees described in subsection (B)(2) of this section. The applicant shall submit a legible, reproducible plan, drawn to scale and indicating the following information for the entire site: 
1.  Location, shape and spatial arrangements of all existing and proposed buildings, walls or fences, or other improvements and structures. 
2.  Identification of uses on adjacent properties. 
3.  Location, shape and spatial arrangement of all parking areas and access roads. 
4.  Existing and proposed utility services. 
5.  Existing and proposed elevations. 
6.  Setbacks, yard requirements and location of easements. 
7.  Existing and proposed wells. 
8.  All sink holes, rock outcroppings and historical sites. 
9.  A tree survey certified by a landscape architect, land surveyor or land planner overlaid directly upon the site plan, and indicating the location referenced to structures, of all protected trees as defined in this section. The survey shall distinguish existing trees which are proposed to be destroyed, relocated, replaced or preserved at their present location. Said survey shall show the location of all existing trees as defined in this section. Tree information shall be summarized in a legend form and shall contain the variety, trunk diameter, height and location referenced to structure of all trees shown on the survey. Groups of trees less than three (3) feet apart may be designed as clumps, with the exception that any tree with a trunk diameter of eight (8) inches or more must be specifically designated. For sites on which tree removal activity is to occur on less than the entirety of the site, the building official shall provide that the tree survey may exclude those portions of the site which it determines will not be affected by the tree removal or clearing activity. 
10.  Trees not affected by tree removal or clearing activity shall be properly identified by means of surveying tape or non-injurious painting. Each tree preserved shall be protected by fencing around the drip line of the canopy. 
(c)  Post-development: An application for a tree removal permit shall be required for removal of any tree on real property previously developed and for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued, except that no tree removal permit shall be required for removal of any of the exempt and excepted trees described in subsection (B)(2) of this section. The following information shall be required on an application for removal of a nonexempt tree from such previously developed property: 
1.  Site plan showing all structures, sidewalks, driveways, etc. 
2.  Location on site plan of trees to be preserved, removed, and replacement location of tree from the tree list. 
(d)  Application fee. The nonrefundable application fee for the tree removal permit authorized under this section shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first tree and ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional tree for which removal is requested on said application, with a maximum fee not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). An applicant may apply for a fee waiver when the tree to be removed is to be replaced and/or relocated by a tree of any of the types described in the tree list. 
(4)  Criteria for issuance of tree removal permits. Tree removal permits shall be issued in accordance with this subsection (B) when the building official has been satisfied that the application meets all of the following criteria: 
(a)  The subject tree is located within the area where any building, roadway, pavement, retention pond or other improvement is proposed to be constructed, or where a grade change necessary to proposed development of the site will be made which is too severe for the tree to survive, and such proposed improvements or grade change cannot be relocated upon the site so as to further maximize the preservation of the existing trees upon the site while not unreasonably restricting the permitted use of the property. 
(b)  If it is in the welfare of the general public that the tree be removed for a reason other than set forth above. 
(c)  Appropriate arrangements for disposal of trees and tree parts have been provided that will comply to the Landfill Ordinance (Ordinance No. 922-89, adopted August 2, 1989) [Section 43.00]. 
(5)  Relocation or replacement: 
(a)  As a condition to the granting of a tree removal permit under this section, the applicant may be required, where practical, to: 
1.  Relocate those trees which would otherwise be destroyed to another location upon the site; or 
2.  Replace those trees which will be destroyed with suitable replacement trees elsewhere within the site. Such replacement trees shall be of a variety listed in the tree list or of any other variety approved by the building official. 
(b)  In determining the required relocation or replacement of trees, the building official or agent shall consider the needs of the intended use of the property, including all lands dedicated to public use, together with an evaluation of the following: 
1.  Existing tree coverage on the site and in the immediate surrounding area. 
2.  Number of trees or trees to be removed on the entire site. 
3.  The type, size and condition of the tree or trees to be removed. 
4.  The feasibility of relocating that particular tree or trees. 
5.  Topography and drainage of the site. 
6.  The extent to which the tree or trees contribute to the aesthetic, economic and environmental integrity of the surrounding area. 
7.  No person shall plant or transplant any tree or shrub within the area or space between a sidewalk and the adjacent street, in any parkway or right-of-way, without first obtaining a written permit from the city manager, subject to the list of prohibited species of trees. 
(6)  Procedure for permitting tree removal: 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application containing all the information as required by this section, the building official shall review said application. The review procedure shall determine the adequacy and accuracy of content, and determine whether the application meets the requirements of this subsection (B), and whether the applicant has taken all necessary and reasonable steps to preserve existing trees and to otherwise enhance the aesthetic appearance of the proposed development by incorporation of trees into the design process. 
(b)  Following approval of the application, the building official shall issue the appropriate permits. 
(c)  Upon the issuance of a tree removal permit under this subsection (B), a copy of said permit shall be prominently displayed on the site prior to the removal, relocation or replacement of any trees. Tree removal permits shall be included with all other permit cards and shall be displayed alongside them on the site. 
(d)  No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued nor electrical power connection authorization given until any relocation or replacement of trees required by the tree removal permit has been completed and a final tree inspection approval has been given by the building official. Trees relocating from one portion of the site to another which do not survive transplantation for at least one year shall be replaced by the owner of the site with a suitable replacement tree. 
(7)  Protection of trees not approved for removal, relocation or destruction. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, materials, machinery or temporary soil deposits within the drip line of any tree protected by this section and not permitted for removal or destruction, to fail to erect barriers necessary to protect such tree, or to attach anything other than protective wires, braces or other similar non-injurious materials to such tree. Furthermore, no structure or impervious paving shall be located within a three-foot radius of the trunk perimeter of any such tree. A tree of two and one-half (21/2) feet or more in diameter shall require additional space as may be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1174-98, § 1, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 1332-2003, § 1, 12-17-03; Ord. No. 1385-2005, § 1, 8-17-05) 
SECTION 40.10. OPEN SPACE AND PRESERVATION CREDITS FOR LANDSCAPING 
    Open space as referred to in this section shall mean those unimproved portions of development site plans for Single-family, multi-family, commercial and industrial projects with the main intent to preserve trees and habitat. Preservation of these open space areas will result in reduced infrastructure construction cost and reduction of landscaping cost and by offering credits and incentives to developers to increase these areas beyond what is required by code. 
1.  Tree preservation credits. Trees to be preserved on site will receive the following credits to the landscaping requirements found in Section 40.30. 
Existing Crown Spread of Preserved Tree Or Diameter of Tree Trunk 41/2 Feet Above 
Natural Grade Number of 
Trees Credited 90 feet or greater or 36 inches or greater 7 60-89 feet or 30-35 inches 6 50-59 feet or 26-29 inches 5 40-49 feet or 20-25 inches 4 30-39 feet or 13-19 inches 3 20-29 feet or 8-12 inches 2 10-19 feet or 2-7 inches 1  
2.  Preservation incentives. Those development sites which offer to preserve more trees than are required by the landscape code for parameter and interior trees may request the following incentives in the order presented: 1) reduction in required building setback distance (up to twenty (20) per cent on non-residential sides) 2) reductions in parking space requirements (up to a ten (10) per cent reduction); 3) increase lot coverage requirements (up to an additional ten (10) per cent of coverage based upon the zoning district requirements); 4) reduction in storm water retention standards (no greater than ten (10) per cent and no less than the requirements of St. Johns River Water Management District) and 5) a possible density bonus of one unit per acre for residential projects. 
3.  Incentives process. 
(a)  Applicant shall submit a site plan in accordance with the provisions of Section 40.30, showing the tree survey and those trees and open space proposed to preserved. The plan shall also show proposed retention areas, building footprints ingress/egress points and parking areas. 
(b)  Staff will calculate the trees required for the site and determine if the applicant can request preservation bonuses and incentives. 
(c)  Staff report will be faxed and/or given to the applicant and the applicant will have ten (10) working days to decide if they will be requesting preservation bonuses or incentives. 
(d)  The applicant will request what types of incentives/bonuses they will be requesting, which will be forwarded to the planning commission and city council for their review and approval. 
(e)  The final site plan shall be engineered to meet the approved incentives given by the Rockledge City Council. 
(f)  The final landscaping plan shall reflect the preservation credits and will be binding on the applicant and will automatically comply with the landscaping requirements of the city. 
(g)  Those projects exceeding the tree preservation landscaping requirements, will be exempt from the tree removal fees and permitting. 
Preservation per centage over required Incentive/Bonus requested 1-50% Setback reduction 51-100% Parking spaces 101-150% Increase coverage 151-200% Reduced stormwater over 200% Density increase  
4.  Compliance with Section 40.30. 
(a)  Those applicants which preserve trees on site which meet or exceed the number required by Section 40.30, will not need to meet the different species requirement. 
(b)  Applicant will be required to protect of preservation trees on-site during the construction phase and ensure their viability for the first year. 
(c)  Preserved trees dying during the first will be replaced using the credit chart in reverse. 
(Ord. No. 1332-2003, § 1, 12-17-03) 
SECTION 40.11. - TREE PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION AND CARE DURING DEVELOPMENT 
    During the clearing of land for development purposes, protected trees and accompanying under-story shall be conserved on the development site wherever and whenever reasonably possible. This requires protection of vegetation from mechanical damage and soil compaction during construction. The developer shall include on the site plan how existing trees shall be preserved, mitigated on site, or mitigated to another site selected by the City of Rockledge. It is required that all reasonable effort be made to save major trees. Reasonable effort shall include, but not be limited to, alteration of building design; alternate location of building, parking area, water retention, drainage pipes; micro-siding of buildings or improvements; or relocation of utilities. All retained, re-located, or replaced trees must be protected by temporary barriers around them to prevent parking or storage of materials. To the extent that protected trees are lost or destroyed as a result of the clearing of a development site, the developer shall mitigate for their loss or destruction by the planting of replacement trees as follows: 
(a)  Credits. (See section 40.10) 
(b)  All pruning must be done following the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations Tree, Shrub, and Other Wood Plant Maintenance-Standard Practices (available from the International Society of Arboriculture, P. O. Box GG, Savoy, IL 61874-9902. The Code specifically prohibits: 
Topping tree limbs over a three-inch caliper or trimming them into little round balls of foliage. 
Excessive thinning of the tree crown. 
Removing lower limbs higher than seven (7) feet above the ground level on the trunk (unless this is necessary for the safe passage of large vehicles such as fire or garbage trucks). 
(c)  The required amount of replacement trees shall be planted, established and nurtured on the development site to the extent determined practicable by the developer, provided that such trees shall be at least two (2) caliper-inches and shall be planted no closer than ten (10) feet to any other tree. 
(Ord. No. 1385-2005, § 2, 8-17-05) 
SECTION 40.20. - SOIL CONSERVATION 
(1)  Scope and exclusions. This section shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any lands, except for the following: 
(a)  Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, or other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. 
(b)  The construction of single-family residences when they are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, excluding residential accessory modifications (i.e., sheds, pools, driveways, etc.) 
(c)  Any activity for which bids have been let or construction contract signed prior to the date of adoption of this section; provided, that the activity is completed within six (6) months after the effective date of this section. 
(2)  Procedure for permitting land-disturbing activity: 
(a)  No person shall perform any land-disturbing activity without first obtaining an erosion and sedimentation control permit from the building official after certification by the city engineer to perform such activity. Such permit shall be in addition to any other permits or approvals required for the project by any other ordinances, rules and regulations in effect. 
1.  All commercial, industrial, manufacturing and subdivision projects must receive approval from the St. Johns River Management District. 
(b)  Application for an erosion and sedimentation control permit must be made to the city engineer on an application form provided by the city, and must be accompanied by an erosion and sedimentation control plan. The applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan shall include, as a minimum, the following information for the entire tract of land to be disturbed, regardless of whether the tract will be developed in stages: 
1.  A narrative description of the overall project. This narrative shall include: 
a.  Anticipated starting and completion dates for each sequence and stage of land disturbing activities and the expected date the final stabilization will be completed; and 
b.  A description of the sediment control program and sediment control practices; and 
c.  An adequate description of general topographical and soil conditions of the tract; and 
d.  A description of the zoning classification of adjacent property and a general description of existing structures, building and other fixed improvements located within a perimeter of two hundred (200) feet of the boundary line of applicant's property; and 
e.  A description of the maintenance program for sediment control facilities including inspection programs, re-vegetation of exposed soils, method and frequency of removal and disposal of solid waste material removed from control facilities and disposition of temporary structural measures. 
2.  The city engineer or his designee shall approve the erosion and sedimentation control plan upon finding that the requirements of this section have been met. 
3.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then the building official may issue a separate permit for a master plan or for each phase. 
4.  The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the building official or his designee upon a finding that the holder is not in compliance with this section or has violated any of the provisions or conditions of the permit. 
5.  No building permit shall be issued until any required erosion and sedimentation control permit certifying approval of the erosion and sedimentation control plan is obtained in accordance with this section. 
(3)  Maintenance. Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the owner. 
(4)  Penalty for violation: 
(a)  Any person who directly or indirectly willfully causes any land-disturbing activity without first obtaining an erosion and sedimentation control permit from the building official and in violation of any provisions of this section shall, and upon being found in violation of this Code, maybe fined in an amount not to exceed one dollar ($1.00) per square foot of property disturbed. 
(b)  All fines shall be imposed by the code enforcement board in the same fashion as other code violations. The defenses of accident or ignorance may be raised and can be, but are not absolute, defenses to the imposition of the fine. 
(Ord. No. 1332-2003, § 1, 12-17-03) 
SECTION 40.30. - LANDSCAPING 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to all future development of property within the city and shall be the minimum requirements to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for installation and maintenance of certain landscaped areas; to protect the character and stability of residential, business, manufacturing, institutional and industrial areas; and to conserve the value of land and buildings on surrounding properties and neighborhoods. 
(1)  Landscaping plan required: 
(a)  No new non-residential or multi-family site plans or projects classified as substantial improvements shall be approved unless accompanied by a landscaping plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals fifty (50) feet, showing the required off-street parking facilities and landscaping. Nor shall a permit be issued for the improvement of a parking area to serve as an accessory use to an existing building or buildings until a landscaping plan has been approved in accordance with the provisions herein set forth. Prior to approval, the landscaping plan will be reviewed by the building official in order to ensure that all requirements have been met. 
(b)  The landscaping plan shall describe the following: 
1.  The plant material proposed for use listed according to species, variety, quality and size. Existing native drought resistant plant material is encouraged to be retained wherever possible and credit will be allowed for the retention of viable plant material on the site. 
2.  Provision for water efficient irrigation systems, with rain sensor devices, to provide deep watering of the roots of the plant material and sod, to encourage deeper root growth, which will promote a healthier more drought tolerant landscaping plan. 
3.  Access aisles, driveways, water efficient irrigation systems, and water outlet location and storm water retention areas and structures and utility systems whether underground or aerial, shall be illustrated on the landscape plan. 
(2)  Landscaping design standards: 
(a)  Commercial, professional, multifamily, manufacturing, institutional and industrial zoning: 
1.  Landscaping for yard areas adjacent to abutting properties. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance to the following example illustrated below (see Figure 1): 
a.  Off-street parking or other vehicular use areas which are not entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure from the abutting property shall be provided with a wall, fence or landscaped barrier not greater than six (6) feet in height or less than three (3) feet in height. Such barrier shall form a continuous barrier between the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area and the abutting property. This barrier shall be located along the common lot line. Should this barrier consist entirely of planted materials, the planting strip shall not be less than seven (7) feet in width. 
b.  One tree shall be provided for each thirty (30) linear feet or fraction thereof of lot perimeter. 
c.  When the abutting property is zoned or used for single- or two-family uses, the required landscaping area shall meet the applicable yard requirement of the adjacent property. 
FIGURE 1 

Figure 1
2.  Landscaping for yard areas adjacent to public rights-of-way. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following: 
a.  A landscaping area at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided between the abutting rights-of-way and the vehicular use or parking lot area. The ten-foot landscaped area is to be part of the developed private property and shall not include any public property or street right-of-way. A flowering hedge or other durable native drought tolerant landscape screen not less than two (2) feet or greater than three (3) feet in height shall be planted in the yard area. Planting size (3 gallon containers and spacing no greater than three feet apart). 
b.  One tree shall be planted for each thirty (30) linear feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof. 
c.  That portion of any public right-of-way which abuts property regulated by this subsection must be sodded or make use of an approved ground cover by the owner or the applicant up to the back of the curb or edge of the pavement, whichever is applicable. 
d.  Necessary and approved accessways through the landscaped area may be subtracted from the linear dimension used to determine the number of trees required. 
3.  Interior parking area landscaping. Off-street parking areas shall have at least ten (10) square feet of interior landscaping for each parking space excluding those spaces abutting a perimeter for which landscaping is required by other part of this subsection (E). Such interior landscaping shall maintain the following standards: 
a.  Each separate landscaped area shall contain a minimum of two-hundred fifty (250) square feet landscaping materials, each landscape area shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. 
b.  Each separate landscaped area shall contain at least one tree having a clear trunk of at least five (5) feet in height as measured from the average grade level with the remaining area adequately landscaped with shrubs, ground cover or other authorized landscaping material. 
c.  Each separate landscaped area shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving and at strategic points to guide traffic flow and direction. 
d.  All planting areas may be protected with a continuous curb or be part of an on-site water retention or drainage system. 
e.  If the specific application of the interior landscape requirements will seriously limit functions of the building site, the building official shall have authority to permit consolidation and relocation of these landscaped areas on the building site. 
f.  One additional interior tree for every fifteen (15) parking spaces. 
4.  Visibility at intersections. Landscaping shall not obstruct the visibility of automobiles at intersections. No landscaping, flowering hedges, or plantings shall be placed or allowed to obstruct the clear vision of street intersections in violation of the provisions of Section 52.23 of this Code. 
5.  Internal landscaping regulations: 
a.  Off-street parking areas. The owner, tenant and/or agent of an off-street parking or other vehicular use area shall landscape within the internal off-street parking area as described below. All parking areas and other paved ground surface areas used for vehicular use shall have internal landscaping to provide visual and climatic relief from broad expanses of pavement and to channelize and define logical areas for pedestrian and vehicular circulation. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the building official, the following landscaping requirements shall be met: 
i. A minimum landscape buffer strip of four (4) feet in width where tiers of parking are utilized. Examples of such tiers are illustrated below (See Figure 2): 
FIGURE 2 

Figure 2
This is a minimum requirement and cannot be utilized as the overhang area for a car. Curbing shall be placed in each space at least two (2) feet away from the edge of the four-foot buffer strip adjoining a parking area to prevent vehicle overhang onto the four-foot wide buffer area; and the two (2) feet of ground surface between the curbing and/or wheel stops, and the edge of the four-foot buffer strip, shall be covered with lawn grass or native drought tolerant ground cover rather than pavement. The relationship of the curbing and/or wheel stops and the two-foot grassy areas between the curbing and/or wheel stops and the edge of the four-foot buffer strip is illustrated below (see Figure 3): 
FIGURE 3 

Figure 3
ii. A native drought tolerant hedge or other durable landscape screen shall be installed at least two (2) feet six (6) inches in height, immediately upon planting in said area except as provided in subparagraph 5.1.iii [5.a.iii] below. The hedge shall be continuous except as provided in subparagraph 5.a.iv of this subsection. Planting size (three-gallon containers and spacing no greater than three (3) feet). 
iii. If the durable screen is of nonliving material, the provision of subparagraph 5.a.iv of this subsection shall be followed. 
iv. A pedestrian cross accessway shall be installed within the four-foot buffer area. Such accessways shall be provided as follows: 
(a) If the four-foot buffer strip is between eighty (80) and one hundred (100) feet in length, one pedestrian cross accessway shall be provided. 
(b) If the four-foot buffer strip is between one hundred (100) and two hundred (200) feet, two (2) pedestrian cross accessways shall be provided. 
(c) If the four-foot buffer strip is greater than two hundred (200) feet, two (2) pedestrian accessways shall be provided, plus one additional accessway shall be provided for each two hundred (200) feet or fraction thereof in addition to the two hundred (200) feet. 
v. Landscaping for I-P zoning district: 
(a) Except as otherwise provided, all open portions of any lot and all parking areas shall be graded, drained and landscaped with trees and shrubs planted in ground cover. One tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of non-paved open area shall be planted. This is in addition to the interior landscaping requirements. 
(b) All parking areas shall have internal landscaping to provide visual and climatic relief from broad expanses of pavement and to channelize and define logical areas for pedestrian and vehicular circulation. Interior landscaping shall account for a minimum of ten (10) per cent of parking areas. A tree shall be planted for each two hundred (200) square feet of required interior landscaping. All interior landscaping shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by curbing and/or wheel stops. Landscaping dividing strips, with or without walkways, shall be used to subdivide parking areas into parking bays with not more than thirty (30) spaces; provided, that no more than fifteen (15) spaces shall be in an uninterrupted row. 
b.  Minimum landscaping for newly developed single-and two-family residential lots. 
i. A minimum of four (4) trees must exist or be planted on each newly developed lot. Trees planted must be of a variety which is compatible with the existing soil and drainage condition and must be provided with an efficient water and nutrient source to encourage growth. Trees shall be planted in locations so as not to cause danger or interference with existing structures at the time of maturity. 
ii. Residential lots must use one or a combination of the following: be fully sodded; or make adequate use of ground covers; or native drought tolerant vegetation to present a finished appearance. In no case shall more than fifteen (15) per cent of the residential lot contain non-living vegetative materials (i.e.: mulch, rock, etc.) 
iii. That portion of any public right-of-way which abuts property regulated by this subsection must be sodded by the owner or the applicant up to the back of the curb or edge of the pavement, whichever is applicable. 
iv. When adequate ground cover or sod is not available, the applicant may post a bond with the building official to satisfy requirements of above within six (6) months of receipt of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Plant materials and planting procedures: 
(a)  The total number of trees required for any development shall be of the species listed. No less than seventy-five (75) per cent of the required trees shall be native trees. Fifty (50) per cent of the trees planted must be of a canopy type and no more than one palm tree species may be used in the total tree requirement. No more than thirty (30%) per cent of any one type of tree species in each category shall be planted on each development. 
(b)  Plant material used in conformance with provisions of this section shall equal or exceed the standards for Florida No. 1, as given in "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants. 1973," State of Florida, Department of Agriculture, Tallahassee, and any amendments thereto. Grass sod shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. 
(c)  The required landscaping shall be installed according to accepted commercial planting procedures. All elements of landscaping shall be installed so as to meet all other applicable ordinances and code requirements of the City of Rockledge. Landscaped areas shall require protection from vehicular encroachment as herein provided. The building official shall inspect all landscaping, and no certificate of occupancy or similar authorization shall be issued prior to landscaping conforming to the requirements herein provided. 
(d)  Trees shall be of a species capable of growing in the Central Coastal area of Florida with an overall height of a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. When planted, trees must be at least eight (8) to ten (10) feet in height. (no less than a twenty-five-gallon container) Trees having an average mature spread of crown less than fifteen (15) feet may be substituted by grouping the same as to create the minimum fifteen (15) feet crown spread. Trees of species providing roots known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted closer than twelve (12) feet to such public works, unless the tree root system is completely encased within a container for which the minimum interior dimension shall be five (5) feet square and five (5) feet deep. 
1.  Trees planted near utility lines, both underground and aerial, will not be allowed to be planted within the specific distances as shown on tree list. 
(4)  Landscaping maintenance standards and responsibilities: 
(a)  Landscaping shall be maintained in a manner so as to not obstruct the visibility of automobiles at intersections or at points of ingress and egress to the public right-of-way. 
(b)  All landscaping required under the provisions of this section shall be maintained by the owner in a viable, neat and orderly condition. Nonviable landscaping shall be replaced to satisfy the requirements of this section at the developer's or owner's expense. 
(c)  The applicant shall provide each landscaped area with a water efficient irrigation system, with rain sensor devices that provide coverage to all landscaped areas. Priority shall be given to use of nonpotable water sources (i.e., shallow wells, reuse lines, recycled water, etc.). 
(d)  Trees and shrub pruning shall be done in accordance with American National Standard Institute requirements for Tree Care Operations as amended from time to time. 
(5)  Hazardous trees and landscaping. The building official may require the removal of any tree or landscaping which is a nuisance and constitutes eminent danger to the safety of the public under the provisions of the Rockledge City Code. 
(6)  Appeals. Any decision of the building official regarding the interpretation of any portion of the provisions of this section may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any office or bureau of the governing body of the city affected thereby to the board of adjustment under Section 28.00 [Section 23.00] of this Code. 
(7)  Penalty for violation: 
(1)  Any person who directly or indirectly willfully causes any tree located within the City of Rockledge to be cut down, removed or effectively destroyed in violation of any provisions of this section shall, upon being found in violation violators maybe fined in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per diameter inch of the each tree destroyed. The unlawful cutting down, removal or effective destruction of each tree shall be deemed a separate offense punishable as herein stated. 
(a)  All fines shall be imposed by the code enforcement board in the same fashion as other code violations. The defenses of accident or ignorance may be raised and can be, but are not absolute, defenses to the imposition of the fine. 
(2)  Whenever the provisions of this section require the performance of any act or thing, or the submission of any documentation or other condition precedent to the issuance of a tree removal permit or other form of permit, no such permit shall be issued until the required performance is completed or required documentation is received in compliance with this section. 
(3)  The provisions of this section may also be enforceable by proceedings before the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board, or by suit for prohibitory or mandatory injunctive relief, or by any other lawful remedy existing at law or in equity for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(8)  One year maintenance bond for all non-residential projects. 
(a)  All required landscape materials on the site, whether preserved or newly planted, must demonstrate health and viability one year after issuance of certificate of completion, except for individual single-family lots. For multi-family, commercial and industrial projects, the city may perform a courtesy inspection of the landscaping within ninety (90) days after the issuance of certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion. If the vegetation appears to be under stress, the staff shall notify the property owner. A second inspection may be performed six (6) months after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion. If the vegetation is not viable at that inspection, notice shall be given to the property owner and the property owner shall be responsible for replacing that dead vegetation with equivalent points of landscaping material. Failure to have viable landscaping materials consistent with the approved landscape plan in place at the twelve-month inspection from the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall constitute a violation as described under Section 40.30. A maintenance bond, cash bond or letter of credit shall be required to be collected at the time a certificate of occupancy is issued for multi-family, commercial, and industrial projects (two (2) acres or more in size), equal to twenty-five (25) per cent of the cost of vegetation other than sod. This maintenance bond, cash bond, or letter of credit shall be foe a period of one year and forfeited if required vegetation is not maintained in a viable state. The city reserves the right to cross property in order to make the necessary inspections. 
(b)  The maintenance bond requirement may be appealed in whole or part by the property owner or tenant to the city council for a hardship waiver. Should the city council determine that an economic hardship exist, they may waive either in full or in part, the bond requirement which would cause the hardship. 
City of Rockledge 
Recommended Tree Species, Use, and Characteristics 
Species Common Name 
* = Accent Tree Native Moisture 
H = Hydric 
M = Mesic 
Z = Xeric Type 
D = Deciduous E = Evergreen Canopy Area (sq ft) Crown Spread (ft) Height 
(ft) Prox. To Power Lines 
A = 75 sf (15' or less) 
B = 125 sf (15'-30') 
C = 200 sf (30' +) Acer A. rubrum Red Maple H-M D 491 25 35-50 B A. negundo Box Elder H-M D 491 25 35-50 B Araucaria A. bidwillii Monkey Puzzle Tree* M E 40-50 Bauhinia B. blakeana Orchid Tree, Hong Kong* H-M D 30 B. purpurea Orchid Tree, Purpie* H-M D 30 Betula B. nigra River Birch H D 201 16 45-65 B Callistemon C. lanceolatus/citrinus Bottlebrush Citrus-Leaf* M E 25 C. rigidus Bottlebrush, Erect* M E C. viminalis Bottlebursh, Weeping* M E 20 Carpinus C. caroliniana American Hornbeam H D 113 12 25-35 B Carya C. floridana Scrub Hickory H D 113 12 10-20 A C. glabra Pignut Hickory M D 707 30 80-100 C C. illinoensis Pecan M D 707 30 80-100 C C. tomentosa Mockernut Hickory M D 707 30 80-100 C Celtis C. laevigata Sugarberry (Hackberry) M D 1257 40 40-60 C Cercis C. canadensis Eastern Redbud* Z D 150 15 25-40 Chionanthus C. virginicus Fringe Tree* M D 79 10 15-25 A Category I Pest Plant M E 707 30 40-50 C Crataegus C. spp Hawthorne M D 113 12 15-20 A Category I Pest Plant Eriobotrya E. japonica Loquat, Japanese H-M E 79 10 15-20 A Eucalyptus E. cinera Eucalyptus, Silver Dollar* M-Z E 30 Fraxinus F. caroliniana Pop Ash H D 491 25 30-50 B F. pennsylvanica Green Ash H-M D 1257 40 60 C Gledistsia G. aquatica Water Locust H D 177 15 40-60 B Gordonia G. lasianthus Loblolly Bay H-M E 201 16 30-40 B Ilex I. attenuatas East Palatka Holly* H-M E 201 16 25-30 B I. cassina Dahoon Holly* H-M E 201 16 25-30 B I. opaca American Holly* M-Z E 201 16 30-45 B I. vomitoria Yaupon Holly* H-M-Z E 50 8 15-25 A I. vomitoria pendula Pendual Weeping Holly* H-M-Z E 50 8 15-25 A Jacaranda J. acutifolla Jacaranda M-Z 40 50 Juniperus J. siliciola Southern Red Cedar M-Z E 113 12 25-30 B Lagerstroemia L. indica Crepe Myrtle* M D 113 15-25 A Ligustrum L. japonicum Wax Leaf Ligustrum* M E 28 6 10-15 A L. lucidum Glossy Privet* M-Z E 314 20 30-35 B Liriodendron L. tulipifera Tulip Poplar M 35 90 Liquidambar L. styraciflua Sweetgum H-M D 707 30 60-100 C L. orientalis Oriental Sweetgum H-M D 962 35 40-60 C Magnolia M. grandiflora Southern Magnolia H-M E 491 25 50-100 C M. virginiana Sweet Bay Magnolia H-M E 201 16 30-60 B Myrica M. cerifera Wax Myrile* H-M E 28 6 10-18 A Myrcianthes Simpson' Stopper/ M. fragrans Twinberry/Nakedwood* H-M-Z E 33 Nyssa N. sylvatica Black Gum H-M D 314 20 50-100 C Osmanthus O. americana Wild Olive, Devilwood* H-M E 50 8 15-30 B O. megacarpa Scrub Olive Z E 79 10 12-15 A Parkinsonia P. aculeata Jerusalem Thorn* M D 201 16 15-25 A Peltophorum P. dubium Yellow Poinciana 80 Persea P. borbonia Red Bay H-M E 113 12 20-60 B Pinus P. clausa Sand Pine M-Z E 314 20 60-80 C P. elliotti Slash Pine H-M E 314 20 80-100 C P. elliotti var densa South Florida Slash Pine H-M-Z E 14 20 80-100 C P. palustris Long Leaf Pine M-Z E 314 20 80-100 C P. taeda Loblolly Pine H-M E 491 20 60-80 C P. thunbergina Black Pine M-Z E 113 12 15-25 A Platanus P. occidentalis Sycamore H-M D 962 5 50-80 C Podocarpus P. macrophylia Podocarpus M-Z E 113 12 45 B P. nagi Podocarpus M E 113 12 45 B Prunus P. augustofolia Chicasaw Plum M-Z D 177 15 15-20 A P. caroliniana Cherry Laurel M-Z E 314 20 30-40 B P. serotina Wild Black Cherry H-M-Z D 314 20 50-65 C Psidium P. cattlelanun Cattley Guava* Quercus Q. charmanii Chapman Oak M-Z D 314 20 15-20 A Q. prinus Basket Oak H-M D 962 35 80 C Q. marilandica Black Jack Oak Z D 177 15 50 B Q. incana Blue Jack Oak M-Z D 314 20 20-30 B Q. laurifolia Laurel Oak M semi-D 962 35 60-100 C Q. virginiana Live Oak H-M E 1257 40 50-60 C Q. myrtifolia Myrtle Oak M-Z E 79 10 15-20 A Q. muhlenbergii Pin Oak H-M D 962 35 90 C Q. stellata Post Oak Z D 707 30 70 C Q. geminata Sand Live Oak M-Z E 113 12 15-30 B Q. shumardii Shumard M-Z D 1257 40 60 C Q. falcata Southern Red Oak M D 962 35 80 C Q. larvis Turkey Oak M-Z D 491 25 40-50 C Q. nigra Water Oak H-M semi-D 707 30 60-100 C Q. alba White Oak H-M D 962 35 80 C Q. phelios White Oak H-M D 962 35 80 C Salix S. babylonica Weeping Willow* H D 40 50 Stenolobium E S. stans Yellow Elder* Tabebuia T. argentea Tabebuia/Tree of Gold* Taxodium T. ascendens Pond cypress H D 25 50-60 T. distichum Bald cypress H-M D 314 25 60-100 B Tilia T. caroliniana Carolina Basswood H-M D 491 25 50-60 C Ulmus U. alata Winged Elm M D 491 25 40-80 C U. almericana var. floridana Florida Elm M D 707 30 80-100 C U. parvifolia Drake Elm or Chinese M semi-D 201 16 30-40 B Vaccinium V. arboreum Sparkleberry M-Z D 113 12 20 A Viburnum V. nudum Possum Haw H-M D 177 15 20 A V. obovatum Black Haw H-M E 177 15 20 A V. odoratissimum Viburnum, Sweet*  
  
(Ord. No. 1332-2003, § 1, 12-17-03) 

40.31. - Landscaping requirements within the community redevelopment district. 
    Within the area of the Rockledge Community Redevelopment District, as defined by Resolution No. 2002-481 and Ordinance No. 1277-2002, there exists an overlay provision which empowers, upon request by a developer or staff on all new or remodeled properties, the reduction of or elimination of the landscaping requirements upon the unanimous approval of the city manager, building official and Chairman of the Rockledge Community Redevelopment Agency. Any property or structure given modified landscaping shall automatically become conforming structures. 
(Ord. No. 1550-2010, § 1, 5-19-10) 
SECTION 40.40. - BUFFER AND SCREENING REQUIRED 

40.41. - Any commercial development backing up to residential. 
(a)  Masonry walls. When a lot in a commercial district abuts a lot, either to a side or to the rear, in a residential district, there shall be a solid masonry wall, a minimum of six (6) feet in height built and maintained along the commercial line of abutment, constructed in such a manner that there is no visibility through the wall on a horizontal plane. Construction of such wall shall conform to the standards of the Standard Building Code. The wall shall run the entire length of the line of abutment except that a wall running along a side line shall be constructed three (3) feet in height from the front yard setback point of the abutting residential district to the street or end of commercial line of abutment. The wall shall be constructed on the commercial property and the height of the wall shall be measured from the finished ground level of the commercial property or abutting residential property, whichever is the highest elevation. 
40.43. - Double-frontage lots. 
(a)  Double-frontage lots. Lots having double street frontage shall be avoided where the streets are essentially parallel unless it is necessary to provide separation of residential development from railroads or arterial roads and streets. In such cases, provision shall be made either for marginal access streets or for lots to back up to the arterial rights-of-way. In the case of lots proposed to be backed up to said arterial, additional lot depth of twenty (20) feet, plus screen planting that will reach six (6) feet in height in twelve (12) months from date the subdivision is complete, shall be required. Vehicular access to the rear of a double-frontage lot shall be prevented. 
(b)  Double frontage through lots. On double frontage through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each street, except that if the rear property line of such a lot is the right-of-way line of a public street, the owner of such lot may, at his option, erect a fence six (6) feet in height along the entire rear property line of such lot, and, when such a fence is erected and installed, and for only such period of time as said fence remains installed and in compliance with this section, said lot will not be deemed a double frontage through lot for setback purposes. If the lot or property adjoining a double frontage through lot is improved with a house or building which faces toward the public street, or there is access from said adjoining property to the public street, the foregoing exception shall not apply to the double frontage through lot. 
SECTION 42.00 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, CONSERVATION AND AQUIFER PROTECTION 

42.05. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this section to protect surface and groundwater resources by ensuring that stormwater runoff peak rates and volumes retained after development approximate predevelopment conditions; that groundwater tables are not artificially lowered; and that precautions are taken to prevent erosion, sedimentation, flooding and water pollution. 
    It is the further intent of this section to: 
1.  Adopt the Level of Service Standards of the Comprehensive Plan as follows; 
Drainage 
Design storm event = 25-year frequency, 24-hour duration event. On-site stormwater management = Retention of the first one inch of rainfall runoff for areas greater than 1 acre. For residential areas less than 1 acre, 1/2 inch is required. Stormwater quantity = Post-development stormwater runoff flow rates, quantities, peaks, and velocities shall be equal to or less than levels which existed prior to development. Stormwater quality = No degradation of existing water quality condition in receiving waterbodies.  
2.  Stormwater requirements within the community redevelopment district: Within the area of the Rockledge Community Redevelopment District as defined by Resolution 2002-481 and Ordinance 1277-2002, there exists an overlay provision which would allow all new or remodeled properties a reduction in stormwater requirements, but never below the minimum standards established by state authorities with jurisdiction over the area, upon unanimous approval of the City Manager, Building Official and Chairman of the Rockledge Community Redevelopment Agency. Any structure given modified stormwater requirements shall automatically become conforming structures. 
    For performance standards which will ensure the compliance to the Comprehensive Plan see Part V, "Performance Standards." The Rockledge Comprehensive Plan will show the new standards that will be adopted into the performance standard section of this Land Development Regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1326-2003, § 2, 10-15-03; Ord. No. 1376-2005, § 4, 5-4-05) 
42.06. - Stormwater pollution control. 
(1)  Authority: The City of Rockledge is authorized by the Florida Constitution and the provisions of the Florida Statutes Chapter 163, Section 125 and Section 403 to establish and administer programs for stormwater management including the control of pollution caused by stormwater. 
(2)  Definitions: 
    Best management practices or BMPs mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, treatment methods and other management practices to prevent or reduce pollutants from entering the MS4 or being discharged from the MS4. 
    City means City of Rockledge. 
    Clean Water Act or CWA means Public Law (PL) 92-500, as amended by PL 95-217, PL 95-576, PL 6-483, and PL 97-117, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987, PL 100-4. 
    Construction activities means the alteration of land during construction and includes such activities as clearing, grading, and excavation, except operations that result in the disturbance of less than one (1) acre of total land area which are not part of a larger common plan of development of sale. 
    Discharge means the release of liquid, solid or gaseous material and included but is not limited to a release, spilling, leaking, seeping, pouring, emitting, emptying, and dumping of any substance or material. 
    Illicit connection means point source discharges to the city's MS4 or to waters of the state, which are not composed entirely or stormwater and are not authorized by a permit. 
    Illicit discharge means the discharge to the city's MS4 or to waters of the state which is not composed entirely stormwater, unless exempted pursuant to this ordinance, or the discharge to the city's MS4 or to waters of state which is not in compliance with federal, state or local permits. 
    Industrial activities means activities at facilities identified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency as requiring an NPDES Stormwater permit in accordance with 40 Code of the Federal Register 122.26 of the Code of the Federal Register of amendments thereto. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system or MS4' means a conveyance, storage area or system of conveyances and storage areas (including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, treatment ponds, and other structural BMPs) owned or operated by a local government that discharges to waters of the state or the other MS4's, that is designed solely for collecting, treating or conveying stormwater, and that is not part of a publicly owned treatments works (POT) as defined by 40 Code of the Federal Register 122.2 or any amendments thereto. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm organization, corporation, association or other legal entity, whether singular or plural, as the context may require. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), heat, wrecked or damaged equipment, rock sand, and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into the MS4. 
    Reclaimed water means water that has received at least advanced secondary treatment and basic disinfection and is reused after flowing out of a wastewater treatment facility. 
    Reuse means the deliberate application of reclaimed water, in compliance with Florida Department of Environmental Protection and St. Johns River Water Management District rules, for a beneficial purpose. 
    Runoff means the surface flow of water that results from, and occurs following, a rainfall event. 
    Spill means illicit discharge. 
    Stormwater means surface runoff and the discharge of runoff water resulting from rainfall. 
    Waters of state means surface and ground waters as defined by 40 Code of the Federal Register 122.2. 
(3)  Stormwater discharges to the MS4 and Waters of the state: 
(a)  Discharges to the city's MS4 shall be controlled to the extent that such discharges will not impair the operation of the MS4 or contribute to the failure of the MS4 to meet any local, state, or federal requirements, including but not limited to, NPDES Permit No. FLR04E047. Discharges to the waters of the state shall be controlled to the extent that the discharge will be controlled to the maximum extent practicable as defined in the NPES Permit No. FLR04E047. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges determined by the city to be contributing to the failure of the city's MS4 or waters within the city to comply with the provisions and conditions of NPDES Permit No. FLR04E047 shall provide corrective measures in accordance with a schedule approved by the city and may be subject to paying fines and damages. 
(4)  Stormwater discharges from industrial and construction activities: 
(a)  Stormwater discharges from industrial activities shall be treated or managed on site, in accordance with appropriate federal, state or local permits, and regulations, prior to discharge to the city's MS4 or to waters of the state. 
(b)  Stormwater discharges from construction activities shall be treated or managed on site in accordance with appropriate federal, state or local permits and regulations, prior to discharge to the city's MS4 or to waters of state. Erosion, sediment and pollution controls for the construction site shall be properly implemented, maintained and operated according to a pollution prevention plan required by an NPDES permit for the discharge of stormwater from construction activities, or according to a state permit issued by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or St. Johns River Water Management District. 
(c)  The owners or operators of industrial facilities and constructions sites which will discharge stormwater to the city's MS4 or to waters of the state within the city limits shall provide written notification of the connection or discharge prior to the discharge from the industrial activity or construction activity. 
(5)  Control of pollutant contributions from interconnected MS4's: The discharge of stormwater between interconnected state, county, city or other MS4's of an interconnected MS4 shall be responsible for the quality or discharge from their portion of the MS4 in accordance with interlocal agreements controlling the discharge of stormwater from one MS4 to another. 
(6)  Prohibition of illicit discharges and illicit connections: 
(a)  Illicit discharges and illicit connections, not exempt under the provisions of this ordinance, are prohibited. 
(b)  Any discharge to the city's MS4 or to waters of the state which is in violation of federal, state or local permits or regulations constitutes an illicit discharge. 
(c)  Persons responsible for illicit discharges, or illicit connections shall immediately, upon notification or discovery, initiate procedures to cease the illicit discharge, or illicit connection, or obtain appropriate federal, state, or local permits for such discharge or connection. 
(7)  Inspection and monitoring for compliance: Authorized personnel shall be granted access for inspection of facilities discharging or suspected of discharging to the city's MS4 or waters of the state in order to effectuate the provisions of this ordinance and to investigate violations or potential violations of any of the terms herein. 
(8)  Maintenance of BMP's: Structural controls and other BMP's used for controlling the discharge of pollutants to the city's MS4 or to waters of the state shall be operated and maintained so as to function in accordance with permitted design or performance criteria and in compliance with federal, state or local permit conditions and regulations. 
(9)  Exemptions: 
(a)  The following activities shall not be considered either an illicit discharge or illicit connection unless such activities cause, or significantly contribute to, the impairment of the use of the city's MS4: 
Discharges from: 
1.  Water line flushing; 
2.  Flushing of reclaimed water lines; 
3.  Street cleaning; 
4.  Construction dust control; 
5.  Landscape irrigation; 
6.  Diverted stream flow; 
7.  Rising ground waters; 
8.  Foundation and footing drains; 
9.  Swimming pool discharges; 
10.  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 Code of the Federal Register 35.2005(20); 
11.  Uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
12.  Discharges from potable water sources; 
13.  Air conditioning condensate; 
14.  Irrigation water; 
15.  Springs; 
16.  Lawn watering; 
17.  Individual residential car washing; 
18.  Flows from riparian habitat and wetlands; and 
19.  Discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting activities and emergency response activities done in accordance with an adopted spill response/action plan. 
(b)  Discharges that have obtained appropriate federal, state and local permits are in compliance with the conditions of these permits. 
(10)  Enforcement, penalties and legal proceedings: 
(a)  The code enforcement officer is authorized to issue cease and desist orders in the form of written official notices immediately on site and following in writing by registered mail to the person(s) responsible for the violation. Specific activities and operations may be ordered to be ceased based upon the following conditions: 
1.  In a situation that may have a serious effect on the health, safety or welfare of the public or the environment, including the quality of stormwater in the city's MS4; or 
2.  When irreversible or irreparable harm may result, in the reasonable opinion of the code enforcement officer, and immediate cessation of the activity is necessary to protect the public or the environment, including the quality of stormwater in the city's MS4. 
(b)  Any person who violates this ordinance and/or fails to comply with the requirements of subsections (a) and/or (b) shall be subject to prosecution before the city code enforcement board. 
(c)  In addition to any fines which may be imposed by the city code enforcement board, persons responsible for violation of this ordinance shall be liable for all sampling and analytical costs incurred in monitoring the discharge, and state and/or federal fines imposed as a result of the discharge and costs of removing or properly treating the discharge. 
(d)  If the persons responsible for the violation fail to take action required herein, the city has the right to take remedial action. All costs incurred by the city in taking such actions shall be reimbursed by the persons responsible for the violation. 
(e)  The city may elect to take any or all of the above remedies concurrently, and the pursuance of one shall not preclude the pursuance of another. 
(f)  Any fines or other funds received as a result of the enforcement under this ordinance which are not used for specific purposes set forth in this ordinance shall be deposited in the stormwater utility fund. 
(g)  This ordinance shall be administered by the city manager or his designee. All persons in violation of this ordinance shall address such violations immediately upon written notification by the city. Violations may require a written response outlining the temporary and permanent measures that will be taken to correct the violation and proposed schedule for completion of corrective measures. Determination of when a written response is required shall be in the sole discretion of the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1494-2008, § 1(Exh. A), 7-16-08) 
SECTION 42.10. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

42.11. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Florida has in Section 166.021, Florida Statutes, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Rockledge City Council enacts the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention. 
42.12. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(c)  It is imperative that minimum elevation requirements be established for the construction of streets, roads, highways, buildings and other improvements in these areas of the City of Rockledge other than the flood hazard areas determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in order to control surface drainage, storm runoff and other water conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1022-91, § 1, 12-18-91) 
42.13. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(a)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(b)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(c)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(d)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; 
(e)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(f)  Regulate and control the minimum elevation for the construction of streets, roads, highways, buildings and other improvements; and thereby prevent damage or injury to persons or property from floods, surface drainage, storm runoff, overflow and other water conditions. 
42.14. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention are: 
(a)  To protect human life and health; 
(b)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects; 
(c)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(d)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(e)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(f)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(g)  To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area; and 
(h)  To minimize damage to persons and properties from floodwaters, and also from surface drainage, storm runoff, overflow and other water conditions both in flood hazard areas and other areas that are not specifically specified as flood hazard areas in the city. 
(i)  Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this subsection includes methods and provisions for: 
(a)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(b)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(c)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(d)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(e)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 1322-2003, § 1, 9-17-03) 
42.15. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give such provisions their most reasonable application: 
    Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means a structure which is located on the same parcel of property as the principle structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principle structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structure are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one per cent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one per cent chance of being equaled or exceed in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Coastal high hazard area means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on the FIRM as Zone VI-V30, or VE or V. 
    Critical facility means a facility for which even a slight change of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or permanent storage of materials. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls or breakaway walls. 
    Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, building, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before November 15th, 1979. 
    Existing manufactured home/mobile home park or subdivision means a manufactured home/mobile home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes/mobile homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before November 15th, 1979. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home/mobile home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home/mobile home are affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
    Floodplain management administrator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means this ordinance and other Zoning Ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Floodway fringe means that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted without additional hydraulic and/or hydrologic analysis. 
    Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood-frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
    Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure (see Section 25.20 of this Code). 
    Increased cost of construction (ICC) means the cost to repair a substantially damaged building that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to bring a substantially damaged building into compliance with the local flood damage prevention ordinance. ICC insurance coverage is provided in a standard (NFIP) flood insurance policy. 
    Lowest adjacent grade means the lowest elevation, after the completion of construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed are (including basement), an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the nonelevation design standards of this ordinance. 
    Mangrove stand means an assemblage of mangrove trees which is mostly low trees noted for a copious development of interlacing adventitious roots above the ground and which contain one or more of the following species: black mangrove (Avicennis nitida); red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle); white mangrove (Languncularia racemosa); and buttonwood (Conocarpus erecta). 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes part [park] trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value means the building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a willing buyer and seller) as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (Actual Cash Value) or adjusted assessed values. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purpose of the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention, the term is synonymous with North American Vertical Datum 1988 (NAVD). 
    New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after March 15, 1979. 
    New manufactured home/mobile home park or subdivision means a manufactured home/mobile home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes/mobile homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) which was completed after November 15th, 1979. 
    North American Vertical Datum 1988 (NAVD) is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pike, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    Public safety and nuisance, any thing which is injurious to safety or health or an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
    Recreational vehicle-type unit means, a vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not to be used as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded twenty-five (25) per cent of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event. 
    Sand dunes means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) (see Area of special Flood Hazard) means an area having special flood hazard and shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvements was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its original pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) per cent of the market value of the structure (from the date on which it was damaged). 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) per cent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. This includes any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building taking place during the life of the buildings in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) per cent of the market value of the building either: 
(a)  Before the improvement or repair is started; or, 
(b)  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage" and are "repetitive loss," regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include either: 
(c)  Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations which have been identified prior to permit issuance by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or, 
(d)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home/mobile home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) per cent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repairs, reconstruction or improvements commenced. 
    Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this Code relating to flood damage prevention which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by such provisions where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this ordinance. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum 1988 (NAVD), (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 1054-93, §§ 1, 2, 6-16-93; Ord. No. 1322-2003, §§ 2, 3, 9-17-03; Ord. No. 1554-2010, § 1, 8-18-10) 
42.16. - Lands to which this Code applies. 
    This Code shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City, and where herein expressly stated, to those areas in the City other than areas of special flood hazard, including those areas which may hereafter be annexed into the City. 
(Ord. No. 1022-91, § 2, 12-18-91) 
42.17. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard within the City are identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in its flood hazard boundary map, Community Panel Nos. 12009C0350 E, 12009C0355 E and 12009C0365 dated April 3rd, 1989, and any revisions thereto, and said map and Panels are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1022-91, § 2, 12-18-91) 
42.18. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of Section 42.30 prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
42.19. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. 
42.20. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    The provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention are not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where such provisions and another [ordinance] conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
42.21. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
42.22. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. Such provisions do not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. Such provisions shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on such provisions or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
42.23. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of any provision of this Code relating to flood damage prevention or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions, shall constitute an offense against the people of the City of Rockledge. Any person who violates any provision of this Code relating to flood damage prevention or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be prosecuted and upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and any person so convicted shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to the penalty and punishment hereinabove authorized, or as an alternative thereto, the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention may be enforced by proceedings before the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board as authorized by Florida Statutes and Rockledge city ordinances, and in addition, or as a further alternative, by civil action for injunctive relief. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Rockledge from pursuing any other lawful action or remedy as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. If in any action for injunctive relief to enforce any provision of this Code relating to flood damage prevention it is determined by the court that the defendant or defendants in such action violated any such provision, the city shall recover from such violator or violators all costs of such action, including the reasonable attorney's fees of the city's attorney in such action. 
SECTION 42.30. - ADMINISTRATIVE [PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION] 

42.31. - Designation of building official. 
    The city building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention. 
42.32. - Duties and responsibilities of building official. 
    Duties of the building official shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this section have been satisfied; 
(b)  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(c)  Notify adjacent communities and the Florida Department of Community Affairs prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(d)  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(e)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with this Section. 
(f)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with this Section. 
(g)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the building official shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with this Section. 
(h)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building official shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section. 
(i)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with this Section, then the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this Code. 
(j)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention shall be maintained in the office of the building official and shall be open for public inspection. 
42.33. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the Building Official on forms furnished by him prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(a)  Application stage: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
(3)  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in [this] Code; and 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(b)  Construction stage. Provide a floor elevation of flood-proofing certification after the lowest floor is completed, or in instances where the structure is subject to the regulations applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or flood-proofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the building official a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, flood-proofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building official shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
42.34. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The building code board of adjustments and appeals of the city, hereinafter referred to as the board of adjustments and appeals, as established by Section A105.4 of the Standard Building Code, which has been adopted by reference as part of this Code, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention. 
(b)  The board of adjustments and appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustments and appeals, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the appropriate court having jurisdiction of such matter. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustments and appeals, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the appropriate court having jurisdiction of such matter. 
(d[.1])  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section, except for subsections (h)(1) and (4), of this section, and provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the structure losing its historical designation. 
(e)  In passing upon such applications, the board of adjustments and appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention, and; 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flowing or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(12)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (1) through (11) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(f)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of the provisions of this Code relating to flood damage prevention, the board of adjustments and appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of such provisions. 
(g)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variances is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, not to destroy the historic character and design of the building; 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Variance notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a building official that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and; 
(2)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
The floodplain management administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in the community's biennial report submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 1322-2003, § 4, 9-17-03) 
SECTION 43.00. - PROTECTION OF NATURAL TOPOGRAPHY 

43.01. - Land filling and excavation, site preparation and disposal of construction or demolition debris. 
    Parcels subject to this section. No person or persons shall in any single or successive land filling, excavation or site preparation work or operation either increase or decrease any real property in the City of Rockledge in elevation by one foot (12 inches) or more from existing grade following compaction without complying with the requirements of this section. Those properties which meet the single-family residential criteria indicated in Section 43.02 are subject only to Sections 43.03 through 43.05 and Section 43.08. Those properties which do not meet all of the criteria in Section 43.02 are subject to Sections 43.03(a) through 43.08. 
43.02. - Single-family residential property. 
    Those properties which satisfy the following criteria shall be considered "single-family residential properties" in the application of this section: 
(a)  A parcel of property that is less than, or equal to, one acre in total area; and 
(b)  Which said parcel of property is entirely zoned for single-family residential (R1 or R2) use, as defined in the Rockledge Code. 
43.03. - Site preparation and documentation for single-family residential properties. 
    No person or persons shall in any single or successive land filling, excavation or site preparation work or operation on single-family residential property as defined in Section 43.02 affect any change in elevation of said land to the extent described in Section 43.01 without complying with the following minimum site preparation requirements: 
(a)  Strip and/or excavate all deleterious materials, i.e., muck, debris, roots, etc., from the entire building footprint. 
(b)  If stripping or excavating is to occur below the groundwater table, then a dewatering system, i.e., sump pumps, etc., shall be used to assure complete removal of water so as to facilitate a visual inspection of the bottom. 
(c)  Compaction requirements for either the original soils or fill soils to be placed, regardless of the fill thickness, must meet minimum density requirements that cannot be less than ninety-five (95) per cent of the Standard Proctor (ASTM D-698) under any circumstances. 
(d)  All fill soils shall be free of organic materials, such as roots and vegetation. 
(e)  Fill should be placed in layers or lifts not exceeding twelve (12) inches in depth and each lift compacted in accordance with project specifications but never less than ninety-five (95) per cent of the Standard Proctor Test (ASTM D-698). 
(f)  Vibrations produced during compaction operations will always be noticeable and may cause settlement distress of adjacent structures within certain ranges. Therefore, the property owner shall take the necessary precautions to protect nearby structures. 
(g)  Solid concrete block or brick may be buried in proposed driveway aisles and/or sidewalks, with no pieces being buried which would create a subsurface void space area. Fill including solid concrete block or brick must be uniformly compacted to ninety-nine (95) [sic] per cent of the Standard Proctor Test (ASTM D-698). 
43.04. - Scheduling and completion of work. 
    All stripping, excavating, filling, compaction, removal of organic materials and site preparation work required by this section shall be completed within a period of sixty (60) consecutive calendar days following the date of issuance of the building permit, unless otherwise authorized by the city at the time of issuance of the permit. 
43.05. - Wetlands or hydrologically sensitive areas. 
    No person or persons shall in any single or successive land filling, excavation or site preparation work or operation affect any change in elevation of land to the extent described in Section 43.01, nor be entitled to a building permit for the improvement of said property unless they have first complied with the following requirements: 
(a)  The property owner(s) or his/their representative shall submit documentation certifying the subject parcel is not considered to be either a wetland or hydrologically sensitive area, as defined by any of the following authorities that have jurisdiction to make such a determination over the property, i.e., St. Johns River Water Management District (SJRWMD), Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (DER), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (ACOE) or Florida Department of Natural Resources (DNR); or 
(b)  If the parcel contains wetlands or hydrologically sensitive areas, the property owner(s) or his/their representative shall submit a copy of the required permits indicating regulatory agency approval of the project and the scope of work. 
43.06. - Engineering report. 
    Any person or party applying to the City of Rockledge for a building permit for improvement of property other than as described in Section 43.02, shall, prior to issuance of the building permit by the city, and prior to performance of any excavation, filling or site preparation work on such property, furnish the city a site plan or report signed and sealed by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Florida, including the following information: 
(a)  Identification of existing subsurface conditions, including soil types, groundwater table elevations and permeability rates. 
(b)  A description of proposed site filling procedures, finished grade, and acceptable fill materials. 
43.07. - Site maintenance. 
    Any person or party applying to the City of Rockledge for a building permit for improvement of property, other than as described in Section 43.02, shall, prior to issuance of the building permit by the city, and prior to performance of any excavation, filling, or site preparation work on such property, furnish the city a written site maintenance program including the following information: 
(a)  The proposed method of stormwater management, including runoff retention/detention, overflow relief points and receiving systems. 
(b)  The proposed soil stabilization methods. 
(c)  A construction schedule indicating dates for commencement and completion of work. 
43.08. - Transportation and disposal of construction/demolition debris. 
    The actual producer or owner of any construction or demolition site debris, or the owner of the premises upon which any construction or demolition site debris is accumulated, shall be responsible for the removal and proper disposal of such debris. The debris shall be transported and disposed of at the expense of the producer or owner. Transportation of the material shall be performed in accordance with applicable Florida Statutes. Site debris shall be disposed of in a Florida DER-approved landfill facility possessing a currently valid operating license. No certificate of occupancy will be issued until these provisions are complied with. 
43.09. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person who shall perform any land filling or excavation work in the City of Rockledge in violation of the provisions of this section, or who shall transport, remove or dispose of any construction or demolition debris in violation of the provisions of this section, shall upon conviction be punishable by fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Whenever the provisions of this section require the performance of any act or thing or the submission of any documentation or other condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit or other form of permit, no such permit shall be issued until the required performance is completed or required documentation is received in compliance with this section. 
(c)  Whenever performance of any act or thing is required by the provisions of this section to be completed within a specified time after the issuance of a permit, or approval of required documentations and submissions to the city, and the performance of such act or thing is not substantially completed within the specified time, the permit, approval or authorization by the city for the performance of such act or thing shall expire and be null and void and of no force or effect upon expiration of the specified time period. The performance of any such act or thing subsequent to the expiration of the specified time period without a valid permit, authorization or approval by the city shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The provisions of this section may also be enforceable by proceedings before the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board, or by proceedings before the Rockledge Nuisance Abatement Board, or by suit for prohibitory or mandatory injunctive relief, or by any other lawful remedy existing at law or in equity for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
SECTION 44.00. - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION OF SCRUB HABITAT AREAS 
(a)  The term "scrub habitat area" as used in this Code shall mean any part of an area shown on the map entitled "Natural Communities in the City of Rockledge" produced by G.I.S. Lab. F.I.T., 1991, as part of the June, 1991, City of Rockledge Conservation Study under the supervision of Hilary Swain, PhD., Department of Biological Services, Florida Institute of Technology, and designated on said map as any one of the following natural communities: 
(1)  Scrub; 
(2)  Scrubby Flatwood; 
(3)  Xeric Hammock; 
(4)  Sand Pine Scrub. 
(b)  No person or party shall in any single or successive land filling, excavation, site preparation work, development, project, or other operation, disturb, change, modify, alter, or in anywise affect all or any part of any "scrub habitat area" as herein defined without first obtaining and submitting to the city an environmental study and report concerning the proposed area to be developed in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  The environmental study and report required by this section shall be conducted and prepared by a professional consultant whose qualifications include a recognized degree in biology or other environmental science discipline, two (2) years of experience in environmental studies or environmental planning, and a competent knowledge of current laws, regulations and rules applicable to conservation of federal and state listed endangered or threatened species. 
(d)  The environmental study and report required by this section shall disclose at least the following information: 
(1)  The legal description of the entire project property, and a surveyor's drawing thereof certified to the city. Said survey and legal description shall separately identify and describe the portion or portions of the project area that are within "scrub habitat areas" as herein defined. The survey shall be on a scale of one inch equals two hundred (200) lineal feet. 
(2)  The identification and specific location of all types of natural communities found within the "scrub habitat area" (as described in the guide to The Natural Communities of Florida, prepared by the Department of Natural Resources and Florida Natural Areas Inventory). 
(3)  A list of possible endangered or threatened species that could be found within the "scrub habitat area." 
(4)  A list of found, and number of, and location of any endangered or threatened species within the "scrub habitat area", and a statement as to whether or not each species identified is a protected species indicating the federal and state ranking of each species found. 
(5)  Soil types. 
(6)  The environmental study and report shall be verified by an affidavit of the consultant that the information contained in the submitted report is true and accurate to the best of the consultant's knowledge and belief. Also, an indemnification agreement of the owner in form and content satisfactory to the city, holding the city harmless from any consequence of the environmental survey being incorrect. 
(7)  The dates when the environmental study and report were commenced and completed. 
(8)  In view of the fact that environmental conditions may change, the commencement date of the environmental study and report must be within six (6) months of the date of issuance of the development order. 
(9)  The documented credentials of the consultant conducting the environmental study. 
(10)  Weather conditions during all field survey work. 
(e)  If the environmental study and report discloses that there is no endangered or threatened species within the "scrub habitat area", then before a development order will be issued for any development within the "scrub habitat area" the owner of the property involved in the development project shall first make, execute, and record in the public records of Brevard County, Florida, a good and sufficient conservation easement in form and content satisfactory to the city, of the type described in F.S. (1991) § 704.06, which conservation easement shall include not less than ten (10) per cent of that portion of the development project that lies within "scrub habitat area", the precise location and description of said conservation easement to be determined by the owner based upon recommendations of the owner's environmental consultant and sound conservation and environmental planning concepts. 
(f)  If the environmental study and report discloses that there is any endangered or threatened species within the portion of the project area lying within "scrub habitat area", no development order will be approved or issued by the city for any development within the "scrub habitat area" until after the owner of the property has first obtained and furnished to the city a conservation plan and permit approved by the United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Services, and demonstrates full compliance with all conditions and regulations required by said service, its permit and approved conservation plan. 
(g)  Nesting season for Florida Scrub Jay is from about March 1st to June 30th annually. Development of any kind in a "scrub habitat area" during said nesting season will be closely scrutinized by the city with great caution because molestation or harassment of nesting birds with fledglings will constitute a direct incidental taking. No construction or development activity shall be permitted within a radius of one hundred fifty (150) feet of an active scrub jay nest. 
(Ord. No. 631-92, § 1, 2-19-92) 
Part V - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
A. Public Infrastructure Performance Standards 
B. Building Performance Standards 
A. - PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
SECTION 50.00. - GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
(a)  Generally. Any use established or changed to, and any building structure of land developed, constructed or used for any permitted principal use, or any use permissible as a special exception, or any accessory use, shall comply with all of the performance standards herein set forth for the district involved. If any existing use or building or other structure is extended, enlarged or reconstructed, the performance standards for the district involved shall apply with respect to such extended, enlarged or reconstructed portion or portions of such use, building or other structure. 
(b)  Administration and enforcement. Determinations necessary for administration and enforcement of performance standards set forth in paragraph (d) hereof range from those which can be made with satisfactory accuracy by a reasonable person using normal senses and no mechanical equipment to those requiring great technical competence and complex equipment for precise measurement. It is the intent of this section that: 
(1)  Where determinations can be made by the building official, using equipment normally available without extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be made before notice of violation is issued. 
(2)  Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it unreasonable for the city to maintain the personnel or equipment necessary for making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures shall be available for causing corrections of apparent violations or performance standards, for protecting individuals from arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable administration and enforcement of performance standard regulations, and for protecting the general public from unnecessary costs for administration and enforcement. 
(3)  All odor, heat, humidity, toxic gases, fumes, or matter expelled shall be contained within the property from which it originates, and all D.E.R. and Federal E.P.A. standards and criteria shall be adhered to without exception. Any violation of this Section shall constitute grounds for revocation by the City of the violator's occupational license and the right to perform business in the City of Rockledge. 
(c)  Applicable performance standards. If the building inspector finds, after making determinations in the manner set forth in this section, that there is violation of performance standards, he shall take or cause to be taken lawful action to cause correction to within the limits set by such performance standards. Failure to obey lawful orders concerning such correction shall be punishable as provided in Section 11.40 [Section 21.40] hereof. 
(d)  Standards designated. All uses within the city shall conform to the performance standards set forth in this section: 
(1)  Noise standards: Sound and/or noise levels shall be in accordance with the requirements of chapter 12 of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Smoke and particulate matter standards: 
(a)  Requirements. All uses shall be controlled to prevent the emission of any smoke or particulate matter, from any source whatever, to a density greater than the density as described as number one (1) on the Ringelmann Chart; provided, that the following exceptions shall be permitted: Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not darker than number two (2) of the Ringelmann Chart for a period, or periods, aggregating four (4) minutes in any thirty (30) minutes. 
(b)  Method of measurement. For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Chart, as published and used by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, which is hereby made a part of this section shall be the standard. 
(c)  Locational requirements for measurement. Smoke and particulate matter will be measured at its point of emission into the atmosphere. 
(3)  Odor standards: 
(a)  Requirements. All uses shall be controlled to prevent the emission of odorous gases, fumes or matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable or to produce a public nuisance or hazard at any point as measured along the lot lines of the property from which the odor is disseminated. Detailed plans for the elimination of odorous matter shall be required before the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Method of measurement. A noxious concentration shall be deemed a nuisance if detectable when diluted in a ratio of one (1) volume of odorous air to four (4) volumes of clean air for not more than fifteen (15) minutes in any one (1) hour period. 
(c)  Locational requirements. Noxious odors shall be measured along the lot lines of the property in question. 
(4)  Toxic gases and matter: 
(a)  Requirements. No person shall cause or permit the emission into the atmosphere, from existing source, [of] gases containing more than 2,000 parts per million by volume of sulfur dioxide or 500 parts per million by volume of sulfur dioxide from any source, except those in which both: 
1.  A fuel is burned primarily to produce heat; and 
2.  The sulfur compound emission is due primarily to the sulfur in the fuel burned. 
(b)  Method of measurement. No person shall cause or permit the emission of sulfur dioxide from any point as measured along the lot lines, in such a matter and amounts that the concentrations and frequencies attributed to such emissions exceed the following: 
0.40 parts per million on a one (1) hour basis; 
0.18 parts per million on a twenty-four (24) hour basis; and 
0.05 parts per million for ninety per cent (90%) of all measurements taken over a calendar year period. 
The method of measuring sulfur dioxide in the ambient atmosphere shall be: Gaseous (502) colormetric. 
All limitations on toxic gases and matter shall be in compliance with all D.E.R. and Federal E.P.A. standards. 
Any violation of these standards may result in the revocation of the City's occupational license, if approved by the Rockledge City Council. 
Emission of other gases, not specified herein, shall not be emitted at any point in concentrations or amounts that are noxious, toxic, and corrosive. 
(5)  Glare and lighting standards: 
(a)  Requirements. Any lighting elements or structural materials installed on a site shall not cast or reflect glare or light beyond the boundaries of the site. Locations requiring some means of preventing the transmission of glare or light beyond the site's boundaries, are established according to the relationship between the required minimum elevation of the lighting element or structural material above the final grade established along the nearest site boundary, and the distance of the lighting element or structural material from the nearest boundary. 
(b)  Method of measurement. As set forth in the following table, elements or materials below the minimum elevation required of each distance shall be shielded or otherwise screened to prevent transmission or light or glare beyond the site. 
Distance From 
Property Line 
(feet) Required Minimum Elevation for Lighting Sources or Elements 
(feet)  50 20  60 19  70 18  80 17  90 16 100 15  
(6)  Vibration standards: 
(a)  Requirements. All uses of real property, machinery, equipment and other forces shall be controlled to prevent the transmission or radiation from any lot, piece or parcel of land in the city to any other lot, piece or parcel of land in the city of any earth or ground vibration from any source or at any time whatever that exceeds the maximum displacement set forth in subsection (d)(6)(d) of this section. 
(b)  Method of measurement. The displacement of earth caused by vibration shall be measured in inches by appropriate instrument approved by the building official of the City of Rockledge. 
(c)  Locational requirement. Vibrations may be measured at any point, place, site or location in the City of Rockledge for the purpose of determining compliance with applicable performance standards. 
(d)  Permitted vibration transmissions. (See also subsection (d)(7) of this section). 
Frequency 
(cycles per second) Maximum Permitted Displacement At Any Given Spot Within the City 
(inches)  0-10 0.0008 11-20 0.0005 21-30 0.0002 31-40 0.0002 Over 40 0.0001  
(7)  Electromagnetic radiation: 
(a)  Requirements. All uses shall be controlled to prevent any intentional source of electromagnetic radiation which does not comply with the current regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding such sources of electromagnetic radiation. Further, any operation in compliance with Federal Communications Commission regulations shall not be permitted if such radiation causes an abnormal degradation in performance of other electromagnetic radiators or electromagnetic receptors of quality and proper design because of proximity, primary field, blanketing, spurious reradiation, conducted energy in power or telephone systems or harmonic content. 
(b)  Method of measurement. For the purpose of determining the level of radiated electromagnetic interference, standard field-strength measuring techniques for interference transmitted or conducted by power or telephone lines, a suitable turntable peak reading radio frequency voltmeter shall be used. This instrument shall, by means of appropriate isolation coupling, be alternately connected from line to line and from line to ground during the measurement. 
(c)  Determination of electromagnetic interference. The determination of "abnormal degradation in performance," and of "quality and proper design" shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the latest principles and standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of Radio Engineers, and the Radio Manufacturer's Association. In case of any conflict between the latest standards and principles of the above groups, precedence in the interpretation shall be in the following order: 
1.  American Institute of Electrical Engineers; 
2.  Institute of Radio Engineers; and, 
3.  Radio Manufacturer's Association. 
(d)  Maximum allowable levels. For purposes of determining the maximum allowable level of radiated electromagnetic interference and electromagnetic interference transmitted or conducted by power or telephone lines, maximum allowable levels will be adopted by the city council upon recommendation of the planning commission and qualified electrical engineers. 
(8)  Heat and humidity. Any use producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat, shall be carried on in such a manner that steam, humidity or heat is not perceptible at any lot line. 
(9)  Environmental liability surety bond: 
(a)  Every business now or hereafter conducted in the City of Rockledge which generates, produces, stores, processes, reuses, recycles, or handles any "hazardous waste" as hereinafter defined, such business being herein referred to as a "regulated business," is hereby required to post with the City of Rockledge an environmental liability surety bond in form and content approved by the City unless exempt under the later provisions of this Section. 
(b)  Every owner of a regulated business in existence and in operation in the City of Rockledge at the time of enactment of this Section shall comply with the provisions of this Section by furnishing the required environmental liability surety bond on or before October 1st, 1991, if engaged in such regulated business at that time. 
(c)  Every regulated business commencing operation in the City of Rockledge after date of enactment of this Section shall furnish the required environmental liability surety bond before being issued an occupational license. 
(d)  Every environmental liability surety bond will run in favor of the City of Rockledge as the Obligee, and the conditions of the bond will be that the Obligor comply with all Florida State and Federal statutes, rules and regulations applicable to hazardous waste on the business site, and that in the event of an accidental, unauthorized or unlawful release, spill, or escape of a hazardous waste product, the obligor will timely and expediently complete all environmental recovery, rehabilitation, cleanup and restoration work and activities in accordance with applicable state and federal requirements. 
(e)  The surety on every environmental liability surety bond required by this Section shall be an insurance company duly authorized and licensed to transact insurance business in the State of Florida. 
(f)  Every environmental liability surety bond will be for a term of one (1) year and will contain an express provision that the bond cannot be cancelled or terminated by either the principal or surety named therein without notice thereof in writing to the City at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date of such cancellation or termination. 
(g)  Every business required to have an environmental liability surety bond will evidence to the City of Rockledge at the time of renewal of its annual occupational license, the payment of its bond premium by furnishing to the City a paid receipt evidencing such payment. Failure to timely evidence to the City the payment of bond premium will result in revocation of the occupational license. 
(h)  The occupational license tax issued by the City to any regulated business shall immediately be revoked by the City in the event such regulated business shall cease to have a valid environmental liability surety bond in force and effect. 
(i)  In the interpretation and enforcement of this Section the term "hazardous waste" shall mean any substance, gas, element, or matter identified as hazardous waste in Chapter 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 261.31 through 261.33, which provisions of said Code of Federal Regulations are by this reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
(j)  The amount of environmental liability surety bond to be posted by a regulated business shall be in accordance with the following classification schedule: 
Quantity of Hazardous Waste 
   Generated or Stored  Classification Amount of Bond 
Required Generates less than 220 pounds or 25 gallons of hazardous waste during a one-month period; with hazardous waste storage on site of not more than 2,200 pounds or 250 gallons at any one (1) time. Small Quantity 
Generator Exempt Generates less than 2,200 pounds or 250 gallons of hazardous waste during a one-month period; with hazardous waste storage on site of not more than 13,000 pounds or 1500 gallons for not more than 180 days. Small Quantity 
Generator $250,000 Bond Generates more than 2,200 pounds or 250 gallons of hazardous waste during a one-month period; or with hazardous waste storage on site exceeding limits of a Small Quantity Generator, but within limits of FDER and EPA regulations. Large Quantity 
Generator $500,000 Bond  
(k)  Any business may reduce its bond classification one (1) category by producing proof to the Rockledge Fire Department of its entitlement to the next lower category and the business site is free of contamination. The City may revoke the reduced bond classification if the business is later found to exceed the hazardous waste limits of the lower classification. No business shall be entitled to have its bond classification reduced more often than one (1) time in any two (2) year period. 
(l)  A regulated business having an environmental liability surety bond may obtain permission from the City to cancel its environmental liability surety bond upon furnishing the City satisfactory proof, at the expense of the business, that the business site is in an exempt classification, and is free of all contamination. 
(Ord. No. 1491-2008, § 2, 8-20-08) 
SECTION 50.50. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

50.51. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(a)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(b)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(c)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(d)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(e)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(f)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(g)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(h)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(i)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of this section shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in these regulations. 
(j)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a building which is not in compliance with the provisions of this section, shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 1054-93, § 3, 6-16-93) 
50.52. - Specific standards. 
(A)  Special flood hazard areas where base elevation data provided. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. In all new construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home/mobile home), the elevation of the lowest horizontal structural member, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities and basement, but excluding footings, pilings, columns, pile caps, nonstructural slabs, bracing and grade beams, shall not be lower than the level of the highest of the following described elevations to wit: 
(a)  Twelve (12) inches above base flood elevation; or 
(b)  Eighteen (18) inches above the crown of the public street, road or highway upon which the property site of such residence fronts; or 
(c)  Such height or elevation as may be necessary to cause all surface, storm, flood and other waters to adequately and suitably drain from the residence site into a drainage facility serving the locale of the residence at the time of such construction or substantial improvement. 
Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (A)(3) below. 
(2)  Non residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure (or manufactured home/mobile home) shall have the lowest floor, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities and basement, elevated no lower than the elevation required for residential construction as specified in subsection (1) of this paragraph (A), or structures and their attendant utility and sanitary facilities located in all A Zones may be flood proofed in lieu of being elevated; provided, that all areas of the structure below the elevation required for residential specified in subsection (1) of this paragraph (A) are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this paragraph are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in this section. 
(3)  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
(a)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject of flooding; 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
(b)  Electrical, plumbing and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevation; 
(c)  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and 
(d)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(4)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments, unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharged. 
(b)  If subsection (4)(a) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(c)  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured homes (mobile homes) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of Section 50.52(6)(b), and the elevation standards of subsection (A)(1) above are met. 
(5)  Street, road and highway construction. New construction of any street, road or highway shall have the crown of such street, road or highway elevated to or above the level of the highest of the following described elevations, to wit: 
(a)  Nineteen (19) feet above mean sea level; or 
(b)  Such height or elevation as may be necessary to cause all surface, storm, flood and other waters to suitably and adequately drain from said street, road or highway into an off-site drainage facility serving the locale of such street, road or highway at the time of the construction thereof; or 
(c)  Six inches (6?) above the mean base flood elevation on the property as determined by FIRM Map or a certified land surveyor. 
(6)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
(a)  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirement for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. 
(b)  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that: 
(1)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than specified in subsection (A)(1) of this section above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
(2)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength; of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above the ground. 
(3)  The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, any manufactured home placed or substantially improved must meet the standards of Section 50.52, subsection (A)(6)(b)(1) and (3), above. 
(c)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(1)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions), or; 
(2)  Meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of Section 50.52, subsection (A)(6)(a) or (b)(1) and (3), above, or; 
(3)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
(7)  Certification of elevation. In all new construction or substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures, including prefabricated or manufactured homes, the elevation of the lowest horizontal structural member, including basement, but excluding footings, pilings, columns, pile caps, nonstructural slabs, bracing and grade beams, shall be preliminarily field-certified by a professional surveyor licensed in the State of Florida, as being at or exceeding the one-hundred-year flood elevation for the applicable flood hazard zone. Such certification shall take place after the completion of the foundation or slab for the intended structure and no further construction shall take place pending submission and review of the filed certification. The building official, or his authorized agent, shall authorize continuation of construction provided that said certification indicates that the elevation of the lowest horizontal structural member, including basement, but excluding footings, pilings, columns, pile caps, nonstructural slabs, bracing and grade beams of the structure is not lower than the designated one-hundred-year flood elevation of the applicable flood hazard zone. 
(8)  Critical facility. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet or more above the level of the base flood elevation at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. 
(B)  In all areas of the city, including those areas which may hereafter be annexed by the city, the following provisions are required to assure adequate drainage: 
(1)  Residential construction. In all new construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure, (or manufactured home/mobile home), the elevation of the lowest horizontal structural member, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities and basement, but excluding footings, pilings, columns, pile caps, nonstructural slabs, bracing and grade beams, shall not be lower than the level of the highest of the following described elevations to wit: 
(a)  For lot drainage designed to flow from the rear of the lot to the street curb, twenty-two (22) inches above the crown of the street, road or highway upon which the property site of such residence fronts. 
(b)  For lot drainage to be split, where the front half of the lot is designed to flow to the street curb and the rear half of the lot is designed to flow to another appropriate drainage facility, eighteen (18) inches above the crown of the street, road or highway. 
(c)  Such height or elevation as may be necessary to cause all surface, storm, flood and other waters, as determined by a Florida registered engineer and approved by the public works department, to adequately and suitable drain from the residence site into a drainage facility serving the locale of the residence site at the time of such construction or substantial improvement and will prevent flooding (caused by sheetflowing or other factors) of adjoining properties. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this paragraph are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the building official as set forth in Section 42.33(a)(3). 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. In all new construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure (or manufactured home/mobile home), the elevation of the lowest horizontal structural member, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities and basement, but excluding footings, pilings, columns, pile caps, nonstructural slabs, bracing and grade beams, shall not be lower than the level of the highest of the following described elevations to wit: 
(a)  Six (6) inches above the crown of the street, road or highway upon which the property site of such nonresidential construction fronts; or 
(b)  Such height or elevation as may be necessary to cause all surface, storm, flood and other waters to adequately and suitable drain from the construction site into a drainage facility serving the locale of the construction site at the time of such construction or substantial improvement; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the minimum construction and improvements elevation level for nonresidential construction, as specified above in this paragraph, the structure is water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with a structural component having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this paragraph are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the building official as set forth in Section 42.33(a)(3). 
(Ord. No. 1022-91, §§ 3-8, 12-18-91; Ord. No. 1054-93, §§ 4-7, 6-16-93; Ord. No. 1322-2003, §§ 5-11, 9-17-03; Ord. No. 1357-2004, §§ 1-4, 9-22-04; Ord. No. 1386-2005, § 1, 8-17-05) 
50.60. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions). 
(e)  Areas of special flood hazard shall be delineated on tentative and final subdivision plats. 
(f)  Residential building lots shall be provided with adequate buildable area outside the regulatory floodway. 
(g)  All subdivision proposals and other developments within the area of special flood hazard shall include with proposals data showing base flood elevations on each lot within the area of special flood hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1022-91, § 9, 12-18-91) 
SECTION 51.00. - STREETS, ROADS AND THOROUGHFARES-GENERAL PROVISIONS 

51.10. - Street classification. 
    Street [is defined as] a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. "Street" includes any lane, place, way or other means of ingress or egress regardless of the term used to describe it. In order for a privately owned thoroughfare to be deemed a "street" for purposes of meeting city zoning, subdivision or building regulations, such privately owned thoroughfare must first be approved as a street by the Rockledge city council. The term "street" includes, but not in way of limitation, the following types and classes of streets: 
(a)  Highways: Those traffic routes officially designated as federal or state highway routes. 
(b)  Arterial: Those routes intended to carry heavy volumes of traffic for major distances within the city, which provide a through traffic function rather than providing direct access to property. 
(c)  Collector street: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, including a street which would serve as the principal entrance street of a residential subdivision or could provide for traffic circulation within a subdivision. 
(d)  Local roads: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting property. 
(e)  Cul-de-sac or dead-end street: A minor street with only one (1) outlet terminating at one (1) end with a circular turnaround. 
(f)  Marginal access streets: A street that is parallel and adjacent to a major arterial street or highway and which provides access to abutting property. 
(g)  Alley: A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
51.11. - Road and street design standards. 
(a)  All roads or streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the minimum cross-sections as set forth elsewhere in this Code. The construction work and the construction materials shall conform to the specifications for the subgrade, base and wearing surface provided by this section. 
(b)  Care shall be exercised in making the street layout so as to prevent excessive grades, extreme cuts and fills, or other changes in the natural topography which would induce rapid and unwarranted storm water runoff, thereby causing washing and erosion or diversion of storm water over private or adjoining property. 
51.12. - Design of streets. 
(A)  Access to public streets required. Every unit within a subdivision shall have approved access to a street dedicated to public use which has been accepted and maintained by the City of Rockledge. Where a proposed subdivision does not immediately abut such a street, the applicant shall provide access from the subdivision to a street in accordance with the requirements set forth within the provisions of these regulations. All lots or units within a proposed subdivision shall have direct access to a street or road dedicated and accepted by the city unless the lots or units are within PUD or RCE zoning districts per Section 51.13. PUD and RCE zoning districts lots or units must comply with access requirements in the Zoning Ordinance. 
(B)  Street design standards. Required pavement and right-of-way widths are shown below. 
(1)  Street right-of-way widths, depending on the type of road drainage indicated, shall not be less than the following: 
Street Type Swale 
(feet) Right-of-Way Width 
Curb and Gutter 
(feet) (a) Highways and arterial 150 100 (b) Collector streets  80  80 (c) Local roads  66  50 (d) Marginal access  60  50  
(2)  Street pavement widths, depending on the type of road drainage indicated, shall not be less than the following: 
Street Type Swale 
(feet) Pavement Widths 
Curb and Gutter 
(feet) Lanes (a) Highways and arterials 50 50 4 (b) Collector streets 28 28 2 (c) Local roads 26 26 2 (d) Low density subdivision and marginal access 26 26 2 (e) Private street (PUD or RCE subdivision) 26 26 2 (f) Single Family Medium Density subdivision (may be allowed a 20% reduction, if approved) 26 26 2  
(3)  The right-of-way width and pavement widths described in subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) above constitute the minimum required widths. Upon the recommendation of the city's engineering coordinator, modifications in width may be granted if the change is consistent with the projected traffic volume of the road, the anticipated speed and safety needs of the traffic load, the physical conditions affecting traffic, drainage requirements and good engineering practices. 
(4)  All streets and highways which the applicant installs shall comply with the standards in the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction, and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, published by the Florida Department of Transportation. 
(C)  Relation of proposed streets to existing streets. The pattern of streets in new subdivisions shall provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas, or for their proper projection where adjoining land is not subdivided. Where street extends [extensions] into adjacent undeveloped land are necessary to ensure a coordinated street system, provisions for such future street or streets shall be made. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, vehicular access from subdivisions to highways and arterial roads shall be limited and controlled to provide safe access according to traffic volume, speed limits and other conditions affecting traffic safety. 
(D)  Required access. Every unit of land in a subdivision shall have direct access to a public road or public street, except as provided in Section 51.13. 
(E)  Entire right-of-way required. If a street proposed for dedication in a new subdivision will connect with an existing dedicated and accepted street, the entire street right-of-way for the proposed street shall be platted within the subdivision. 
(F)  Dead-end streets and cul-de-sac. See Exhibit 2. 
EXHIBIT 2. CUL-DE-SAC FORMS 
add figure page 5-22 
      PLAIN CIRCLE 
      GIANT           
ISLAND CIRCLE     
(1)  Culs-de-sac, with one (1) end permanently closed, shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet. 
(2)  All cul-de-sacs shall terminate with a circular right-of-way having a minimum diameter of one hundred five (105) feet. The wearing surface of the cul-de-sac shall have a minimum diameter of eighty (80) feet. The right-of-way of the cul-de-sac shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from the nearest road or street or the nearest plat boundary. Where a street is to be temporarily dead-ended at a property line and is to be continued when adjacent property is subdivided, either [sic] a temporary turnaround having an outside diameter of eighty (80) feet [shall be provided]. 
(3)  Dead-end roads and streets. There shall be no permanent dead-end streets. Temporary dead-end streets shall comply with subsection (F)(2) above. 
(G)  Right-of-way radius. Rights-of-way at intersections shall be rounded with a minimum twenty-five-foot (25) radius. 
(H)  Intersections and street jogs. Streets shall be arranged to intersect at right angles. Curved streets shall have a minimum tangent of one hundred (100) feet at intersections unless otherwise approved by the city's engineering coordinator. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than two hundred fifty (250) feet shall not be allowed unless approved by the city's engineering coordinator. See Exhibit 3. 
EXHIBIT 3. STREET INTERSECTIONS 
add figure page 5-23 
      GOOD 
      STRAIGHT INTERSECTION 
SATISFACTORY 
OFF-SET INTERSECTION 
UNSATISFACTORY 
OFF-SET INTERSECTION 
(I)  Intersections with arterial routes. Acceleration and deceleration lanes along arterial routes, if found necessary by the city's engineering coordinator, shall be provided at intersections of arterial streets and entrance roads to subdivisions. 
(J)  Street names. New streets which are extensions of existing streets shall bear the name of the existing street. All street names shall be continuous except at distinct corners, lots or break points, as determined by the city. All others shall be named in the following manner, as approved by 911, Street name approval of Brevard County: 
Direction     Designation East and West Roads, streets or boulevards North and South Roads, avenues or boulevards Diagonal Roads or ways Curving Drives, lanes or circles Culs-de-sac Courts or places  
In no case shall a name for a proposed road duplicate an existing road name, regardless of whether the road is further described as an avenue, boulevard, driveway, place, way, lane, circle or court. 
51.13. - Conditions for limited access. 
(a)  Frontage. All lots shall front on a public street dedicated and accepted by the city council of the City of Rockledge, except lots in PUD and RCE subdivisions. In PUD or RCE subdivisions, limited access private roads may be proposed under the following conditions: 
(1)  That the proposed limited access private road would not prohibit or interrupt any planned public street system in the area. 
(2)  Said limited access private roads shall have the required right-of-way as specified in these regulations deeded fee simple to a homeowners' association composed of the owners of lots in the subdivision who will be responsible for maintenance of said limited access private road or street. The construction plans and specifications shall comply with the requirements contained herein. The subdivision inspector shall make inspections of the construction and the Public Works Director shall issue a certificate of completion prior to the issuance of any building permits. 
(3)  That the homeowners' association's documents, which provide for the maintenance of limited access roads and streets, shall be subject to review by the Public Works Director and subject to approval by the city council. The road shall be maintained to city standards. 
(4)  That PUD or RCE subdivisions cannot mix public streets and limited access roads or streets. 
(5)  That emergency vehicles and all official public vehicles shall be granted use of the limited access streets at all times. 
51.14. - General construction methods. 
(A)  General construction methods. All design and construction methods shall conform to the following manuals published by the Florida Department of Transportation, latest editions, and [such manuals] shall serve as reference guides and standards of construction for the construction of all improvements. Said manuals are hereby declared to be good engineering practice for the construction of improvements and shall be used by the city as the engineering standard for the purpose of making inspections, approved items of construction and approving construction plans and specifications: 
Subject Florida Department of Transportation Manual Drainage design Drainage Manual and City Specifications Construction techniques Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction Road design standards Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, 1976  
(B)  Construction plans and specifications generally. All construction plans and specifications shall include a topographical map showing not less than one-foot contours on the North American Vertical Datum 1988 (NAVD), not only of the development tract but also of such necessary adjacent land to indicate the method of final disposal of surface water and shall also contain the following information: 
(1)  A street layout plan showing all necessary elevations, treatment of intersections, designed grade of pavement, the width and type of pavement and details showing the final disposal of all street draining. Sufficient topographic information shall be shown on existing outfall ditches, major drainage channels to validate drainage designs, and other drainage facilities. 
(2)  Typical sections showing details of proposed pavements, wearing surfaces, curbs, swales, canals, shoulders, slopes drainage structures and other items of major construction. 
(3)  Profile sheets of all streets to be constructed, together with elevations shown for connection to existing streets. 
(4)  Current Rockledge Public Works and Wastewater Departments technical specification sheets. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 7, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1554-2010, § 2, 8-18-10) 
51.15. - Minimum requirements for roads and streets. 
(A)  Specifications-Constitute minimum standards; other standards: 
(1)  The specifications contained in this section are the minimum standards acceptable to the city covering street and road construction. 
(2)  The developer, if he so desires, may submit to the city other detailed specifications covering other types of pavement prepared by a registered engineer, and accompanied by reports from recognized testing laboratories outlining in detail the differences between the submitted specifications and the city's minimum standards, and the opinion of the testing laboratory that the submitted specifications are equal to or of higher standards than the city's. The city at its option, may submit such specifications to its consulting engineer for approval. 
(3)  The minimum grade for street construction shall be 0.3%. 
(B)  Same-Scope. The work specified under this section shall consist of clearing and grubbing, grading, construction of the base course, construction of curbs and gutters and construction of the wearing surface, so that these items conform to lines, grades and cross sections as shown on the plans, or [as] are specified in this section, or as established by the city's consulting engineer. 
(C)  Equipment required. Adequate and sufficient equipment to properly perform the work specified shall be furnished at the project site. This equipment shall have been approved by the city's engineering coordinator or consulting engineer prior to the start of construction. 
(D)  Clearing and grubbing; protecting trees, etc.: 
(1)  The entire right-of-way area shall be completely cleared and grubbed of all trees, brush, stumps, roots and other obstructions, except such trees and shrubs as may be designated by the city manager to remain. Branches of trees extending over the proposed paved area shall be trimmed as directed to give a clear height of fifteen (15) feet above the proposed paving area. The street right-of-way shall be cleared and grubbed so as to properly facilitate grading and planting. Trees shall be allowed to remain in park areas. 
(2)  Special attention shall be given to saving, protecting and preserving existing trees, shrubs or other vegetation designated by the city's Public Works Director or consulting engineer to be preserved. Such trees, shrubs, etc. shall be neatly trimmed as directed. Particular care shall be exercised in both the clearing and grubbing operations and the grading work to prevent damage to such growths by construction equipment or otherwise, if considered necessary. If so directed by the city's engineering coordinator or consulting engineer, the developer (or contractor) shall furnish and erect temporary posts or construct temporary fences around the areas or trees to be preserved. Slopes may be made variable and other than shown on standard sections to protect and save existing growth as the city's engineering coordinator or consulting engineer may direct. 
(E)  Preparation of subgrade: 
(1)  The work of preparing the subgrade shall consist of bringing the bottom of excavations and top of embankments of the roadway between lines two (2) feet out from the edges of the proposed paving to a surface conforming to the grades, lines and cross sections shown on the plans, of uniform and acceptable density, ready to receive the base or paving course. 
(2)  All soft or yielding material and other portions of the subgrade which will not compact readily shall be removed and replaced with suitable material and the whole subgrade brought to line and grade and to a foundation of uniform compaction and supporting power. Where the subgrade is of a compacted nature as determined by the city's engineering coordinator, it shall be plowed to a depth of not less than six (6) inches for the full width of the subgrade. The loose materials shall then be spread and manipulated so as to bring all the material to a uniform density. 
(3)  All submerged stumps, roots or other perishable matter encountered in the preparation of the subgrade shall be removed to a depth of two (2) feet. 
(4)  The top six inches (6?) of the subgrade, in both cut and fill sections, shall be compacted to a density of not less than one hundred per cent (100%) of the maximum density, as determined by the AASHO Method T 180. Mix four inches (4?) of coquina rock or limerock with top four inches (4?) on subbase with a mechanical mixer creating a stabilized subbase to an LBR ratio of fifty (50) and compacted by ninety-eight per cent (98%) of maximum density by the AASHO Method T 180. Where specified by the City's consulting engineer, any aggregate materials overlying the subgrade (bottom of proposed base or pavement) shall be bladed aside in order to compact the subgrade. Unless the subgrade material at the time of compacting contains sufficient moisture to permit proper compaction, it shall be moistened as necessary and then compacted. The subgrade shall be shaped prior to making the density tests. The required density shall be maintained until the base or pavement has been laid, or until the aggregate materials for the base or pavement course have been spread in place. 
(5)  After the subgrade has been prepared, as specified in this section, the developer (or contractor) shall maintain it free from ruts and depressions and all damage resulting from the hauling or handling of materials, equipment. tools, etc. Ditches and drains shall be constructed and maintained along the completed subgrade section if necessary. A completed subgrade equal to the length of base of pavement to be laid the next working day shall be maintained at all times. 
(6)  After the subgrade has been prepared and forms set true to line and grade, and immediately before any base or paving course is laid, the subgrade shall be tested as to crown and elevation by the use of an approved subgrade template furnished by the developer (or contractor). The subgrade template shall be so constructed that its lower or testing edge will just come to the true position of the subgrade when the template is riding on the forms or grade stakes. Testing of the subgrade elevation shall be done by moving the template back and forth on the forms or grade stakes without tilting or lifting. The template shall be drawn along just ahead of the point where the materials for base or paving course are being deposited and shall always be kept in position while materials are being placed. If the subgrade is found not to be at the proper elevation at all points, material shall be removed or added as the condition necessitates and compacted to bring all portions of the subgrade to the correct elevation and to the specified density. 
(7)  Where the subgrade is more than twenty-four (24) feet in width it shall be tested in strips twenty-four (24) feet or less in width by the use of crown stakes, temporary forms or other means approved by the city's engineering coordinator or consulting engineer. Where no forms are required for the work the subgrade shall be tested by the use of elevation stakes and other means approved by the city's engineering coordinator or consulting engineer. 
(F)  Construction of curbs and gutters: 
(1)  The work specified in this section consists of the construction of curbs, curbs and gutters or valley gutters of Portland concrete. Such work [is] to be constructed in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades, dimensions and notes as shown on the plans, or as ordered by the city's engineering coordinator or consulting engineer. 
(2)  Unless otherwise shown on the plans, the concrete shall be Class A and of materials and proportions as required by the city's engineering coordinator or consulting engineer, with the following additions and exceptions: 
(a)  The coarse aggregate in the mix shall be 3,000 PSI minimum. 
(b)  For white concrete curb, the coarse aggregate shall be either gravel or light-colored stone. The fine aggregate shall be white sand, and the cement shall be white Portland cement. 
(3)  Where the plans call for steel reinforcement to be placed in the curb or gutter, such reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of the ASTM for like reinforcement. 
(4)  Forms for construction of curbs and gutters shall be made of wood or metal. They shall be straight, free from warp or bends and of sufficient strength, when staked, to resist the pressure of the concrete without springing. If of wood, they shall be of two-inch-surfaced plank; if of metal, they shall be of approved section. Forms shall have a depth equal to the plan dimensions for the depth of the concrete being deposited against them. Forms for combination curbs and gutters shall be so constructed as to ensure fastening of the forms to each other. 
(5)  Excavations shall be made to the required depth and the subgrade or base upon which the curbs, curbs and gutters or valley gutters is to be set shall be compacted to a firm even surface. 
(6)  The concrete shall be mixed as specified by the city's consulting engineer. It shall be placed in the forms to the depth specified in layers of not more than six (6) inches, and tamped and spaded until mortar entirely covers its surface. The top of the curbing or gutter shall be floated smooth and the edges rounded to the radius shown on the plans. 
(7)  Unless otherwise shown on the plans, the curbs, curbs and gutters and valley gutters shall be constructed in uniform sections ten (10) feet in length except where shorter sections are necessary for closures, but no section shall be less than four (4) feet. These sections shall be separated by sheet metal templates set perpendicular to the face and top of the curbing. The templates shall be held firmly during the placing of the concrete and shall be allowed to remain in place until the concrete has set sufficiently to hold its shape, but shall be removed while the forms are still in place. 
(8)  The forms shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the concrete has been placed, and minor defects filled with mortar composed of one (1) part of Portland cement to two (2) parts of fine aggregate. Plastering shall not be permitted on the face of the curb and all rejected curbs, curbs and gutters or valley gutters shall be removed and replaced without additional compensation. The top of the curb and the face from the top to eight (8) inches below shall be finished while the concrete is still green by wetting a soft brick or a wood block and rubbing the surface until it is smooth. A liberal amount of water shall be used, either by dipping the brick or block in water, or by throwing water on the curb with a brush. After the concrete has been rubbed smooth, it shall be rubbed again until a uniform color is produced, using in place of water a thick grout composed of one (1) part of Portland cement and one part of fine aggregate. 
(9)  When completed, the curbs, curbs and gutters and valley gutters shall be covered with suitable material and kept moist for a period of three (3) days or longer, if necessary, [and] shall be protected in a satisfactory manner from the elements until thoroughly hardened. 
(10)  After the concrete has set sufficiently, the spaces in front and back of the curb shall be refilled to the required elevation with suitable material, which shall be tamped in layers of not more than six (6) inches until firm and solid. Where bases are to be constructed adjacent to the curbs or gutters, the curbs, curbs and gutters or valley gutters shall be properly backfilled and shall set for a period of not less than fourteen (14) days before any base material is placed against it. 
(G)  Base course-Lime rock base: 
(1)  Applicable specifications. Florida State Road Department specifications and other specifications, standards and publications referred to in this section shall form a part of this section. 
(2)  Materials. The materials used shall conform to the Florida State Road Department specifications, Section 503, "Base Course Materials." 
(a)  Lime Rock-Miami Oolite Formation, Paragraph 503.1. 
(b)  Lime Rock-Ocala Formation, Paragraph 503.2. 
(3)  Equipment: 
(a)  In general. All equipment necessary for the proper construction of this work shall be on the project, in first class working condition, and shall have been approved by the city's consulting engineer before construction is started. 
(b)  Scarifiers. Scarifiers shall have two (2) rows of teeth with teeth not more than eight (8) inches apart, and the rows shall be staggered so that the paths of the teeth will not be more than four (4) inches apart. 
(c)  Road machines. Road machines shall weigh not less than three (3) tons, and shall have a wheel base not less than fifteen (15) feet, and a blade not less than ten (10) feet. Road machines shall not be pulled with rollers. 
(4)  Forms. Forms shall be either: 
(a)  Two-inch lumber square edge and sound end of sufficient width to extend from the top to bottom of the loose spread lime rock; 
(b)  Steel sections meeting the approval of the city's consulting engineer; 
(c)  The forms shall be set true to line and grade and substantially staked in place to ensure stability during the spreading and rolling operations. 
(5)  Correction of the elevation of manhole frames. Before spreading lime rock, all manhole frames encountered in the course of preparation of the subgrade shall be raised, by the use of brick and cement mortar, to the elevation of the finished pavement. 
(6)  Transporting lime rock: 
(a)  Lime rock shall be transported to the point where it is to be used, over rock previously laid, and dumped on the end of the preceding spreading. In no case shall the rock be dumped directly on the subgrade. 
(b)  No hauling over the subgrade shall be done except with written approval of the city's consulting engineer, in which case the subgrade shall be protected by planing for a distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the point where lime rock is being dumped. 
(7)  Spreading lime rock. Lime rock shall be spread uniformly with shovels or forks, or by means of bulldozers or other equipment approved by the city's consulting engineer. 
(8)  Compacting and finishing base: 
(a)  After spreading is completed, the entire surface shall be scarified and shaped so as to produce the exact grade and cross section after compaction. 
(b)  The base course shall be compacted to an average of ninety-five (95) per cent, for each day's operations, of the maximum density as determined by AASHO Model T 180, modified as follows: "The weight of the tamper shall be ten (10) pounds and it shall be dropped from a height of eighteen (18) feet, and the sample shall be compacted in five (5) equal layers. The density for individual tests shall be not less than ninety (90) per cent of the maximum density." 
(c)  During final compacting operations, if blading of any area is necessary to obtain the true grade and cross section, the compacting operations for such area shall be completed prior to making the density determinations on the finished base. Finished base shall be compacted to ninety-eight (98) per cent or the maximum density as determined by AASHO Method T 180. 
(d)  In order to permit the specified density to be obtained, it may be necessary to add moisture if the rock is too dry, or to aerate and reduce the moisture. 
(e)  At least three (3) density determinations shall be made on each day's final compaction operations, and at more frequent intervals if so directed by the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator. 
(f)  Immediately prior to the application of the prime coat, the surface shall be "hard planed" with a blade grader so as to remove the thin glazed or cemented surface of the base. This hard planing shall be done in such a manner that only the glazed or cemented surface will be removed, leaving a granular or porous condition which will allow free penetration of the prime material. The materials planed from the base shall be removed from the base area. 
(g)  If at any time the subgrade material becomes churned up or mixed with the base course material, the contractor or developer should see that the mixture is dug up and removed, the subgrade reshaped and compacted, and the materials removed replaced with clean lime rock, reshaping and compacting to be done as specified in this section. 
(h)  Where cracks or checks appear in the base, either before or after priming, which in the opinion of the city's consulting engineer will impair the structural efficiency of the base course, such cracks or checks shall be removed by rescarifying, reshaping, adding lime rock where necessary, and recompacting. 
(9)  Testing the surface: 
(a)  The finished surface of the base course shall be checked with a template cut to the required crown, and with a fifteen-foot (15) straight edge laid parallel to the center line of the road. All irregularities greater than one-quarter (1/4) inch shall be corrected by scarifying to a depth of not less than four (4) inches, and removing or adding work as may be required, after which the entire area shall be recompacted as specified in this section. 
(b)  In testing the surface, measurements shall not be taken in small holes where individual pieces or rock have been pulled out by the grader. 
(10)  Opening to traffic and maintaining: 
(a)  The completed base course shall be opened to traffic for a sufficient period of time, as determined by the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator, to allow the base to become thoroughly cured before the prime coat is applied. 
(b)  Traffic shall be distributed so as to properly cure the entire area of the base. 
(c)  The developer (or contractor) shall maintain the base to a true and satisfactory surface and the specified density, until the wearing surface is laid. 
(d)  After the base has been under traffic the required curing period, and immediately preceding the application of the prime coat, the base shall again be tested as provided in subsection (9) of this section, and if the base shall be found to meet all the requirements, the hard planing, as specified in subsection (8)(f) of this section, shall then be done. 
(11)  Thickness determinations: 
(a)  The thickness of the base shall be measured at intervals of not more than two hundred (200) feet. Measurements shall be taken at various points on the cross section. 
(b)  The measurement shall be taken by core borings, not less than one and one-half (11/2) inches in diameter. 
(c)  Where the base is more than five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch less than the required compacted thickness, the developer (or contractor) shall correct such area by scarifying and adding rock. The base shall be scarified and rock added for a distance of seventy-five (75) feet in each direction from the edge of the deficient area. The affected areas shall then be brought to the required thickness and cross section. 
(d)  The average thickness of the base shall be determined from all measurements taken within each city block. 
(12)  Method of measurement: 
(a)  The quantity to be paid for under this section shall be the number of square yards of lime rock base compacted and accepted. 
(b)  The square yards of base shall be the product of the length, as actually measured on the completed work, and the width, which shall be the width of the base actually constructed within the neat lines on the drawings, or designated by the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator. 
(H)  Same-Alternative. Coquina shell base may be used as a substitute for lime rock when applied according to Florida Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. 
(I)  Bituminous prime and tack coats: 
(1)  The work specified in this section consists of an application of bituminous material on a previously prepared base in accordance with the specifications herein contained and in conformity with the lines, grades, dimensions and notes shown on the plans. 
(2)  A pressure distributor shall be used and shall be equipped with pneumatic tires having a sufficient width of rubber in contact with the road surface to avoid breaking the bond of or forming a rut in such surfacing. The distance between the centers of openings of the outside nozzles of the manifold shall be equal to the width of the application required within an allowable variation of two (2) inches. The outside nozzle at each end of the manifold shall have an area of opening not less than twenty-five (25) per cent nor more than seventy-five (75) per cent in excess of the other nozzles which have uniform openings. 
(3)  The bituminous material to be used shall conform to the Florida State Road Department Specifications Section 300, 311, or as amended. (Water emulsified Prime Coat of a approved grade may be used) 
(4)  Before any bituminous material is applied, all loose material, dust, dirt, caked clay and foreign material which might prevent proper bond with the existing surface shall be moved to the shoulders to the full width of the treatment by means of revolving brooms or approved mechanical sweepers and by mechanical blowers, of approved types, supplemented by hand sweeping. Dust and other loose materials not removed by mechanical means shall be removed with hand brooms. Particular care shall be taken to clean the outer edges of the strip to be treated in order to ensure that the prime or tack coat will adhere. Sweeping and blowing shall be continued until all the loose dirt and dust is removed from the surface. 
(5)  Where the prime or tack coat is applied adjacent to curbs and gutters, valley gutters or any other concrete pavement surface, such concrete surfaces (except where they are to be covered with bituminous wearing course) shall be protected by means of heavy paper or other material approved by the city's consulting engineer, while the prime or tack coat is being applied. Any bituminous material deposited on such concrete surfaces shall be removed immediately. 
(6)  No bituminous material shall be applied when the temperature of the air is less than sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit in the shade, or when, in the opinion of the city's consulting engineer, the weather conditions or the conditions of the existing surface are unsuitable. 
(7)  The surface to be treated shall be clean and dry. The temperature of the prime material shall be between one hundred (100) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit. The exact temperature shall be such as will ensure uniform distribution and shall be designated by the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator. The material shall be applied by means of a pressure distributor. The amount applied shall be at the rate of approximately 0.15 to 0.25 gallons per square yard, to be determined by the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator, and will be dependent on the character of the surface, but shall be sufficient to coat the surface thoroughly and uniformly without having any excess to form pools or to flow off the base. 
(8)  The prime shall be allowed to stand without sanding for a period of at least one (1) hour, unless otherwise ordered by the city's consulting engineer. 
(9)  If so ordered by the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator, a light, uniform application of clean sand shall be applied prior to opening the primed base to traffic, in which case the sand shall be rolled with a traffic roller in conjunction with traffic, to cure the prime coat. After the sand covering has been applied the surface may be opened to traffic. 
(10)  If warranted by traffic conditions, in the opinion of the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator, the application shall be made on only one-half (1/2) the width of base at one time, care being taken to secure the correct amount of bituminous material at the joint. If deemed necessary, the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator may require that the base be lightly sprinkled with water in advance of the application of the prime. 
(11)  Where a bituminous surface is to be laid and a tack coat is required, it shall be applied as herein specified. On newly constructed base courses the application of the tack coat shall follow the application of the prime coat, immediately prior to placing the wearing surface. When the wearing surface is to be laid over an old pavement and a prime coat is not required, the tack coat shall be applied to the surface without the prime coat as shown on the plans. The tack coat shall be applied with a pressure distributor except that on small jobs, if approved by the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator, the application may be made by other approved mechanical methods or hand methods. The bituminous materials shall be heated to a suitable consistence as designated by the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator. The rate of application shall be between 0.02 and 0.08 gallon per square yard. The exact rate shall be designated by the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator, who shall also designate the curing period for the tack coat. The tack coat shall be applied sufficiently in advance of the laying of the wearing surface to permit drying, but shall not be applied so far in advance or over such an area as to lose its adhesiveness as a result of being covered with dust or other foreign material. The tack coat surface shall be kept free from traffic until the wearing surface is laid. 
(J)  Wearing surfaces-In general. Asphalt wearing surface shall be Type I placed at a thickness of one and one-half (11/2) inches and compacted to one and one-quarter (11/4) inches. Asphalt resurfacing shall be Type III with areas to be determined by the public works department. Hot-plant-mixed asphalt wearing surface shall be the construction preferred by the city, and in accordance with the Florida State Road Department Specification Sections 330, 331, or as amended. 
(K)  Same-Asphalt concrete, Type S-I: New construction. 
(1)  Job mix: In accordance to the Florida State Road Department Specifications in accordance with Sections 331 and 333.4, or as amended. 
(2)  Transportation of mixture: 
(a)  The mixture shall be transported in tight vehicles previously cleaned of all foreign materials, and when directed by the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator, each load shall be covered with waterproof canvas cover of sufficient size to protect it from weather conditions. The inside surface of the truck bodies may be thinly coated with soapy water, or a mixture of water with not more than ten (10) per cent of lubricating oil, but an excess of either shall not be used. After coating, the bodies shall be raised so that all excess water will drain out before placing any mixture therein. Kerosene, gasoline or similar products shall not be used. 
(b)  No mixture shall be sent out so late in the day as to prevent spreading, finishing and compacting the mixture during daylight. 
(3)  Weather limitations. No mixture shall be laid when, in the opinion of the city's consulting engineer or engineering coordinator, weather conditions are unsuitable, or when the air temperature in the shade is below forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit, except by written permission of the city's consulting engineer. 
(L)  Same-Bituminous surface treatment: 
(1)  The work specified in this section consists of a wearing surface composed of a single application of bituminous material covered with a single application of cover material or a double application of bituminous material covered with a double application of cover material. The wearing surface shall be applied in accordance with the Florida State Road Department Specifications contained in Section 310. 
(Ord. No. 1022-91, §§ 11, 12, 12-18-91) 
51.16A. - Signs and pavement markings for street systems. 
    Required signs must be in place prior to city acceptance of the street. All signing and pavement marking shall be in accordance with the Florida Department of Transportation manual entitled "Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways," and shall be approved by the Public Works Director. If at any time prior to final acceptance, an unforeseen need becomes apparent for signing or pavement markings that were not shown on the approved plans, the city reserves the right to require the additional sign(s) or marking(s) in the interest of public safety and as a condition of city acceptance. 
(a)  Street name signs. Street name signs shall be provided by the city at the expense of the developer. 
(b)  Regulatory. All regulatory signs including "Stop" signs, shall be required and provided by the city at the expense of the developer at the appropriate location at every street intersection as a condition for acceptance of subdivision paving and drainage improvement and shall be in place prior to final inspection. Assignment of right-of-way will be made utilizing a logical estimate of which street will carry the higher volume of traffic, based on the geometry and lot layout of the subdivision. The street determined to have the right-of-way shall not be stopped; the other street(s) shall be regulated by a "Stop" sign. In case of question, the city's engineering coordinator will assist. The developer shall furnish and erect twenty-miles (20) per hour speed limit signs at every entrance to the subdivision unless a higher speed limit is indicated for an arterial street by the city's engineering coordinator. In larger subdivisions, additional speed limit signs shall be erected as required. "Stop" signs shall not be used primarily for speed control purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 8, 8-14-96) 
51.16B. - Minimum road elevations. 
    Minimum road elevations at the lowest point shall be nineteen (19) feet above mean sea water table. Flood insurance rate maps may set a higher minimum road elevation for particular subdivision areas. (See Flood Prevention.) 
51.17. - Restrictions for industrial park streets. 
(A)  Street and access design: 
(1)  All streets within an IP industrial park district shall be paved with rights-of-way as follows: 
R/W 
(feet) Pavement 
(feet) Major Collector 106 48 (4 lane) with 20-foot median Minor Collector  66 32  
(2)  Major collector. This road collects industrial traffic from minor collector streets and conducts it to a major arterial roadway. 
(3)  Minor collector. The primary purpose of this street is to provide access to individual industrial sites. Consequently, it is not conducive to through traffic. Traffic volumes are low because the street seldom serves more than fifteen (15) industrial sites. 
(4)  Streets may utilize either curbs and gutters or open swales for drainage. 
(5)  All improvements shall include comprehensive drainage facilities for positive drainage based on the twenty-five year design standards. Drainage plans and specifications shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. Open swales, ditches or other waterways shall require complete engineering design data pertinent to its design and its effect within the particular drainage area to establish its adequacy. 
(6)  Each industrial or other permitted use shall have not more than two (2) access points to any one (1) street and there must be at least one hundred (100) feet between access points. 
(7)  Cul-de-sac streets are not normally desirable in an industrially developed area; however, any cul-de-sac shall have a minimum of a sixty (60) foot radius and a maximum length of five hundred (500) feet. The minimum radius of the pavement in the cul-de-sac area shall be forty-four (44) feet. 
51.18. - Acceleration/deceleration lane requirements. 
    Development of sites that use frontage for vehicular access on collector or arterial streets, as defined in the comprehensive plan, shall be required to construct acceleration and deceleration lanes in accordance with the State of Florida Department of Transportation Standards and the City of Rockledge specifications for roadways and streets as identified in this section. 
51.19. - Location of curb cuts along streets. 
(a)  Curb cuts shall not be located within acceleration or deceleration lanes, and shall not be located closer than thirty (30) feet to an intersection with another arterial road. 
(b)  In the event the city council finds that a hardship is created by the terms hereof and that public safety would not be impaired by variance from the terms hereof, the city council may grant a variance from the provisions hereof by resolution, upon submission of plans for ingress and egress by the landowner and approval thereof by the city council. 
51.20. - Protection of rights-of-way. 
    The front setback requirement on all properties fronting urban collector, urban minor arterials and urban major/principle arterials must be maintained, to preserve the financial burden on taxpayers in the future, if and in the event further widening is needed on those roadways. Special consideration shall be given to those applicants requesting variances on those properties when requesting reductions to any setback, only the rear setback may be revised when hardships are shown and a variance is granted. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 9, 8-14-96) 
SECTION 52.00. - SIDEWALK STANDARDS 

52.10. - [Generally.] 
    Sidewalks [shall be] designed and constructed for public use according to the standards and requirements of this section, except as provided for in Low Density Subdivisions. 
52.11. - Time for construction of sidewalks. 
    No person shall occupy, inhabit or dwell in any structure on any lot or parcel of land in a subdivision until after the developer of the subdivision, or the owner of such lot or parcel of land, shall have first constructed and installed in the right-of-way of any public street or streets abutting such lot or parcel of land, and on the side of such street or streets nearest such lot or parcel of land, a sidewalk extending the entire distance that such lot or parcel of land abuts the public street or streets. The sidewalk shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications and requirements of these regulations applicable to the construction of sidewalks within subdivisions, and shall conform in all respects to the applicable portion of the plans and specifications for construction of public improvements in the subdivision submitted by the developer prior to approval of the plat by the governing body of the city. No certificate of occupancy shall be granted or issued for the occupancy of any structure on any lot, piece or parcel of land in a subdivision until after the sidewalk required by this section has been installed as herein required and finally inspected and approved by the Rockledge Building Official. 
52.12. - Extended time for construction of sidewalks. 
    The developer shall be responsible for constructing sidewalks and such sidewalks shall be installed prior to the final city inspection and approval of the public improvements in the subdivision as required for the issuance of a certificate of completion; provided, however, that a developer desiring to defer construction of the sidewalks until dwellings have been constructed on the subdivision lots may extend the time for construction of the sidewalks for a period of time not to exceed two (2) years from the date the subdivision has received its certificate of completion from the city, provided the subdivision developer shall, prior to final plat approval by the city council, obtain the city council's consent to such an extension and to the posting by the developer with the city of a bond or other form of security, hereinafter referred to as "performance security," in form and amount satisfactory to the city, guarantying and securing the developer's timely completion of construction of the sidewalks in accordance with city specifications, requirements and regulations. Such bond or security shall be in the amount of fifty (50) per cent of the estimated material and labor cost of constructing the sidewalks, such estimated cost being that set forth in the engineering estimate approved by the city. Said performance security shall be accompanied by a written sidewalk construction agreement executed and acknowledged by the developer in form and content satisfactory to the city and delivered to the city with the performance security before the subdivision receives its certificate of completion. The sidewalk construction agreement shall contain, but not in way of limitation, substantially the following provisions: 
(a)  That no part of said performance security shall be refunded to the developer until all sidewalks in the entire subdivision are constructed and completed in accordance with city specifications; 
(b)  That if said sidewalks are not completed by the developer or his designee within said two-year period, all performance security shall automatically stand forfeited to the city; 
(c)  That the developer shall be liable to the city for all costs, expenses and damages incurred and sustained by the city, including reasonable attorney's fees and court costs in the event of the developer's default in any provision of said sidewalk construction agreement; and 
(d)  In the event the developer fails to complete construction of the sidewalks and the performance security is forfeited, the city may elect to take all or any of the following actions: 
(1)  Complete construction of some or all of the sidewalks, utilizing city employees and materials. 
(2)  Contract for completion of the construction of some or all of said sidewalks. 
(e)  In the event the developer fails to complete the construction of the sidewalks within the required timeframe and all performance security is forfeited to the city, the city shall not be liable to any party to continue the sidewalk improvements after said performance security has been exhausted toward that end. 
(Ord. No. 1066-93, § 1, 10-6-93) 
52.13. - Design of sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks shall be provided on each side of all highways, roads and streets, and on each side of marginal access streets located within a subdivision, except for subdivisions where all lots are one (1) acre or greater in size. All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete and at least four (4) feet in width, four (4) inches thick, six (6) inches thick in driveways, and at least six (6) feet from the toe of the road pavement. Each sidewalk shall extend to a curb cut which shall provide access for wheelchair occupants at street intersections. All sidewalks shall not be less than six (6) inches from the property line. 
52.14. - Conformity with city policies. 
    The subdividing and development of any areas subject to these regulations shall conform to the adopted general goals and objectives of the council with respect to the physical development of the city as set forth in various elements of the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan and other policy statements including those in the Zoning Ordinance. 
52.23. - Clear view of intersecting streets (sight triangle). 
(A)  [In general.] 
(1)  In order to provide clear view of intersecting streets to the motorist, there shall be a triangular area of clear vision maintained at each corner of intersecting streets as hereinafter described. The size of the clear vision triangle area for a particular corner of a street intersection is based upon the functional road classifications of the intersecting streets, as determined by the Florida Department of Transportation, in the manner hereinafter described. 
(2)  No owner, occupant or person in possession of a triangular area of clear vision adjacent to a street intersection, as described and illustrated in this Section, shall cause, allow or permit anything to be erected, placed, maintained, planted, or allowed to grow within said triangular area in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of three (3) feet and eight (8) feet above grade level at the point of intersection of the center lines of the two streets comprising the intersection. 
(3)  The triangular area of clear vision shall be formed by three (3) lines, two (2) of which lines shall extend outwardly from the point of intersection of the centerlines of the two (2) intersecting streets along the respective centerlines of said streets for the distances stated below, and the third line of said triangle shall connect the outermost termini of the first two (2) lines aforesaid. The length of the line running along the centerline of the street shall be one hundred (100) feet for a local road, one hundred sixty (160) feet for a collector road, and two hundred (200) feet for a highway or arterial road. 
Functional Road Classification Distance from Street
Centerline Intersection
(feet)Local 100 Collector 160 Highways and Arterial 200  
Subdivision signs are permitted in medians, provided the care and maintenance of the medians and subdivision sign are the responsibility of the subdivision's Homeowners Association or other party, and if the median is setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the road right-of-way of the intersecting road, and the sign is no closer than thirty (30) feet from the intersecting right-of-way, and the subdivision sign does not impair the clear sight distance, as determined by the location of the stop bar with the intersecting roadway. 
(4)  The diagram below is an example of the formation of a sight triangle at the Southeast corner of the intersection of two local roads: 
(5)  Violation of this Section shall be deemed a public nuisance, hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Rockledge, and may be enforced by proceedings before the Rockledge Nuisance Abatement Board, proceedings before the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board, or by suit for injunctive relief. 
(B)  Determination; Notice to alter or remove. 
(1)  Whenever the Rockledge Building Official, after investigation, shall determine that the owner, occupant or other person in possession of a triangular area of clear vision as described in this Section is in violation of this Section, he shall cause to be served upon such person or party a written notice requiring such person or party to remove the obstruction so as to comply with the provisions of this Section. 
(2)  The notice shall be served upon the owner, occupant or other persons in possession of the triangular area and shall require such person or party to comply with the directions contained therein within fifteen (15) days after service thereof. 
(3)  Such notice may be served by personal delivery to the addressee, or by mailing same by certified mail to the addressee's last known postal address as indicated on the records of the Brevard County Property Appraiser, or by placing a copy thereof at a conspicuous place upon the triangular area abutting or adjacent to the intersection. 
(C)  Appeal to nuisance abatement board. Any person affected by the notice authorized by this Section may, within the time specified in the notice, appeal to the Rockledge Nuisance Abatement Board, and until said Board shall act upon such appeal, the appellant shall not be required to comply with the notice. 
(D)  Abatement by City. If, after service of notice, the owner or occupant does not comply with nor appeal the directions contained in the notice within the time herein specified, or thereafter fails to comply with an order of the Nuisance Abatement Board within the time specified therein, the Building Official shall cause the necessary action to be taken to remove and terminate the unlawful obstruction and all cost of such abatement by the City shall constitute a lien upon the property in favor of the City which lien shall be levied, enforced and collected by the City in the same manner as is provided for the recovery by the City of its costs and liens for the abatement of nuisances found to exist by the Rockledge Nuisance Abatement Board. 
(E)  Exemptions. Nothing contained in this Section shall prohibit the owner of any property from erecting or maintaining a building or permanent structure permitted by this Code, however, no plants, shrubs, hedges, foliage, or movable structures, whether existing at the time of enactment of this Ordinance or hereafter, shall be exempt from this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1018-91, § 1, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 1098-95, § 6, 5-3-95) 
SECTION 53.00. - BLOCKS [AND LOTS] 

53.10. - Design of blocks. 
(a)  Generally. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the use contemplated. 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions. 
(3)  Such access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare as approved by the city's Public Works Director. 
(b)  Length. Residential blocks shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet in length, nor shall they be less than five hundred (500) feet in length. 
53.20. - Design of lots. 
(a)  Generally. Lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide satisfactory and desirable building sites, appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. See Exhibit 5 to determine building setback lines. 
(b)  Frontage. All lots shall front on a public street dedicated and accepted by the city council of the City of Rockledge, except lots in PUD and RCE country estate subdivisions. In PUD or RCE country estate subdivisions, limited access private roads may be proposed under the following conditions: 
(1)  That the proposed limited access private road would not prohibit or interrupt any planned public street system in the area. 
(2)  Said limited access private roads shall have the required right-of-way as specified in these regulations deeded fee simple to a homeowners' association composed of the owners of lots in the subdivision who will be responsible for maintenance of said limited access private road or street. The construction plans and specifications shall comply with the requirements contained herein. The engineering coordinator or his designee shall make inspections of the construction and issue a certificate of completion prior to the issuance of any building permits. 
EXHIBIT 5. DETERMINING BUILDING SETBACK LINES 
BUILDING SETBACK LINE 
Where the lot frontage is less than the minimum lot width required by the zoning resolution, the building setback distance is the minimum required by the zoning resolution, or the distance to the point where the lot width equals the minimum width required by the zoning resolution, whichever is greater. Lot width must be measured at a right angle to the lot depth line. The lot depth line is a line connecting the midpoint of the front line with the midpoint of the rear lot line. 
Where the lot frontage exceeds the minimum lot width required by the zoning resolution, the building setback is the minimum required by the zoning resolution, and the setback line runs parallel to the front lot line. 
(3)  That the homeowners' association's documents, which provide for the maintenance of limited access roads and streets, shall be subject to review by the Public Works Director and subject to approval by the city council. The road shall be maintained to city standards. 
(4)  That PUD or RCE country estate subdivisions cannot mix public streets and limited access roads or streets. 
(5)  That emergency vehicles and all official public vehicles shall be granted use of the limited access streets at all times. 
(c)  Double-frontage lots. Lots having double street frontage shall be avoided where the streets are essentially parallel unless it is necessary to provide separation of residential development from railroads or arterial roads and streets. In such cases, provision shall be made either for marginal access streets or for lots to back up to the arterial rights-of-way. In the case of lots proposed to be backed up to said arterial, additional lot depth of twenty (20) feet, plus screen planting that will reach six (6) feet in height in twelve (12) months from date the subdivision is complete, shall be required. Vehicular access to the rear of a double-frontage lot shall be prevented. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots, except for lots of one-half (1/2) acre or more in size, shall have a width at least fifteen (15) per cent larger than the width of interior lots along both adjacent streets. 
SECTION 54.00. - PUBLIC STREETS AND PRIVATE ROADS IN SUBDIVISIONS 
(1)  Generally. 
(a)  All subdivisions shall be designed in conformity with the requirements of these regulations. All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the adopted Rockledge Comprehensive Plan and Rockledge Zoning Ordinance. An applicant must obtain a construction permit prior to constructing any improvements or portion of an improvement. 
(b)  All roads or streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the minimum cross-sections as set forth elsewhere in these regulations. The construction work and the construction materials shall conform to the specifications for the subgrade, base and wearing surface provided by this Code. 
(c)  Care shall be exercised in making the street layout so as to prevent excessive grades, extreme cuts and fills, or other changes in the natural topography which would induce rapid and unwarranted storm water runoff, thereby causing washing and erosion or diversion of storm water over private or adjoining property. 
(d)  In addition to the specifications furnished to apply specifically to this construction, all required storm sewers or culverts, sanitary sewers and water lines, where such occur in the paved portion of the street, shall be installed prior to the final grading of the base. 
(e)  Water services may be jacked under the pavement where the water main has been installed on the opposite side of the street from where the services are needed. 
SECTION 55.00. - PARKING REQUIREMENTS 

55.10. - General requirements. 
    There shall be provided at the time of the erection of any main building or structure, or at the time any main building or structure is converted for the below listed uses, enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, floor area or seats, minimum off-street automobile parking space, which shall be stabilized and paved with asphalt, concrete or other surface approved by the parking board, with adequate provisions for ingress and egress in accordance with the following requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 10, 8-14-96) 
55.11. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation of this section, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  The floor area of a building or structure shall be the sum of the gross horizontal area of every floor of a building, using exterior wall dimensions. 
(b)  The seating capacity is the number of seating spaces permitted by the fire code and approved by the fire chief. 
[(c)  Reserved.] 
(d)  Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number if the fraction is five-tenths (0.5) or more, and when the fraction is less than five-tenths (0.5), the next lower whole number shall apply. 
55.12. - Detailed parking space requirements. 
    [Parking space requirements are as follows:] 
(a)  Auditoriums, theaters or other places of assembly. One and one-half (11/2) spaces for each four (4) seats. 
(b)  Automobile care (detailers, stereo installers, window tinting, headliners, etc.) and automobile repair shops (transmissions, engines, air conditioners, brakes, tires, etc.) Five (5) parking spaces for every inside repair or work area bay. All other portions of the structure (office or storage) shall be calculated separately, using the guidelines found in this section." 
(c)  Bowling alleys. Four (4) spaces for each alley. 
(d)  Business or commercial buildings. One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof. 
(e)  Clubs or lodges. One (1) space for each four (4) seats or one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof, whichever is greater. 
(f)  Dwelling structures: Two (2) spaces for each single-family residence, townhouse or dwelling unit in a duplex. Each attached or detached single-family dwelling unit built after January 1, 2000, shall have a garage or carport for at least one (1) automobile. Conversion of an existing garage or carport to living area is not permitted unless a new garage or carport with at least one (1) parking space is provided as a replacement. All existing converted garage or carport spaces will be considered a conforming grand-fathered use, if such conversion had a valid building permit issued before January 1, 2000. The minimum parking space within any garage shall be not less than an area measuring eight (8) feet by eighteen (18) feet. In such parking space there may not be placed any appliance (washer/dryer, etc.), air-conditioner or other item, which cannot be readily moved, nor are items which require a utility hookup of any kind allowed within the clear space of the garage. Two and one-half (21/2) spaces for each dwelling unit within a multiple-family complex of three (3) dwelling units or more. Group care facilities having more than three (3) clients, adult congregate living facilities (ACLF), and treatment and recovery facilities shall have one (1) off-street parking space for every three (3) beds in the facility. 
(g)  Furniture and major appliance stores. One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of floor area devoted to storage for the first four thousand (4,000) square feet, and one (1) space per seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of floor area of the remaining storage area, plus one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area devoted to any use other than for storage. 
(h)  Hospitals, sanitariums. Three (3) spaces for each bed. 
(i)  Hotels. One (1) space for each suite or sleeping unit. 
(j)  Libraries, museums. One and one-half (11/2) spaces for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof, or one and one-half (11/2) spaces for each four (4) seats, whichever is greater. 
(k)  Major retail commercial facility of 100,000 square feet gross lease space, or greater. One (1) space per each three hundred (300) square feet of gross retail space; and one (1) space for every five hundred (500) square feet of garden storage, warehouse and accessory office use. In addition, the following provisions may be used for these facilities only: 
(1)  A maximum of ten (10) per cent of the required off-street parking spaces may be designated as compact car spaces. Each such space shall have a minimum stall width of eight (8) feet and a minimum stall depth of eighteen (18) feet. Such spaces shall be signed and designated "compact cars only", and shall not be located in high turnover areas which are in close proximity to main building entrances. 
(2)  Each regular parking space (excluding parallel parking spaces) shall contain a striped rectangular area at least eighteen (18) feet in depth and nine (9) feet in width. Lines demarcating parking spaces may be drawn at various angles in relation to curbs and aisles, so long as the parking spaces so created contain within them the rectangular area required by this section. 
(3)  Front to front parking spaces shall be designed with a minimum length of thirty-six (36) feet, tire stops or green space area must be set back two (2) feet from the center, providing a four (4) foot buffer between vehicles. 
(4)  One (1) bicycle parking space per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of building area, shall be provided. 
(l)  Manufacturing and industrial uses. One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof. 
(m)  Marinas, commercial docks and piers. Two (2) parking spaces for each boat docking slip or mooring accommodation provided by the marina, plus the required spaces for the marina building or buildings associated therewith. 
(n)  Medical or dental clinics. One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof, plus one and one-half (11/2) spaces for each three (3) employees. 
(o)  Mortuaries. One and one-half (11/2) spaces for every four (4) seats. 
(p)  Motels. One (1) space for each unit plus one (1) space for manager or owner. 
(q)  Nursing or convalescent homes. One (1) space for each two (2) beds, plus one and one-half (11/2) spaces for every three (3) employees on the largest shift. 
(r)  Office and professional buildings. One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof. 
(s)  Restaurants or other eating places. One (1) space for each two (2) seats, chairs or stools. 
(t)  Rooming, boardinghouses. Two (2) spaces for each apartment. 
(u)  Schools. One (1) space for every thirty (30) students, plus one (1) space for every two (2) employees. 
(v)  Warehouse (other than mini-warehouse). One (1) space per each four hundred (400) square feet. 
(w)  Warehouse (mini-warehouse). When used for storage with no live occupancy, a minimum twenty-four-foot driveway. 
(x)  Uses not specifically named. The requirements for off-street parking for any use or uses not specifically named in this section shall be the same as provided in this section for the named use most similar in nature and character, it being the intent of the city council to require all uses to provide off-street parking. If a material controversy arises regarding the number of off-street parking spaces required to be provided for a particular use of property, the required number shall be determined and fixed by a board comprised of the building official, city manager and fire chief of the city, which board shall appear and be governed by the following guidelines and criteria in making such determination: 
(1)  Off-street parking requirements for similar uses of property in the city. 
(2)  Off-street parking requirements for buildings and improvements having similar physical characteristics. 
(3)  Intensity of vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area. 
(4)  Foreseeable requirements for police, fire and other emergency vehicle services to and in the vicinity of the property. 
(5)  The size and physical characteristics of abutting streets. 
(6)  Availability of alternative parking areas. 
(7)  Foreseeable requirements for deliveries and public services to and in the vicinity of the property. 
(8)  The aesthetic quality of the property and its vicinity. 
(9)  Other considerations involving the health, safety and welfare of occupants of the property and citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1174-98, § 2, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 1186-99, § 5, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 1211-2000, § 4, 4-5-00; Ord. No. 1356-2004, § 1, 9-22-04; Ord. No. 1379-2005, § 1, 6-1-05; Ord. No. 1515-2009, § 1, 1-7-09) 
55.13. - Parking requirements within the community redevelopment district. 
    Within the area of the Rockledge Community Redevelopment District as defined by Resolution 2002-481 and Ordinance 1277-2002, there exists an overlay provision which empowers, upon request by a developer or staff on all new or remodeled properties, the reduction of parking requirements upon the unanimous approval of the City Manager, Building Official and Chairman of the Rockledge Community Redevelopment Agency. Any structure given modified parking shall automatically become conforming structures. 
(Ord. No. 1326-2003, § 3, 10-15-03; Ord. No. 1376-2005, § 6, 5-4-05) 
55.14. - Off-street parking specifications. 
(a)  Construction requirements: 
(1)  All parking areas shall be stabilized and paved with asphalt, concrete or other surface approved by the parking board, adequately drained and maintained in a dust-proof condition as long as the use is continued. 
(2)  Parking space dimensions shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  The minimum width for one-way driveway aisles shall be fourteen (14) feet and the minimum width for two-way driveway aisles shall be twenty-four (24) feet. 
(4)  Projects which are required to have more than fifty (50) parking spaces may have up to twenty-five (25) per cent of those parking spaces constructed as "grass parking" using a cellar confinement system, and installed in accordance with manufacturers' recommendations. Grass parking areas shall be located at the furthest distance from the principle structure of the project. Such areas shall be kept mowed and maintained with a grass covering. 
(b)  Location: 
(1)  Parking spaces for all dwellings shall be located on the same property with the main building to be served, where feasible. 
(2)  Parking spaces for uses other than dwellings shall be located on the same property with the main building to be served by such parking facilities, or not more than two hundred (200) feet distant from the nearest lot line of the property upon which said main building is situate, such distance to be measured along the center line of the right-of-way of the shortest and most direct route by public street between the street frontage line of the property constituting the off-street parking site. 
(3)  Parking requirements for two (2) or more uses of the same or different types may be satisfied by the allocation of the required number of spaces of each use in a common parking facility. 
(4)  Off-street parking spaces required for a use or uses other than dwellings, and which parking spaces are not on the same lot, parcel or tract of land with the main building to be served by such spaces, shall not be situate or located upon property in an R1, R2, R2A, R3, RCE, MH, or TH zoning district. 
(c)  Off-street loading. The following off-street loading spaces shall be provided for the uses indicated: 
(1)  Every hospital, institution, motel, single-occupancy commercial or industrial building or similar use having a floor area in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet, requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials and merchandise, shall have at least one (1) permanent maintained off-street loading space for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and one (1) additional space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof, over and above the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(2)  Single-occupancy retail operations, wholesale and industrial operations with a gross floor area of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall provide sufficient receiving space on the property so as not to hinder the face movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a sidewalk, street or alley. 
(3)  Each space shall have direct access to an alley or street and shall have the following minimum dimensions: Length, twenty-five (25) feet; width, twelve (12) feet; height, fourteen (14) feet. 
(4)  Each location requiring an off-street loading space shall prepare a circulation plan layout sheet during the site plan approval process which shall include the following elements: all points of ingress and egress; location of driving lanes; layout of all off-street loading and unloading areas; required parking spaces; and on-site maneuvering and turn around area, which avoids interference with public use of the streets or alleys and specifies the route city garbage trucks will take to empty dumpsters on site. 
(d)  Reduction of off-street parking and loading areas. Areas reserved for off-street parking or loading in accordance with paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) hereof shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which it serves is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent parking or loading space is provided to the satisfaction of the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 1016-91, § 3, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 1120-96, § 11, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1174-98, § 3, 11-4-98) 
55.15. - Parking regulations in residential districts. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all residential districts as defined and designated on the official zoning map of the city: 
(A)  Definitions: 
(1)  Boat or cargo trailer. A trailer which is used for or is designed for use in carrying or transporting boats or other cargo. 
(2)  Commercial vehicle. Any truck, bus, trailer, portable equipment, machinery or similar vehicle or combination thereof used or intended to be used for any commercial enterprise or business purpose, or a vehicle which has over four (4) wheels, or more than two (2) axles, or a height greater than eight (8) feet from ground level, or an overall length of more than twenty-two (22) feet, excluding any self-propelled roadway vehicles having a net weight of less than three thousand (3,000) pounds. A legal presumption shall exist that any self-propelled commercial vehicle having a net weight in excess of three thousand (3,000) pounds, or more than four (4) wheels, or more than two (2) axles, or a height greater than eight (8) feet from ground level, or an overall length of more than twenty-two (22) feet, is a commercial vehicle as herein defined. 
(3)  Truck tractor. A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing another vehicle or non self-propelled vehicle from one (1) destination to another. 
(4)  Horse van. A trailer which is used for or is designed for use in carrying horses. 
(B)  Motor vehicles prohibited or restricted in residential districts: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, operator, or person in charge of any truck, truck tractor or other commercial vehicle, boat, boat trailer, cargo trailer or horse van to park, stop, store or keep same on any public street, avenue, alley or other thoroughfare, or on any right-of-way thereof within any residential district in the City of Rockledge for a cumulative period of time exceeding one (1) hour in any twenty-four (24) hour period, unless such parking or stopping is for the specific purpose of providing a lawful commercial service to the owner or occupant of property in a residential district between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. in which case the service provider shall be permitted to park a commercial vehicle in the residential district for such period of time as is necessary to provide or perform the commercial service between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant of real property in any residential district in the city to park on, cause to be parked on, or allow to be parked on such residential real property any truck, truck tractor, horse van or other commercial vehicle of greater than one-and-one-half ton capacity for a cumulative period of time exceeding one (1) hour in any twenty-four (24) hour period, unless such vehicle is parked in an enclosed garage. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit such parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. of a commercial vehicle by a service provider engaged in performing a lawful commercial service to property in a residential district as described in the preceding subsection. This restriction shall also apply to the owner, agent, operator or person in charge of any such vehicle in the event such person is not the owner or lessee or occupant of such real property. 
(C)  Delivery and construction vehicles; emergency repairs: 
(1)  The restrictions of paragraph (B) of this section shall not apply to the temporary parking of such vehicles on private property in residential districts whereon construction is underway, for which a current and valid building permit has been issued by the city and such permit is property displayed on the premises. 
(2)  The restrictions of paragraph (B) of this section shall not apply to a situation where such vehicle becomes disabled and as a result of such emergency is required to be parked within a residential district for longer than one (1) hour. However, such vehicle shall be removed from the residential district within twenty-four (24) hours by wrecker towing, if necessary, regardless of the nature of the emergency. 
(D)  Permissive parking: 
(1)  A panel, pickup or similar type of truck or commercial vehicle that is less than twenty (20) feet in overall length, and is designed and rated by the manufacturer to have a carrying capacity of not more than three thousand (3,000) pounds, may be parked on the premises of a private residence in a residential district provided that said vehicle is in operable condition and regularly used by a resident of the premises where it is parked, and not more than one such vehicle is parked on said premises at any one (1) time. Vehicles, as stated above, bearing vehicle street graphics that cover a surface area of the vehicle greater than ten (10) square feet in total area must be parked within a carport or garage on the residential premises, or in an area of the premises where the vehicle will not be visible to persons on any public street abutting the residential premises. 
(2)  The provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this section prohibiting the parking of buses in residential districts of the city shall not apply to public and private school buses, including church school buses, when parked on school or church property." 
(3)  Official vehicles and equipment parked at the private residence of an employee of city, county, or state government, or employee of a public utility company, when it is a job requirement of such employee that the official vehicle or equipment be used as transportation to and from the employees place of work. 
(4)  Major recreational equipment other than boats and boat trailers, including, but not limited to, recreational vehicles, motor homes, recreational trailers, travel trailers, camper trailers, pickup trailers or coaches, topper campers, and slideout campers, shall not be parked, kept or maintained within any front yard of premises in a residential zone; however, any such major recreational equipment other than boats and boat trailers may be parked in the side yard behind the front building line or in the rear yard of premises in a residential district; provided, that: 
(a)  Said equipment is owned by the owner or occupant of the property upon which said equipment is stored for the personal use of such owner or occupant rather than for rent or hire. 
(b)  Said equipment is not used for residential, office or commercial purposes while so parked or stored. 
(c)  Said equipment is not used for sleeping, housekeeping or living quarters while so parked or stored. 
(d)  Said equipment is located or stored to the rear of the front building line and on corner lots behind the side building line or is located in a garage or carport. 
(e)  Said equipment is not located or stored on any part of any road right-of-way. 
(f)  Said equipment must be located on the property of an established residence and may not be parked or stored on vacant residential property. 
(g)  Said equipment may not be connected or hooked up to water or electricity, except for purposes of filling water tanks and recharging battery systems, while parked or stored on the premises. 
(h)  Said equipment is parked on an improved parking surface which shall consist of asphalt, crushed stone, crushed shell, paving bricks or other such nonconcrete improvements which would render the parking surface sufficiently dust free. No such improved parking surface will be deemed to constitute a "structure" which is prohibited within a side yard setback area. 
(i)  Not more than one (1) recreational vehicle shall be stored on or located within any one (1) lot or parcel of land in a residential district. 
Major recreational equipment may be parked anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours during loading or unloading. Major recreational equipment may be parked in a driveway in the front yard of premises in a residential district for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) continuous hours during any one (1) period of thirty (30) consecutive days if the person in possession and control thereof is a visitor of the owner or occupant of the residential premises during the entire period of parking, and the equipment is not parked within five (5) feet of a right-of-way line of any public road or street. 
(5)  Boats and boat trailers: 
(a)  Exceeding twenty-four (24) feet in length (inclusive of boat, motor and trailer). No boat exceeding twenty-four (24) feet overall in length, or boat trailer capable of carrying a boat exceeding twenty-four (24) feet overall in length shall be parked or kept on premises in a residential zone except in the rear yard of such premises, or in the side yard of such premises if parked or kept within a garage or other opaque structure enclosed on at least three (3) sides. In no case shall such boat and/or boat trailer block or impair pedestrian travel on any sidewalk. 
(b)  Not exceeding twenty-two (22) feet in length. Boats not exceeding twenty-two (22) feet overall in length, and boat trailers designed to carry a boat not exceeding twenty-two (22) feet overall in length, shall not be parked or kept in the front or side yard of premises in a residential zone except under the following conditions and restrictions: 
1.  The boat or boat trailer must be parked on a concrete or paved driveway or surface and in no event shall any such boat or boat trailer be allowed to encroach on a street or thoroughfare. 
2.  The boat or boat trailer shall not be parked on any premises so as to impair or obstruct the visibility or line of sight of the operator of any motor vehicle traveling upon any street or thoroughfare. 
3.  All open and interior areas of the boat must be kept covered with an opaque cover of canvas, nylon, plastic or similar sturdy material securely fastened to the boat in such a manner as to effectively prevent ready or easy access into the boat by children under ten (10) years of age, and so as to prevent visibility into the interior of the boat by persons traveling on public property. "Open and interior areas of the boat" shall mean areas of the boat, other than decks and exterior walkways, designed to be occupied by passengers and operators of the boat. 
4.  The boat must bear a current and valid state boat registration number and decal. 
5.  The boat trailer must bear a current and valid state license plate. 
6.  The boat must be used primarily for recreational purposes. 
7.  The boat and boat trailer must be kept and maintained in a reasonably neat and clean appearance so as not to be or become an eyesore detracting from the aesthetic quality of the premises and neighborhood. 
(E)  Conditional waivers: 
(1)  The Rockledge Board of Adjustment may, upon application by the owner or occupant of premises located in a residential zoning district of the city, grant such owner or occupant a conditional waiver of any parking restriction imposed by subsection (D)(3) of this section with respect to the parking of a recreational vehicle at such premises, subject to the following conditions, limitations and restrictions: The owner or occupant of the premises must submit an application for conditional waiver to the Rockledge Board of Adjustment, together with a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), the application to contain the following: Applicant's name, address and telephone number; legal description of the premises involved; name and address of the owner of the premises; name and address of the persons in possession and control of the recreational vehicle; a description of the recreational vehicle; a diagram or survey of the premises with the location indicated thereon where the recreational vehicle is desired to be kept; the reason and basis why applicant cannot comply with the provisions of subsection (D)(3) of this section; the period of time for which the waiver is requested; the names and addresses of owners and occupants of all property located within a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the premises where the recreational vehicle is to be kept; a statement signed by not less than seventy-five (75) per cent of the owners and occupants of property within five hundred (500) feet of applicant's premises consenting to the granting of the requested waiver. 
(2)  The board of adjustment shall conduct a public hearing on each application after written notice to the owners and occupants of all property located within a distance of five hundred (500) feet of applicant's premises. At the public hearing the board of adjustment shall consider the following: The reasons and basis assigned by applicant for the granting of the waiver; the extent and degree to which the requested waiver varies from the general requirements of subsection (D)(3); various alternatives which would not require a waiver; the term for which the waiver is requested; comments of all interested persons; the probable effects upon occupants of adjoining and adjacent properties from the granting of the requested waiver; the practicality of the requested waiver; the number of other outstanding waivers in existence and their proximity to applicant's premises; and the probable effects of issuance of the waiver upon the health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the community. 
(3)  Any waiver granted shall represent the slightest deviation from the general regulations that is practicable under existent circumstances and for the shortest term necessary to accomplish a just result. 
(4)  No waiver shall permit the parking of a recreational vehicle within five (5) feet of any public road or street right-of-way, nor in any location that will create a safety hazard by obstructing the view of persons entering a public right-of-way from premises adjacent to those for which the waiver is requested. 
(5)  As a prerequisite to the granting of a waiver, the board of adjustment must determine that strict compliance with the provisions of subsection (D)(3) of this section would constitute an unreasonable burden and hardship to the applicant due to the size or configuration of the premises or the improvements thereon, physical handicap of the applicant, or other reasons assigned by the applicant as a basis for granting the waiver; however, in no instance shall the applicant's financial hardship constitute a sufficient basis for the granting of a conditional waiver. 
(6)  Any waiver shall stand revoked automatically upon cessation of the reason or basis for which it was granted. 
(7)  The holder of any waiver shall notify the city of the cessation or termination of the cause or basis for which the waiver was granted within seventy-two (72) hours after the cessation or termination of such reason or basis. 
(8)  Any waiver granted may be revoked by the Rockledge Board of Adjustment at any time said board shall determine that the reason or basis for a waiver has ceased to exist, or that the holder of the waiver has violated any provision, condition or term of the waiver, or that a continuation of the waiver would be contrary to the health, safety, welfare or aesthetics of the community. The board of adjustment shall not revoke any waiver without first conducting a public hearing after reasonable notice in writing to the holder of the waiver. 
(9)  No waiver shall be assignable nor transferable by the holder thereof. 
(10)  Special provisions for the handicapped. If an application for a conditional waiver alleges that the applicant is a physically handicapped person and the holder of a current valid exemption entitlement parking permit issued by the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles pursuant to Section 320.0848, Florida Statutes, and that applicant's handicap necessitates his use of major recreational equipment as herein described for transportation purposes, and that a conditional waiver is necessary because of applicant's inability to comply with the provisions of subsection (D)(3) of this section due to his handicap, then the following provisions will apply: 
(a)  No fee shall be payable with respect to the application. 
(b)  The application need not contain the names and addresses, nor consents, of owners and occupants of property located within five hundred (500) feet of the premises for which the conditional waiver is sought, but must contain the names and addresses of the owners and occupants of properties abutting and adjoining the premises for which the conditional waiver is requested. 
(c)  No notice of public hearing as required by subsection (E)(2) above need be published nor furnished to owners or occupants of property within five hundred (500) feet of the premises for which the conditional waiver is sought, but reasonable notice of the public hearing on the application shall be furnished by mail to the owners and occupants of properties lying within a distance of one hundred (100) feet of the premises for which the conditional waiver is requested. 
(d)  If the board of adjustment determines at the public hearing that the allegations of the application are true and well founded, the board shall grant the minimum conditional waiver to the applicant consistent with the limitations and conditions set forth in this subsection. 
(F)  Enforcement: 
(1)  Nothing contained in paragraph (B) of this section permitting the parking of one (1) truck-type vehicle, one-and-one-half-ton rated capacity or less, on a plot in a residential district shall be considered permission to engage in any type of commercial activities from any location within a residential district unless otherwise permitted in these regulations. 
(2)  The chief of police of the city, or his duly authorized designee, may issue, upon proper application therefor by the owner, or his authorized representative, to the police department, a permit extending the parking time limits set forth in paragraph (B) of this section up to, but not exceeding twenty-four (24) hours upon establishing that such permit is requested in good faith for a reasonable cause shown or demonstrated to the chief of police, or his designee, and not for the purpose of avoiding the intent or objectives of this section. 
(3)  This section is primarily for the purpose of protecting the residential property in the city against the lingering presence of commercial vehicles and the protection of property values in such districts. Therefore, any provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city or laws of this state providing for the regulation of motor vehicles are in addition to this section and whenever any provision of this Code or other ordinance or applicable statute, whether primarily for the regulation of motor vehicles or for purposes of zoning, imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of this section, then the more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations shall apply. 
(4)  The nonconforming use provisions of these regulations shall not apply to this section. 
(5)  This section shall not be construed as authorizing trucks to utilize any street or other public thoroughfare of the city over which such vehicular traffic is now or hereafter prohibited by the provisions of this Code or other ordinance or lawful order of the police department. 
(6)  Any violation of this section shall constitute an offense against the city punishable upon conviction by fine or imprisonment or both, not exceeding the maximum penalty prescribed by Section 1-9 of the City Code. In addition to the punishment hereinabove authorized, or as an alternate thereto, the provisions of this section may be enforced through the powers and authority of the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board. 
(Ord. No. 1059-93, §§ 1-3, 8-18-93; Ord. No. 1240-2000, § 3, 10-18-00) 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, former § 25-286 of the Code of Ordinances has been included herein as § 55.15. 
SECTION 56.00. - UTILITIES/EASEMENTS 

56.10. - Utility structures. 
    Except for antennas and towers which are regulated by the terms of Section 82.00 of these regulations, structures or uses required for private or public utilities such as gas, water, electric, sewage or telephone can be located within any district upon recommendation of the planning commission and approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1098-95, § 7, 5-3-95) 
56.20. - Placement of utilities. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided hereinafter, all utility lines, including, but not limited to, those required for electrical power distribution, telephone and telegraph communication, street lighting, and television signal service, shall be installed underground. Electrical power lines shall be installed at an underground depth of not less than twenty-four (24) inches below grade level, and telephone, telegraph and television cable lines installed not less than eighteen (18) inches below grade level. This section shall apply to all cables, conduits or wires forming part of a local electrical distribution system including service lines to individual properties but shall not apply to main distribution feeder electric lines delivering power to local distribution systems, nor to wires, conductors or associated apparatus and supporting structures whose exclusive function is in transmission of electrical energy between generating stations, substations and transmission lines of other utility systems. Appurtenances such as transformer boxes, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, and meter cabinets may be placed aboveground. 
(b)  Purpose of width of utility easements. Utility easements shall be not less than five (5) feet wide on all side lot lines, and not less than ten (10) feet wide on the front lot lines for each lot and seven and one-half (71/2) feet wide on the rear lot line for each lot, as needed, and approved by the City Council during the platting process. Utility easements shall be of sufficient size to allow utility vehicles access to construct, maintain and repair all utilities. 
(c)  The City Manager may authorize the Building Official to issue permits which would allow above-ground utility drops in any pre-existing and approved subdivision, which currently has above ground utilities already in place. 
(d)  All utility poles installed within the City of Rockledge shall be constructed of concrete, except in designated Historic Districts. All existing wooden utility poles when moved or replaced for any reason shall be replaced with concrete poles. Any exception to this requirement may only be authorized by the City Manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1186-99, § 6, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 1240-2000, § 4, 10-18-00) 
56.25. - Developer to pay city for street lighting poles. 
    Every developer who develops a subdivision within the city shall pay to the city one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each concrete street lighting pole within said subdivision. Said payment shall be made prior to time that the city approves installation by electrical franchise holder. 
56.30. - Location of easements. 
(a)  Utility easements shall be centered on rear and side lot lines. If utility or access easements are planned adjacent to the subdivision boundary, the full width necessary shall be provided within the proposed subdivision. Utility easements shall be identified on the plat as such with an accurate description of the nature of such easement. 
SECTION 57.00. - DRAINAGE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 57.00 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. Provisions originally numbered as § 57.00 have been renumbered as § 57.01. 

57.01. - Drainage facilities required. 
(a)  Drainage and water management facilities [shall be] designed and constructed according to the standards and requirements of this section. The term "drainage," where appropriate, shall include, but not be limited to, swales, ditches, storm sewers, seepage basins, culverts, sidedrains, retention or detention basis, crossdrains and canals. 
Note- See the editor's note to the title of § 57.00. 
57.10. - General construction methods. 
    All design and construction methods shall conform to the St. Johns River Water Management District, the City of Rockledge Specifications and following the methods published by the Florida Department of Transportation, latest editions, and (such manuals) shall serve as reference guides and standards of construction for any improvements. Said methods and manuals are hereby declared to be good engineering practice for the construction of improvements and shall be used by the city as the engineering standard for the purpose of making inspections, approved items of construction and approving constructions plans and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1554-2010, § 3, 8-18-10) 
57.11. - Construction plans and specifications generally. 
    All construction plans and specifications shall include a topographical map showing not less than one-foot contours on the NAVD of 1988, nor only of the subdivision tract but also of such necessary adjacent land to indicate the method of final discharge of surface water and shall also contain the following information: 
(1)  A street layout plan showing all necessary elevations, treatment of intersections, designed grade of pavement, the width and type of pavement and details showing the final disposal of all street draining. Sufficient topographic information shall be shown on existing outfall ditches, major drainage channels to validate drainage designs, and other drainage facilities. 
(2)  Typical sections showing details of proposed pavements, wearing surfaces, curbs, swales, canals, shoulders, slopes, drainage structures and other items of major construction. 
(Ord. No. 1554-2010, § 4, 8-18-10) 
57.12. - Construction and design requirements for water control. 
    A system shall be provided for draining all projects requiring a development order from the city including the lots, roads and streets in the subdivision. Soil types shall be considered for percolation rates and approved land usage in the engineering design. Stormwater system design shall be for thirteen (13) inches of rainfall for the one hundred (100) year twenty-four (24) hour pre vs. post event. Any facility not having an effective positive outfall shall design the stormwater management facility to retain the one hundred (100) year storm of twenty-four (24) hour event as predicted for Brevard County. Stormwater treatment systems in a community redevelopment district (CRA designated) may design to a twenty-five (25) year twenty-four (24) hour pre vs. post storm event. The system shall be designed for fifty-year life, low maintenance costs, and ease of maintenance methods. 
(a)  Off-site easements. Any off-site easements or rights-of-way which are needed to make the drainage system function shall be included in the proposal for development and made a criterion for development approval. 
(b)  Phased development. The drainage system for each phase of a development shall be capable of standing on its own if subsequent areas planned for development are not developed. 
(c)  Acceptable methodologies: 
(1)  Construction plans shall be accompanied by a comprehensive study of proposed site and stormwater drainage system. 
(2)  Upon approval of the city's public works director or his designee, professionally accepted models for calculating stormwater runoff may be used. 
(3)  The storm drainage plan may include the use of street curbs and gutters, and roadside swales as transportation arteries for the stormwater; provided, that the length and grade of the flow canal is such that the velocity flow does not exceed three (3) feet per second. (See subsection (h) hereof.) The use of swales are not allowed in the construction of new residential development, except for those shown on the individual lot grading plan, for on-site drainage, on development construction plans. 
(4)  Outfall of the development surface or storm drainage system, after satisfying all design standards for on-site retention, shall be one of the following: 
a.  Proper connection between the new development drainage system and the existing city drainage system, if, in the opinion of the city's public works director or his designee, the existing city system is adequate. 
b.  Proper connection from the new development to existing natural drainage, such as a creek, river or low wetland area is adjacent to the subdivision may be approved, if, in the opinion of the city's public works director or his designee, the existing natural system is adequate. 
c.  Proper connection from the new stormwater facility to an existing drainage ditch or canal of the city, county or water management district may be approved, provided written permission has been secured from the agency having jurisdictional control of such drainage connection. 
d.  In the event none of the methods of disposal of the stormwater from the development outlined above are readily accessible to the development, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to provide a suitable outfall for the stormwater of the new site by securing permanent easements or the purchase of additional property for the construction of roadside swales or underground storm drain through private property, so as to connect the development storm drainage system with a satisfactory disposal area. In addition, the cost of obtaining and installing such drainage conveyance and structures shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
e.  Lots shall be designed to transfer stormwater runoff to a centralized water retention area within the development in a manner acceptable to the city. 
(d)  Submission of subsoil investigation: A subsoil investigation report shall be submitted with the construction plans and shall include: 
(1)  Test borings on a minimum of five-hundred-foot intervals to a depth sufficient to locate the groundwater table in the development. 
(2)  Providing the city's public works director or his designee with such additional information may be required to ensure that the soil is suitable for the proposed development. 
(e)  Material specifications for culverts and storm sewers: 
(1)  The following pipe materials are acceptable: High density double wall polyethylene pipe, aluminum pipe and reinforced concrete pipe. 
(2)  Workmanship and pipe materials shall conform to DOT Standard Specifications, latest edition. All drainage pipes under driveways or roadways shall be concrete, unless approved by the city's public works director or his designee. 
(3)  Only reinforced concrete pipe shall be used under pavements into saltwater outfalls. Concrete for reinforced concrete box culverts shall conform to FDOT Standard Specifications, latest edition. 
(4)  Outfall retention devices shall be of reinforced concrete and aluminum materials constructed to adequately meet the outfall requirements. 
(f)  Culvert design: 
(1)  The minimum pipe size shall be twenty-four (24) inches diameter on all highways, arterials and collector streets. Local roads, marginal access streets and alleys shall require a minimum eighteen-inch (18) diameter pipe. Equivalent elliptical pipe sizes may be substituted. 
(2)  The minimum clearance between the bottom of roadway base and the top of all pipe culverts shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for the design load projected. All utility installations shall be a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches below the roadway base. 
(g)  Sizing culverts. The design velocity to be used will be in accordance with Florida Department of Transportation design standards. Minimum size for a driveway culvert is eighteen (18) inches or equivalent elliptical size unless approved by the city's public works director or his designee. 
(h)  Swales. 
(1)  A swale is a manmade trench which: 
a.  Contains contiguous area of standing or flowing water only following a rainfall event; 
b.  Is planted with or has stabilized vegetation suitable for soil stabilization, stormwater treatment flows and nutrient treatment; and 
c.  Is designed to take into account the soil percolation, slope length, and drainage so as to prevent erosion and reduce pollutant concentration of any discharge. 
d.  Is designed to take into account the soil erodability, soil percolation, slope, slope length, and drainage so as to prevent erosion and reduce pollutant concentration of any discharge. 
All swales shall be so designed as to adequately meet the particular drainage requirements of the development. 
(i)  Underdrains. In cases where there is a prevalence of soils that exhibit adverse water table characteristics, underdrains and/or fill will be required. See Exhibit 10. 
EXHIBIT 10. STANDARD DESIGN FOR SUB-SURFACE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 

(1)  Finished roads are to be constructed with a minimum crown elevation of twenty-four (24) inches above the ground water table. 
a.  Wherever road construction or lot development is planned in areas of the proposed development having soil types with unacceptable water table characteristics, underdrains and/or fill shall be provided and shown on the engineering plans. Underdrains must be designed with free gravity outlet at carefully selected discharge points. Erosion-control measures shall be provided as needed at all discharge points. 
b.  Wherever road cuts in otherwise suitable soils indicate that the finish grade swill result in a road surface-to-water table relationship that adversely exceeds the degree of limitation stated above, underdrains will be required. 
c.  Wherever roadway construction reveals unexpected water bearing strata that would cause deterioration of the pavement, underdrains will be required even though not shown on the plans. 
d.  Filtering media shall consist of stone, gravel or slag, and shall contain no friable materials. 
(j)  Required submittals. The applicant shall include in the construction plans a master drainage map showing all existing and proposed features. The map is to be prepared on a twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheet on a scale not less than one (1) inch equaling sixty (60) feet. Size and scale may be adjusted for the larger development based on the approval of the city's public works director or his designee. Said drainage map shall reflect inclusion of the following criteria and features: 
(1)  On-site retention of the first inch of runoff. 
(2)  Drainage drawings shall show: 
a.  All areas draining to the proposed development and all area tributaries to proposed structures. 
b.  Topographical information with sufficient elevations to verify the locations of all ridges, streams and other water resources. 
c.  Notes pertaining to existing standing water, areas of heavy seepage or springs. 
d.  Existing drainage features such as swales, roadways and ponds. 
e.  Proposed development layout. 
(Ord. No. 1022-91, § 10, 12-18-91; Ord. No. 1120-96, §§ 12-15, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1240-2000, § 5, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1554-2010, § 5, 8-18-10) 
57.13. - Obstruction of drainage facilities prohibited. 
    No person shall obstruct the flow of storm water by obstructing any ditch or drain on the several alleys and streets of the city in any manner whatsoever, or any natural drain whatsoever, located within the city. 
57.14. - Erosion control. 
    Seeding, mulching and/or sodding shall be performed as required to prevent undue erosion during all construction activities. The developer shall be required to keep accumulations of sand and earth out of the curb and gutter. Temporary siltation basis [basins] may be required during construction. Maintenance shall be provided by the developer for the two-year period of the road guarantee and for each lot until final inspection is passed. 
57.15. - Retention area standards. 
    All retention areas in the city shall be wet retention areas, except in unusual circumstances where it would not be viable for the stormwater drainage system to use wet retention and an alternative retention method is approved by the Saint Johns River Water Management District, a licensed Florida Engineer, and the City of Rockledge. The City of Rockledge shall have final determination of the system to be used, if not wet retention. 
(1)  Fencing: All dedicated public retention areas shall be fenced by a chain link fence six (6) feet in height with an access gate of sufficient size to allow easy ingress and egress by municipal maintenance vehicles and equipment. Any private retention area that has side slopes steeper than a 1 to 5 slope/grade ratio (meaning one (1) foot of vertical descent for each five (5) feet of horizontal extension), shall be fenced in a like manner as stated above. 
(2)  Slope requirements: The slope/grade ratio of all sides of private retention areas shall not be greater (steeper) than 1 to 5 from the outer boundary of the retention area to an imaginary line two (2) feet below the normal water level. From a point two (2) feet below normal water level to the bottom of the retention area the slope/grade ratio shall be no steeper than 1 to 2. A minimum depth from the bottom of the retention area to the normal water level shall be five (5) feet. 
(3)  Retention area designations: The entire area holding retained water from the normal water level inward toward the center of the retention area shall be identified as a separate easement/tract area known as "stormwater retention area easement/tract" on construction drawings and on any final linens. The area extending outward from the stormwater retention area easement/tract to the outer perimeter of the entire approved surface stormwater management system shall hereinafter be described as a drainage maintenance access easement which shall be deemed another separate easement/tract to be known as a "drainage maintenance access easement/tract," which will radiate out a minimum of sixteen (16) feet from the outer edge of the stormwater retention area easement/tract, and have a minimum of one (1) maintenance access route, having a width of not less than sixteen (16) feet, connected to a dedicated public road right-of-way as part of the drainage maintenance access easement/tract. Both of the aforementioned easement/tract areas shall be titled to or given to a homeowners association or other legal entity which shall expressly assume liability and responsibility for the maintenance and upkeep thereof. All drainage maintenance access easement/tract areas shall be kept free of all structures, including but not limited to fences, docks, trees, and seawalls, except common areas as approved by the City of Rockledge during the site plan review process. Both easement/tract areas described above may be identified as one (1) "surface stormwater retention area easement/tract" on the face of any proposed final linen, subdivision plat, or commercial project. 
(4)  Docks and amenities: Docks may be allowed in a stormwater retention area easement/tract provided the developer has included in such an easement/tract a common area titled in the homeowners association or other legal entity for the specific use of constructing a dock or other structure allowed by this Code or the stormwater retention easement/tract has been identified and included in by ownership title to the upland lot or property. Such structures shall not be constructed until after obtaining the correct permits from the City of Rockledge. Access routes from a dedicated public roadway to the stormwater retention area easement/tract shall be placed between every common area identified for the construction of a dock or other structure. Common areas will be identified through the site plan review process and be approved by the planning commission and the Rockledge City Council. In no case shall the city allow any fences, seawalls or other non-dock structure to be built in the stormwater retention area easement or tract. 
(5)  Maintenance of retention and access tracts: All private stormwater drainage systems shall be maintained by a homeowners association or other private legal entity. Such maintenance responsibility shall be expressly stated in a declaration of restrictive covenants recorded in the Official Record Books of Brevard County, Florida, pertaining to the subject development. Such language shall state substantially the following: 
    "The undersigned (developer's name) and its successors and assigns hereby expressly assumes full responsibility for the improvement, maintenance and upkeep of any and all stormwater retention areas and drainage maintenance access easement/tracts in this development (plat), and the City of Rockledge has expressly renounced any responsibility, duty or liability on the part of said city for the improvement, maintenance or upkeep of said stormwater retention areas and drainage maintenance access easement/tracts." 
    In addition, the recorded plat of any development having a private stormwater drainage system shall include a statement on the face of the plat disclaiming any responsibility on the part of the City of Rockledge for the construction, maintenance or upkeep of any part of the private stormwater drainage system, and identifying the entity responsible and liable for the maintenance and upkeep of the entire stormwater drainage system in conjunction with the platting process and be approved by city staff. The final linen shall identify the party(ies) responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the stormwater retention easement/tracts and drainage maintenance access easement/tracts. The use of all easement/tract areas mentioned in this section shall be vested in the legal entity(ies) having responsibility for the maintenance and upkeep thereof. All stormwater retention area easements/tracts and drainage maintenance access easements/tracts as shown on any development or subdivision plat and as shown on any construction drawing, and shall not be used in making a determination of the size of the required minimal lot size, or for setback purposes, as required and identified in each zoning district. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, mowing of grass, weed control, aerator repairs, and draw down structure maintenance. 
(6)  Wet detention systems: All wet detention systems shall be of orifice type, except when conditions show the wet detention system would not be viable and an alternative system is approved by the Saint Johns River Water Management District, a Florida Licensed Engineer, and the City of Rockledge. 
(Ord. No. 1039-92, § 1, 9-16-92; Ord. No. 1080-94, § 1, 7-6-94) 
SECTION 57.20. - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION REQUIRED 

57.21. - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Extra hazard occupancies are occupancies or portions of other occupancies where quantity and combustibility of contents is very high, [or] flammable liquids, dust, lint or other materials are present introducing the probability of rapidly developing fires with high rates of heat release. This class includes occupancies such as: 
Leather goods manufacturing 
Machine shops 
Metal working 
Cold storage warehouses 
Mercantiles 
Flour mills 
Paper and pulp mills 
Cotton picker and opening operations 
Plastics manufacturing and processing 
Feed mills 
    Life safety code means the life safety code promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association and which life safety code is by reference adopted as part of this Code of Ordinances. 
    Light hazard occupancies are those buildings where the quantity or combustibility of the contents is low, and fires with relatively low rates of heat release are expected. This class includes occupancies such as: 
Churches 
Clubs 
Educational 
Institutional 
Residential, other than single family dwellings 
Libraries, except large stack rooms 
Museums 
Offices, including data processing 
Restaurant seating areas 
Theaters and auditoriums, excluding stages and prosceniums 
    The requirements for the installation of automatic wet pipe sprinkler systems in light hazard occupancies shall apply to all light hazard portions of the occupancies listed above or similar light hazard occupancies. 
    Such requirements may also apply to small stores and similar occupancies incidental to the properties listed above; provided, that such occupancies do not individually exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area. Such occupancies which individually exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area shall apply the requirements for the installation of automatic wet pipe sprinkler systems. In other areas used for ordinary or extra hazard occupancy, the requirements for such areas shall apply. 
    Mixed occupancies are those buildings where a combination of one (1) or more of light hazard, ordinary, or extra hazard occupancies exist in the same building. 
    Ordinary hazard occupancies are: 
(1)  Group 1. Those buildings where combustibility is low, quantity of combustibles is moderate, stock piles of combustibles do not exceed eight (8) feet and fires with moderate rates of heat release are expected. This class includes occupancies such as: 
Automobile parking garages 
Bakeries 
Beverage manufacturing 
Canneries 
Electronic plants 
Glass and glass products manufacturing 
Laundries 
Dairy products manufacturing and processing 
(2)  Group 2. Those buildings where quantity and combustibility of contents is moderate, stock piles do not exceed twelve (12) feet, and fires with moderate rate of heat release are expected. This class includes occupancies such as: 
Manufacturing 
Cereal mills 
Chemical plants, ordinary 
Cold storage warehouses 
Confectionery products manufacturing 
Distilleries 
Textile manufacturing 
Leather goods manufacturing 
Libraries with large stack room areas 
Mercantiles 
Machine shops 
Metal working 
Printing and publishing 
Tobacco products manufacturing 
(3)  Group 3. Those buildings where quantity or combustibility of contents is high, and fires or high rate of heat release are expected. This class includes occupancies such as: 
Manufacturing 
Feed mills 
Paper and pulp mills 
Paper process plants 
Tire manufacturing 
Exhibition halls 
Piers and wharves 
Warehouses (having moderate to higher combustibility of contents, such as paper, household furniture, paint, general storage, whiskey, etc.) 
    Sprinkler system, for fire protection purposes, is an integrated system of underground and overhead piping designed in accordance with fire protection engineering standards. The installation includes a water supply, such as a gravity tank, fire pump, reservoir or pressure tank or connection by underground piping to a city main. The portion of the sprinkler system above ground is a network of specially sized or hydraulically designed piping installed in a building, structure or area, generally overhead, and to which sprinklers are connected into a systematic pattern. The system includes a controlling valve and a device for actuating an alarm when the system is in operation. The system is usually activated by heat from a fire and discharges water over the fire area. 
    Wet pipe sprinkler system means a system employing automatic sprinklers attached to a piping system containing water and connected to a water supply so that water discharges immediately from sprinklers opened by a fire. 
57.22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1186-99, § 7, adopted July 21, 1999, repealed Section 57.22 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to light and ordinary hazard occupancies. See the Table of Amendments. 
57.23. - Extra hazard occupancies. 
    Those buildings classified as extra hazard occupancies as defined herein shall be fully protected with an automatic wet pipe sprinkler system, and alarm facilities connected to an approved monitoring company, regardless of height or type of construction of the building. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 2, 8-20-97) 
57.24. - Nursing and convalescent homes and hospitals. 
    All buildings which are utilized as nursing or convalescent homes and all hospitals shall be equipped with an automatic wet pipe sprinkler system and alarm facilities regardless of height or type of construction of the building; except, in such instances where such buildings or hospitals are exempt from the requirements of this section by the state fire marshal or the accrediting agency. 
57.25. - Mixed occupancy. 
    Those buildings classified as mixed occupancy, as defined herein, shall meet the most stringent requirements throughout the building unless the occupancies shall be separated by a fireproof wall of a fire duration period satisfactory to the city fire chief. Such fireproof wall must be able to prevent the spread of flame or smoke from one (1) occupancy to another. 
57.26. - Manner of installing sprinkler systems. 
    Whenever the installation of a sprinkler system, and specifically the installation of a wet pipe sprinkler system, is required by the provisions of this section, such installation shall be done in compliance with the standards, requirements and specifications for the installation of a pipe sprinkler system as prescribed by Volume 6 of the National Fire Codes, 1994 Edition, also known as NFPA No. 13, 1994 Edition. Such standards for the installation of sprinkler systems are by reference adopted as part of this Code by Section 58 of this part. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 3, 8-20-97) 
57.27. - Waivers. 
(a)  For the construction of new buildings, as well as additions or replacement construction as referred to in Section 57.28, the owner of the property, or his authorized agent, may apply to the city fire chief for a waiver of the requirements set forth hereinabove. Such waiver application for new construction shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit by the city building official. Upon receiving the application for the waiver, the fire chief shall make a determination whether the installation of an automatic wet pipe sprinkler system is required, and, where applicable, whether the installation of alarm facilities is required to provide for safer evacuation of the structure in question. The criteria and standards for the determination of whether the installation of an automatic wet pipe sprinkler system is necessary to provide for the safer evacuation of the structure are those criteria adopted in Section 58.00 of this part. The decision of the fire chief on whether to grant or deny the waiver shall be in writing and shall state the specific reasons which justify the approval or denial of the waiver. Such decision in writing may have exhibits or drawings attached thereto if such exhibits are necessary to illustrate the basis for the decision. In the event a waiver is granted, no change planned shall be permitted without a thorough review of the waiver by the fire chief. 
(b)  The fire chief shall have twenty (20) days from the date the application for the waiver is filed to submit his written decision to the city clerk. The fire chief shall also submit his decision in writing within this twenty (20) day period to the applicant. 
(c)  In the event the fire chief shall disapprove or deny the application for a waiver, or in the event the applicant claims that the provisions of this section do not apply to his structure, or the applicant claims that the true intent and meaning of this section have been misconstrued or misinterpreted by the fire chief, the applicant may appeal such decision of the fire chief to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date the decision is filed with the city clerk. 
57.28. - Compliance when structure enlarged or reconstructed. 
    In the event a structural addition is made to an existing building or in the event such existing building is enlarged or expanded, the owner of such building shall comply with the requirements for the particular type of occupancy as set forth in this section for the addition, expansion or enlargement of the structure. In the event an existing building is destroyed or damaged by any cause, and such damage exceeds fifty (50) per cent of the fair market value of such existing building, then and in such event, the owner of such building shall comply with the requirements for the particular type of occupancy as set forth in this section for the rebuilt, repaired or replaced building. Fair market value for the purpose of this section shall be deemed the valuation of such structure by the county property appraiser in his assessment for the levying of ad valorem taxes for the tax year in which such damage was sustained. 
57.29. - Standpipe and hose systems. 
    All buildings which exceed thirty-six (36) feet in height or three (3) stories, whichever is least, shall be protected with an installed Class III standpipe and hose system as prescribed in standards for the installation of standpipe and hose systems by reference adopted as part of this Code by Section 58.00 of this part. 
    These requirements do not eliminate the provisions for portable fire extinguisher installation as prescribed in the standards adopted by reference as part of this Code by Section 58.00 of this part. 
    In case of mixed occupancies, the most stringent requirements shall be met throughout the building unless the occupancies shall be separated by a fire wall of a time duration satisfactory to the fire chief. Such fire wall must be able to prevent the spread of flame or smoke from one (1) type of occupancy to another. 
57.30. - Water supply. 
    Planning for adequate water supply will be based on the maximum fire load anticipated and shall be installed and operational prior to the start of major construction or the delivery of substantial amounts of combustible materials whichever event first occurs. Water delivery volume and rates shall be determined by the fire chief through utilization of recognized standards, primarily, the National Fire Codes. 
57.31. - Required access. 
    Adequate access to all areas of the construction site and finished facility shall be established in the initial planning and design of the structure. The basic requirements shall include the provision that a water source must be so located that no hose line will be required which will exceed three hundred fifty (350) feet in length. Adequate water supply sources shall not be located further than eight (8) feet from an improved and accessible surfaced roadway. 
57.32. - Alarm system. 
    Fire alarm systems shall be installed in accordance with the Life Safety Code in every apartment building, unless provided with automatic sprinkler protection in accordance with Section 6-4 of the Life Safety Code, or unless provided with automatic fire alarms in accordance with Section 6-3 of the Life Safety Code, if such apartment building is more than three (3) stories in height or more than twelve (12) apartment units. Such alarm systems shall be connected to an approved monitoring company. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 4, 8-20-97) 
57.33. - Emergency lighting. 
    When emergency lighting is required it shall be installed in accordance with requirements of the Life Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 4, 8-20-97) 
57.34. - Flammable materials. 
    The use of construction materials which, by their nature, generate undue fire hazard will not be permitted. These materials shall include but are not limited to the following: Flammable fiberglass, flammable plastic and vinyl, interior or exterior finishes which have high flame spread characteristics, wood shakes or shingles or any other roofing material which is easily ignitable or encourages the spread of fire and any flammable decorative materials; provided, that wood shakes or shingles which have been chemically treated to be fire retardant may be used; provided, that the individual desiring to use such wood shakes or shingles shall provide test documents which verify that treatment has been used and that treatment will continue to be effective under the prolonged exposure to the coastal environment in the city. 
57.35. - Elevators. 
    Elevators shall not constitute a required means of exit. When structures are in excess of three (3) stories in height or exceed thirty-six (36) feet in height, whichever is least, and such structures are equipped with automatic elevators, one (1) or more of such elevators shall be designated and equipped for fire emergency use by fire fighters. The key operation shall transfer the elevator operation to a manual operation and bring the elevator to the ground or first floor for use by the fire service. Such emergency elevator shall be situated as to be readily accessible by the fire department. 
57.36. - Fire hydrant location in subdivisions. 
(a)  In all subdivisions with a public water supply, the applicant shall install sufficient fire hydrants in order that fire hydrants are spaced five hundred (500) feet apart (measured from fire hydrant to fire hydrant) or at the discretion of the fire chief. As a minimum standard, fire flows of at least one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute shall be provided in a single-family subdivision, at a residual pressure of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square inch. 
(b)  All standards and requirements of the American Insurance Association (National Board of Fire Underwriters) are hereby adopted. 
SECTION 57.40. - GARBAGE AND TRASH 

57.41. - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
(1)  Bundled garden trash means garden trash which is gathered into bundles and tied securely so that each bundle does not exceed four (4) feet in any dimension, weigh more than fifty (50) pounds overall, nor contain any single branch, limb, piece or item which exceeds four (4) inches in diameter. 
(2)  Construction debris means wood, stone, brick, cement, concrete, roofing and other refuse building materials usually left over from a construction, repair or remodeling project, excepting, however, debris from an original construction project. 
(3)  Containerized trash means refuse which is placed in disposable containers and including bundled garden trash, each unit of which shall not exceed three (3) feet in any dimension nor weigh in excess of fifty (50) pounds. 
(4)  Curbside means by the side of the curb of the public street or road upon which a parcel of property fronts, within a distance of five (5) feet from the traveled portion of such public street or road, and on such a location as to not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle passage on such street or road. 
(5)  Curbside placement means the placement of recyclable materials, garbage, bundled garden trash, and other authorized forms of rubbish and at the times, [and] as prescribed by the provisions of this section. 
(6)  Disposable trash containers means plastic bags and cardboard boxes which shall be nonreturnable and shall be collected and packed into the truck as is. 
(7)  Duplex residential unit means a dwelling unit in a building designed and constructed to be occupied as the separate residences of (2) single-families. 
(8)  Garbage means all vegetable and animal matter, food and other refuse from a kitchen, market, store or elsewhere, including all matter that decays, attracts flies or creates disagreeable odors. 
(9)  Hazardous waste means solid waste, or a combination of solid wastes, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly transported, disposed of, stored, treated or otherwise managed. 
(10)  Miscellaneous refuse means small items of refuse which are incident to the ordinary conduct of the household, not included in the definitions of "garbage," "rubbish," or "trash" herein. 
(11)  Multiple residence complex means the building or buildings comprising a separate and identifiable multiple-family residential complex designed and constructed to be occupied as the separate residences of more than three (3) single-families, including but not in way of limitation, apartment houses, hotels, motels, townhouses, condominiums and cooperatives. 
(12)  Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag with securing twist tie. An untied plastic bag shall not be an approved container. 
(13)  Recyclable materials means any material which can be recovered from the solid waste stream and reused in manufacturing, agriculture, power production or other processes and which include at a minimum the following: 
(a)  Newspapers (daily newspapers, no phone books, or magazines); 
(b)  Glass jars and bottles (clear, brown and green glass, food and beverage jars or bottles); 
(c)  Plastic bottles (milk, water and soft drink bottles); and 
(d)  Aluminum cans (soft drink and beer cans). 
(14)  Recycling container means a portable container or bin approved by the City, used for the storage, curbside placement and collection of recyclable materials, and identifying the recyclable materials at curbside. 
(15)  Recycling program means the program designated by the Rockledge City Council for meeting the solid waste reduction goals as mandated by the Solid Waste Management Act of 1988, Section 403.706 Florida Statutes, and any subsequent amendment thereto. 
(16)  Rubbish means tree limbs, tree trunks, tree stumps, bushes, boxes, planks, boards, old furniture, junk, scrap iron, tin and other articles of similar nature and large in size, excepting, however, materials discarded in the clearing of a heretofore uncleared lot. 
(17)  Single residential unit means any dwelling place occupied by one (1) family. 
(18)  Trash means yard clippings, grass cuttings, leaves and all other accumulations of similar nature and small in size. 
(19)  Triplex residential unit means a dwelling unit in a building designed and constructed to be occupied as the separate residences of three (3) single families. 
(20)  Wheeled container means an eighty (80) gallon plastic covered container permanently attached to a wheeled tubular steel cart designed for use by residential units for storage and curbside placement of garbage. 
(Ord. No. 989-91, § 1, 1-9-91) 
57.42. - Penalties. 
    Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an offense against the city punishable upon conviction by fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each offense, and when a violation occurs in, on or upon private property in which the violator owns a proprietary interest the provisions of this section shall also be enforceable by proceedings before the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board or before the Rockledge Nuisance Abatement Board. 
57.43. - Accumulation prohibited. 
    An owner or occupant of property within the city shall not allow garbage, trash, debris, refuse or rubbish to accumulate thereon, which would likely become a breeding place for snakes, rats, flies, gnats, mosquitoes or other harmful or dangerous creatures or insects, or be likely to cause personal injury or property damage by human illness or fire, or which may become a hazard to traffic on the public highways and streets of the city, or to permit any accumulation thereon of garbage, trash, refuse, debris or rubbish except during periods between city pickups. 
57.44. - Commercial, residential, business and institutional property maintenance. 
    All owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of commercial, residential business or institutional establishments shall maintain their premises (property) in a clean and litter-free manner, including sidewalks, parking lots, grass strips and contiguous alleys, curbs or rights-of-way up to the pavement edge of any public street. No person shall sweep into or deposit in or on any street or on any sidewalk litter from any building or property. 
57.45. - Correction of violations of Sections 57.43 or 57.44. 
    Any owner or occupant of property who permits the same to become in the condition described in Sections 57.43 or 57.44 shall be proceeded against as for the maintenance of a nuisance as provided by this Code. 
57.46. - Offensive deposits. 
    No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited on any land, public square, street, alley, vacant lot or unoccupied lot, the waters of the Indian River, or any other watercourse or ditch within the city, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish or other noxious, malodorous or offensive matter. 
57.47. - Permitting scattering from premises. 
    No person who shall own or occupy a premise or premises in the city shall permit garbage, trash, refuse, debris or rubbish to be scattered from such premise or premises into the public streets or alleys of the city. 
57.48. - Burying garbage prohibited. 
    No garbage shall be buried upon premises upon which such garbage was accumulated, or elsewhere, within the city. 
57.49. - Construction and demolition sites. 
(a)  Receptacles required. It shall be unlawful for any construction and/or demolition contractor to fail to provide bulk, detachable or other type containers on the construction or demolition site sufficient for the storage and collection of loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap material and other trash produced by those working on the construction/demolition site. All such material shall be containerized. The number of containers required at the work site and the frequency of disposal shall be determined by the volume of refuse produced. 
(b)  Adjacent areas. Dirt, sand, construction materials or other debris cast upon any adjacent public or private property (nonconstruction site) as a result of construction or demolition activities shall be removed by the construction/demolition site contractor no later than the end of the workday of the incident or earlier if said material shall cause a public nuisance. 
57.50. - Litter from loads on vehicles. 
(a)  Proper vehicle loading. No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any roadway in the city unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping shifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped only for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on the road surface for cleaning or maintenance purposes. 
(b)  Covering loads on vehicles. It is the duty of every owner and driver, jointly and severally, of any vehicle hauling upon any public road or highway in the city dirt, sand, gravel, silica, or other similar aggregate, or trash, garbage, debris, or yard trash, and tree branches to prevent such material from falling, blowing or in any way escaping from such vehicle. Covering and securing loads with a close-fitting tarpaulin or other appropriate cover of adequate size is required. 
(c)  Vehicular spillage. Any person operating a vehicle traveling on a public right-of-way from which vehicle any objects have fallen or escaped causing unsightly litter, potential obstruction to motorists or damage to vehicles shall immediately cause the public property to be cleaned of debris or litter or shall pay for any cleaning costs incurred by the city. 
57.51. - Prohibiting unauthorized deposits in containers of others. 
    No person shall place or deposit any garbage, trash, refuse, substance or material in any container, dumpster or other form of garbage or trash receptacle on the private property of another without the prior consent of the owner or party having lawful possession of the real property upon which the container, dumpster or receptacle is located. 
57.52. - Responsibility of city; private collection, disposal or transportation. 
    The city by and through its proper departments shall be responsible for the collection and disposal of all garbage, trash, refuse, recyclable materials, debris and rubbish within the city, and no person shall collect and dispose of or transport over the streets of the city any garbage, trash, refuse, recyclable materials, debris or rubbish without first obtaining a written permit from the city to do so. 
(Ord. No. 989-91, § 2, 1-9-91) 
57.53. - Enforcement of collection procedures. 
    The city manager or his designated representatives are assigned the responsibility for enforcement of waste collection and recycling program procedures enumerated herein. 
(Ord. No. 989-91, § 2, 1-9-91) 
57.54. - Time schedule for city collection. 
    The time schedule for the collection of garbage, trash, refuse, recyclable materials, debris and rubbish in various parts of the city shall be established by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 989-91, § 2, 1-9-91) 
57.55. - Wheeled container and recycling container required. 
    The city shall not collect or remove any garbage or recyclable materials from any single family dwelling, duplex unit or triplex unit unless such garbage is placed at curbside in a wheeled container, or unless such recyclable material is placed at curbside in a recycling container, as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 989-91, § 2, 1-9-91) 
57.56. - Containers declared property of city. 
    All wheeled garbage containers and recycling containers furnished on accordance with this section shall at all times remain the property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 989-91, § 2, 1-9-91) 
57.57. - Fee for container. 
    No building permit for the construction of any new single family dwelling, duplex or triplex shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall first pay to the city at the time of the filing of the application for such permit, in addition to any other fee or charge properly payable under the ordinances of the city, a fee computed at the rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per dwelling unit described in the application. Such fee shall entitle the applicant to delivery and right to use for garbage collection and recycling purposes only one (1) wheeled garbage container and one (1) recycling container at each dwelling unit described in the application. When the certificate of occupancy is issued for such new residential construction the city shall deliver one (1) wheeled container and one (1) recycling container to the premises of each dwelling unit for which the said sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) has been paid, said containers to be used only for the collection of garbage and recyclable materials at said premises. In the event a wheeled container and/or recycling container furnished by the city for use at any premises shall become lost, stolen, or unavailable for use due to any reason other than normal wear and tear, the occupant of such premises shall forthwith pay the city the sum of the replacement cost, plus a reasonable administrative fee for a new wheeled garbage container and/or recycling container to replace the one which has become lost, stolen or otherwise unavailable. If the occupant is not the owner of the premises and the occupant shall fail to pay the replacement cost plus a reasonable administrative fee for the replacement container, then the owner of such premises shall pay for the replacement container. No such replacement container shall be issued or delivered to any premises within the city until such replacement fee and reasonable administrative fee have been paid to the city. 
(Ord No. 989-91, § 2, 1-9-91) 
57.58. - Containers for commercial and professional establishments, multiple residence premises. 
(a)  The owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of each commercial and professional establishment with the city, and the owner, lessee, condominium or cooperative association or corporation, or other head of the management and operation of each multiple residence premises within the city, shall provide and maintain, without expense to the city, a refuse container as hereinafter described and shall cause all garbage, trash and other refuse of such commercial or professional establishment, and all garbage, trash and other refuse of the persons residing in such multiple residence premises, to be deposited in said refuse container. Said refuse container shall be maintained in a position and location designated by the city manager on the premises of each establishment and multiple residence premises so as to be readily accessible to the city's pickup truck and equipment. 
(1)  The refuse container shall be enclosed on three (3) sides by an opaque fence or wall six (6) feet in height, constructed, erected and maintained at the property owner's expense. The enclosure may be constructed of PVC, concrete or chain link with slats. 
(2)  Wood construction materials should not be used for the enclosure. 
(3)  The area within the enclosure shall be kept clean and free of litter and the lid(s) of the container shall be kept closed at all times. 
(b)  The refuse container to be provided and maintained as aforesaid by commercial and professional establishments having a volume and quantity of refuse which can be contained in one thirty-two (32) gallon container pending pickup by the city under the city's routine schedule of pickup service shall be a thirty-two (32) gallon galvanized metal garbage can with two (2) handles and a lid. 
(c)  The refuse container for all other commercial and professional establishments and all multiple residence complexes within the city shall be a Dempster Dumpster compatible with the city's pickup equipment, and of a size to be determined by the city manager. As criteria for determining the size of the Dempster Dumpster to be provided and maintained by a commercial or professional establishment or by a multiple residence complex, the city manager shall take into consideration the commercial or residential character of the premises involved; the volume of refuse-producing activities carried on or to be carried on at the premises; the city's past history and experience, if any, with refuse collection at the premises; the anticipated, projected or proposed refuse collection requirements for the premises; the city's policies, schedules and program for the pickup of refuse at the location of the premises; the recommendations of the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the commercial or professional establishment involved; the recommendations of the owner, lessee, condominium association, cooperative corporation or other head of the management and operation of the multiple residence complex involved; the recommendations of the head of the city's sanitation department; and any other facts material and pertinent to a fair and reasonable determination of the size of the Dempster Dumpster. 
(d)  The decision of the city manager, based upon the criteria herein set forth, shall be conclusive and final in any issue arising as to the adequacy of a thirty-two (32) gallon garbage can to contain the refuse of a particular commercial or professional establishment, or as to the necessity for a commercial or professional establishment to obtain a Dempster Dumpster, or as to the size of the Dempster Dumpster to be required in any instance. 
(e)  The city sanitation department may refuse to collect refuse from any commercial or professional establishment or multiple residence complex in the city which fails to provide and maintain a refuse container in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Commercial business or institutional establishments shall store their trash in containers so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about their establishment. Approved methods of containerization include, but are not limited to, bulk containers. All containers must have lids or covers. Covers must be kept closed at all times. Spillage and overflow must be cleaned up immediately and shall be the responsibility of the owner or lessee of the premises. 
Editor's note- It should be noted that section 2 of Ord. No. 1275-2002 states that all properties affected by Section 57.58(a) shall be brought into compliance therewith by October 31, 2004, after which they shall be subject to code enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 1275-2002, § 1, 7-3-02) 
57.59. - Containers to be clean, covered, in good repair. 
    No person shall fail or neglect to keep all containers required by this section clean and sanitary, tightly covered and in good repair. 
57.60. - Use of unauthorized containers. 
    No person shall use a container other than those herein defined as a receptacle for garbage, trash, refuse, or recyclable materials, except containerized trash bundles as herein defined. 
(Ord. No. 989-91, § 3, 1-9-91) 
57.61. - Interference with containers or waste placed for collection. 
    No person shall overhaul, molest or interfere with any container or the contents thereof, or adjacent containerized trash, set out for collection or for emptying or removal by the city, unless by permission of the superintendent of public works. 
57.62. - Manner of disposal for city collection. 
(a)  All recyclable materials as herein defined shall be separated from other garbage and placed in a recycling container at curbside at designated times for collection by the city. Recyclable materials shall be washed, free of liquids, and have the lids and caps removed from all items placed within the recycling container. 
(b)  All garbage other than recyclable materials shall be free of liquids, bagged separately from other trash, refuse and waste materials, and be deposited in a covered wheeled or other container approved by the city, and placed at curbside in accordance with the city's garbage collection schedule. 
(c)  Trash shall be placed and kept in a container provided for such purpose, which container shall always be kept covered. 
(d)  Trash in excess of the capacity of a wheeled container shall only be collected as "containerized trash" (as defined in Section 57.41) when placed adjacent to a wheeled container at curbside on regular collection days. 
(e)  Rubbish or debris shall not be placed or kept in a wheeled container, but shall instead be placed for collection as follows: 
(1)  Small items of rubbish and debris shall be placed at curbside in the form of containerized trash or bundled garden trash; and 
(2)  Items of rubbish and debris not susceptible of containerizing or bundling as herein defined shall be stacked at curbside. Trees and limbs shall not be over four (4) inches in diameter, and shall be cut in lengths not exceeding four (4) feet long. Tree stumps shall be cut up into sections not exceeding fifty (50) pounds in weight per section. 
(Ord. No. 989-91, § 4, 1-9-91) 
57.63. - Location of containers; placement, removal for collection. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the occupant of each single residential unit, duplex residential unit and triplex residential unit to place the wheeled container and recycling container provided by the city for the collection of refuse, on the assigned collection day, at front curbside location within a distance of five (5) feet from the travelled portion of the public street or road adjacent to such premises in such a manner as not to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular passage; except that the superintendent of public works may require the wheeled container or recycling container to be placed on any side of a property for reasons of topography or efficiency. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the occupant of each single residential unit, duplex residential and triplex residential unit to place the wheeled container or recycling container at appropriate curbside location prior to 7:00 a.m. on the morning of the scheduled arrival date of the sanitation truck. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the occupant of each single residential unit, duplex residential and triplex residential unit to remove the wheeled container or recycling container from curbside location to storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting such premises; such removal shall be accomplished not later than 7:00 p.m. on the day the contents thereof are emptied and collected. 
(d)  Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential unit who is disabled to the extent that he is incapable of moving the wheeled container or recycling container and [who] because of such disability shall obtain a certificate of exemption from the city manager or the superintendent of public works, shall not be required to place the wheeled container or recycling container at curbside as required by the provisions of this section. This subsection shall not apply unless all of the persons in a residential unit capable of moving the wheeled container are disabled and obtain such exemption certificate. 
(Ord. No. 989-91, § 5, 1-9-91) 
57.64. - Repair of damaged containers; charge authorized. 
    The owner or occupant of every improved premises within the city which is furnished a wheeled container or recycling container by the city, shall be liable for any damage to the aforesaid container and shall be liable for the expense of repairs which shall be required other than normal wear and tear. Such repair shall be made by the city and billed to the occupant. If for any reason an occupant shall fail to pay such charges, then the owner of such improved premises shall be liable for the payment thereof. The charges shall be the actual cost of labor and materials. 
(Ord. No. 989-91, § 5, 1-9-91) 
57.65. - Notice, picking up of container when premises vacated. 
    The owner or occupant of a single residential unit, duplex residential unit or triplex residential unit within the city, who intends to vacate such residential unit and who has previously been issued a wheeled container, or recycling container, shall notify the city sanitation department of such intent prior to vacating such residential unit and the city sanitation department will pick up the wheeled container and recycling container and issue a receipt to such owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 989-91, § 5, 1-9-91) 
57.66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1323-2003, § 1, adopted September 17, 2003, deleted § 57.66. Formerly, such section pertained to garbage collection fees and derived from Ord. No. 989-91, § 5, 1-9-91; Ord. No. 1029-92, § 1, 2-19-92; Ord. No. 1042-92, § 1, 12-2-92; Ord. No. 1251-2001, § 1, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 1281-2002, § 1, 8-21-02. See Section 9-18 of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances for new provisions. 
SECTION 57.70. - WASTE WATER TREATMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions to implement Sections 57.70 through 57.79 is entitled the "Requirements and Standards for Direct and Indirect Discharges into the Wastewater Collection and Treatment System of the City of Rockledge." and is attached to Ordinance 1129-96 as an Exhibit "A". Ordinance 1129-96 and Exhibit "A" are on file and available for inspection in the Office of the City Clerk. 
Editor's note- Section 57.70 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. Provisions originally numbered as § 57.70 have been renumbered as § 57.70.1. 

57.70.1. - Septic tank required. 
    Unless connected with the municipal sewer system as required by this Code, every residence or place of business within the city shall be equipped with a septic tank and connections of a capacity and efficiency to safety dispose of all body excreta and refuse which may be deposited therein. 
Note- See the editor's note to the title of § 57.70. 
57.71. - Inspection of septic tanks: correction of defects. 
(a)  The building official shall inspect all septic tanks as often as necessary to ascertain the disposal efficiency, and in cases of defects therein or violations hereof, the official shall forthwith notify the owner or occupant in writing. 
(b)  Where the owner or occupant shall fail to comply with the written notice within a time to be specified therein, but not to exceed thirty (30) days, the official shall cause the defect or violation to be corrected and the cost shall constitute a lien on the property and shall be collected in the manner provided by law. 
57.72. - Sewer connection or septic tank required. 
    Every residence and building in which human beings reside, are employed or congregate, shall have a sanitary water closet that is connected with either the city sewer system or an approved type of septic tank. 
57.73. - Septic tanks to be approved type. 
    No septic tank other than those approved by the state department of health and rehabilitative services shall be constructed within the city. 
57.74. - Allowing improper disposal. 
    No person shall permit the disposal of any human excreta on any property leased or rented by him, or as the agent therefor, except as provided by this section. 
57.75. - Responsibility for maintenance of house sewer. 
    Every owner of the property shall be responsible for maintaining and keeping clean the sewer pipe leading and connecting from the plumbing system to the city sewers. 
57.76. - Discontinuing water for failure to maintain house sewer. 
(a)  Failure of the owner of any property to maintain and keep clean the pipe leading from the plumbing system to the city sewer shall give the city the right to cut off the water to the property. The water shall not be reconnected until the sewer pipe is cleaned and maintained properly. 
(b)  Where the owner of property has his own private water supply, the city shall have the right to cut off such water supply to the plumbing system, and the owner shall not reconnect the supply until the sewer pipe leading from the plumbing system to the city main has been maintained and cleaned and put into proper condition. 
57.77. - Obstructing sewers generally. 
    No person shall do any act or thing which may impair or obstruct the flow of any public sewer or clog up any appurtenance thereof, or place therein any substance, solid or liquid, other than the waste products for which the sewers are provided. 
57.78. - Harmful wastes prohibited. 
    No person shall make or maintain any connection with any public or private sewer or appurtenance thereof, whereby there may be conveyed into the same any suffocating, corrosive, inflammable or explosive liquids, gas vapor, substances or material. 
57.79. - Disposal of institutional, commercial and industrial wastes. 
(a)  Treatment of institutional, commercial and industrial wastes. The economy and desirability of the combined treatment of institutional, commercial and industrial wastes and sanitary sewage is recognized. However, not all types and quantities of industrial wastes can be so treated. Hence, it shall be the established policy to admit the types and quantities of institutional, commercial and industrial wastes that are not harmful or damaging to the structures, processes, or operation of the city sewage works. 
(b)  Prohibited wastes generally. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, roof run-off, groundwater, swimming pool water, subsurface drainage, cooling water of any type, or institutional, industrial or commercial process water into any sanitary sewer. 
(c)  Enumeration of prohibited wastes. Except as otherwise provided by this sections, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described wastes or waters to any sanitary or storm sewer: 
(1)  Water or liquid waste containing more than fifty (50) parts per million parts at any one (1) time or that exceeds a dial average of twenty-five (25) parts per million parts when sampled three (3) consecutive times within a twenty-four-hour period, of any grease or oil or any oily substance. 
(2)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(3)  Waters containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(4)  Garbage that has not been properly shredded, which shall mean that the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food must be shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle size greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension. 
(5)  Waters having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 8.5 and having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works. 
(6)  Waters or wastes containing toxic substances in quantities in excess of the limits prescribed by Section 17-3.091 of Chapter 17-3 of the Florida Administrative Code, measured at the point of discharge into the sewer system, or any substance that will pass through the sewage treatment plant and exceed applicable federal requirements. 
(7)  Waters or wastes containing suspended solids, BOD or COD of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such material at the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)  Toxic radioactive isotopes. 
(9)  Noxious gases. 
(10)  Ashes, metals, cinders, rags, mud, straw, glass, feathers, tar, plastics, wood or other interfering or obstructing solids. 
(d)  Approval required for institutional, commercial and industrial wastes. In order to control the admission of institutional commercial and industrial wastes, the discharge into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having the following characteristics shall be subject to review, study and examination by the superintendent of waste water, in consequence of which the superintendent of waste water shall either approve, disapprove, or approve subject to prescribed conditions, the admission of such wastes: 
(1)  A five-day, twenty-degree centigrade BOD greater than two hundred (200) parts per million parts. 
(2)  A suspended solids content greater than two hundred (200) parts per million parts. 
(3)  COD greater than two hundred seventy-five (275) parts per million parts. 
(4)  A chlorine demand greater than fifteen (15) parts per million parts. 
(5)  An hourly flow rate greater than two (2) per cent of the average hourly flow rate of the treatment facility. 
(6)  Toxic substances, and wastes which are considered by the superintendent of waste water to offer possibilities of harm to structures, processes, or operations of the plant. 
(e)  When pretreatment required. Each user of the city sewer system shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment or handling as may be necessary to modify the objectionable characteristics, or constituents, and to cause the same to come within the limits set forth in this section. 
(f)  Right of entry. The right to use the Rockledge Sewer System and enjoy the benefits and conveniences thereof is hereby declared to be a privilege, and not a matter of right. By connection to said sewer system and exercising the aforementioned privilege, each user of said system shall be deemed to thereby consent and grant approval to the Rockledge Superintendent of Waste Water, and his duly authorized representatives, to enter the private premises of such user for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this section. In all instances, other than emergencies (the decision of the superintendent of waste water as to what constitutes an emergency being conclusive), wherein an inspection, measurement, sampling or testing is to be performed by city employees upon the private premises of a user, the superintendent of waste water shall furnish such user written notice of the date and time of the scheduled entry upon the premises of such user not less than twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such scheduled entry, and any user who considers the date and time of such scheduled entry as stated in said notice to be unreasonable shall, not less than twelve (12) hours prior to the time of such scheduled entry, notify the superintendent of waste water in writing of an alternate date and time for the inspection, which alternate date and time shall not be more than forty-eight (48) hours after the user's receipt of the initial notice from the city. 
(g)  Violations. In the event the superintendent of waste water determines that any user of the Rockledge Sewer System is in violation of this section, said superintendent shall furnish such user written notice of the violation, the curative measures necessary to correct the violation, and the time within which such violation must be corrected. If any user shall fail to correct the violation in the manner and time prescribed by the superintendent of waste water, the city may, without further notice, discontinue and suspend sewer service to such user until such user has complied with the curative measures prescribed by the superintendent of waste water, and has paid to the city any costs, expense or damages sustained by the city in consequence of said user's failure to comply with the curative measures prescribed in the city's initial notice of violation. 
(h)  Control manhole. As a condition precedent to the restoration of sewer service to any user to whom service has been discontinued or suspended, the city, through its superintendent of waste water, may require such user to construct and maintain at his own expense a suitable control manhole, or manholes downstream from any treatment, storage or other approved works. to facilitate observations, measurement and sampling of all wastes, including domestic sewage from the premises. The control manhole or manholes shall be constructed at suitable and satisfactory locations and built in a manner approved by the city waste water treatment department and include a flow measuring device. The control manhole shall be accessible to the city at all times for sampling. 
(i)  [Grease interceptors.] Grease interceptors (grease traps) are not required for residences. However, one (1) or more grease interceptors are required on any premises where food is commercially prepared for sale, or where there is a commercial kitchen, including, but not in way of limitation, restaurants, churches, recreation halls, schools, convenience stores, hospitals, factories, nursing homes, public institutions, wholesale and retail food outlets. 
(1)  At any time additions or alterations are made to an existing establishment that is required to have a grease interceptor, and such addition or alteration will result in an increase of flow, or change of effluent characteristics, the grease interceptor at such establishment must at that time be modified and adjusted to meet all of the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Any change of ownership of an establishment that is required to have a grease interceptor shall require an inspection of the grease interceptor, which shall at that time be upgraded, if necessary, to meet the requirements of this section. 
(3)  All grease interceptor systems shall be located and installed so that, with proper maintenance, the system functions in a sanitary manner and does not create a sanitary nuisance or health hazard. Waste and effluent from any on-site grease interceptor system shall not be discharged onto the ground surface or into ditches, drainage structures, surface waters or aquifers. 
(4)  Grease interceptors must be located to provide easy access for routine inspection, cleaning and maintenance. Grease interceptors shall be cleaned at appropriate intervals to ensure that at least fifty (50) per cent of the grease retention capacity of the tank is maintained. 
(5)  Any person owning or controlling property upon which an on-site grease interceptor is installed shall be responsible for the maintenance of the grease interceptor system. 
(j)  Monitoring facilities. The city shall require monitoring facilities to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, to allow for inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the grease interceptor's discharge. 
(1)  Monitoring facilities shall be located on private property, ahead of connection to the city's sewer system and not more than twenty (20) feet from the grease interceptor, with no minimum distance limitation. 
(2)  There shall be eight (8) inches of freefall between the discharge from the grease interceptor to the monitoring facility and the monitoring facility's discharge for sample collection. 
(3)  The monitoring facility's discharge pipe shall be at the bottom of an invert, sloped to four (4) inches on the sides. The facility shall be a standard manhole-type structure, constructed in a manner approved by the city's waste water treatment department, with inspection covers and rings to road grade. 
(4)  Standard grade (0.4%) shall be maintained from the monitoring facility to the city's line. 
(k)  Construction of grease interceptor. The sizing of the grease interceptor is to be determined as follows, except that the minimum volume shall be one thousand (1,000) gallons plus fifteen (15) per cent freeboard: 
For restaurants: S × G × H/12 × LF 
Where: 
S = Number of seats in dining area. G = Gallons per seat (use 25). H = Hours of operation per day. LF = Loading factor. (Use 1.0 for recreation areas) (Use 0.8 for main highways) (Use 0.5 for other roads)  
For other establishments with commercial kitchens: M × G × LF 
Where: 
M = Number of meals prepared per day. G = Gallons per meal (Use 5). LF = Loading factor. (Use 1.0 with dishwashing) (Use 0.5 without dishwashing)  
(1)  There must be a minimum of one (1) baffle per grease interceptor, approximately centered, extending two (2) inches to four (4) inches above the water line and to within eight (8) inches to ten (10) inches of the bottom of the tank. 
(2)  The grease interceptor inlet and discharge pipes must be vented. The inlet pipe may be vented through the building's system. 
(3)  The grease interceptor's discharge device must extend below the water level approximately one-half the water depth. 
(4)  The grease interceptor shall be constructed in a manner approved by the city's waste water treatment department, with inspection covers and rings to road grade. 
57.80. - Responsibility for costs of extending or enlarging city system. 
    Each and every owner of property requesting an extension of the city's sewer collection system shall pay the cost of extending the sewer collection system to his property or the proportionate share of the cost of extending such system with adjacent property owners benefitted by such extension paying their proportionate share. If a major user is connected to an existing system causing the need for enlargement of the existing line, the new user shall pay the cost of such enlargement. The city council shall have the right to vary the aforementioned policy upon unusual circumstances. All extensions made shall be done in accordance with plans and specifications as required by the city manager or his designated representative. 
57.81. - Sewer connections required; exceptions. 
    The owner of each lot or parcel of land within the city, upon which any building or trailer is now situated or shall hereafter be situated, for either residential, commercial or industrial use, shall connect or cause such building or trailer to be connected with the public sewer system of the city, unless the same is already connected, and use the facilities of such system; provided, however, that no connection shall be required if the line of the city sewer collection system does not extend to the property line of the lot, parcel or tract of land upon which the building or trailer is located or is to be located. 
57.82. - Consent of city required. 
    No person shall connect the plumbing system of any property to the city sewer without the written consent of the city. 
57.83. - Specifications for making. 
    All connections to the sewer collection system of the city shall be of a permanent character and shall conform with the plans and specifications as required by the city manager and shall be under the direction of the city manager or his designated representative. 
57.84. - Supervision by city. 
    Every connection of a private plumbing system with the city sewer system shall be made only under the direction and supervision of the city. 
57.85. - Connection by city when owner fails to act; lien. 
(a)  If the owner of any lot or parcel of land within the city shall fail or refuse to connect with and use the facilities of the sewer system of the city after notification by the city clerk, the city shall make such connection, entering on or upon any such lot or parcel of land for the purpose thereof. 
(b)  The city shall recover the cost of making such connection, together with reasonable penalties and interest and attorney's fees, by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  In addition and as an alternative means of collecting the cost of making such connections, the city shall have a lien upon the lot or parcel of land for such cost, which lien shall be of equal dignity with any other lien except for state and county taxes. Such lien may be foreclosed by the city in the same manner provided by the Laws of Florida for the foreclosure of mortgages upon real estate. 
57.86. - Connection of old plumbing. 
    Whenever it is desirable to connect old plumbing with the city sewer main, the owner or plumber contemplating such work shall notify the plumbing inspector who will inspect the old plumbing and notify the owner or plumber what alterations will be necessary to place the facilities in an acceptable condition for connection with the sewer main. 
57.87. - Connections outside city. 
    After June 30, 1968, there shall be no further connections to the sewer system of the city outside the city limits, except as approved by city council. A petitioner requesting sewer hookup shall submit to the city one of the following: 
(1)  A legally binding agreement to annex property where sewer service is provided upon the time when such property becomes contiguous to the city; 
(2)  An interlocal agreement with another local government to provide sewer service to a specific service area; 
(3)  A legally binding agreement to provide sewer service to a specific property pursuant to an agreement between the property owner, another unit of government, and the City of Rockledge. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 16, 8-14-96) 
57.88. - Connection charges established. 
    Each and every owner, agent or party making connection with the city sewer system shall make such connection at his own expense after securing a permit from the city and paying the following sewer connection charge: See Part III. 
57.89. - Sewer connection distance. 
    All developed property within the city limits of Rockledge is required to be connected to the Rockledge Sanitary Sewer System. Property owners in areas which are more than one-quarter (1/4) mile from a force main or gravity sanitary sewer conveyance line and have proposed lot sizes larger than one-half (1/2) acre (twenty-one thousand, seven hundred eighty (21,780) s.f.) may apply to the department of environmental protection for a waiver from the mandatory sewer system connection. The application for waiver shall not occur without first obtaining comments from the planning commission and approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 17, 8-14-96) 
B. - BUILDING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
SECTION 58.00. - FIRE CODES AND STANDARDS 

58.01. - Life Safety Code adopted. 
    The 1994 Edition of the Life Safety Code, also known as NFPA No. 101, 1994 Edition, or Volume 5 of the National Fire Codes, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference by the city as part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 18, 8-14-96) 
58.02. - Standard Fire Prevention Code adopted. 
    The 1997 Edition of the Southern Standard Fire Prevention Code, promulgated by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., is hereby adopted by reference by the city as part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1048-93, § 1, 4-21-93; Ord. No. 1120-96, § 18, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1153-97, § 1, 12-17-97) 
58.03. - Conflicts between Standard Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code. 
    If any provision of the aforesaid Southern Standard Fire Prevention Code conflicts with the aforesaid Life Safety Code, the provisions of the Life Safety Code shall govern. 
58.04. - Standards for installation of sprinkler systems adopted. 
    The 1994 Edition of Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, also known as NFPA No. 13, 1994 Edition, or Volume 1 of the National Fire Codes, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference by the city, as part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 19, 8-14-96) 
58.05. - Standards for installation of standpipe and hose systems adopted. 
    The 1993 Edition of Standards for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems, also known as NFPA No. 14, 1994 Edition, or Volume 1 of the National Fire Codes, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference by the city, as part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 19, 8-14-96) 
58.06. - Standards for installation of portable fire extinguishers adopted. 
    The 1994 Edition of Standards for the Installation of Portable Fire Extinguishers, also known as NFPA No. 10, 1994 Edition, or Volume 1 of the National Fire Codes, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference by the city as part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 19, 8-14-96) 
58.07. - Conflicts between Code and adopted codes or standards. 
    If provisions of this Code conflict with the aforesaid Life Safety Code, Standard Fire Prevention Code, Standards for Installation of Sprinkler Systems, Standards for Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems or Standards for Installation of Portable Fire Extinguishers, the provisions of this Code shall govern. 
58.08. - Certain provisions hereof inapplicable to existing buildings. 
    The provisions of Sections 58.11, 58.12, 58.13, 58.14, 58.17, 58.20, 58.21 and 58.23 [Sections 57.22, 57.23, 57.24, 57.25, 57.29, 57.32, 57.33 and 57.35] of this part shall not be enforced with respect to any building or structure which has been or is erected prior to January 8, 1975, on account of any noncompliance with the aforesaid sections existing on January 8, 1975; provided, that any fire protection devices and facilities required by the aforesaid sections which are actually incorporated in any building which has been or is erected prior to January 8, 1975, shall continue to be maintained in compliance with the provisions of this part; and provided further, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of the aforesaid sections with respect to additions, expansions or enlargements of existing structures, or the rebuilding, replacement or repair thereof, as described in Section 57.28 of this part. 
58.09. - Violations. 
    Any violation of Section 57.20 or Section 58.00 shall constitute an offense against the city punishable upon conviction by fine or imprisonment, or both, not exceeding the maximum penalty prescribed by this Code. 
SECTION 58.10. - ADOPTED BUILDING CODES AND STANDARDS 

58.11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1268-2002, § 5, adopted April 3, 2002, repealed § 58.11. Formerly, such section pertained to buildings and construction regulations. 
58.11.1. - All structures. 
    All structures constructed, altered, repaired, enlarged, moved or demolished shall be accomplished in accordance with the Standard Building Code, including Standard Plumbing Code, Standard Mechanical Code, Standard Housing Code and Standard Swimming Pool Code, as it may be subsequently amended, and the National Electric Code, as it may be subsequently amended. This section shall be administered by the Rockledge building and zoning official. 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, former § 25-372 of the Code of Ordinances has been included herein as § 58.11.1. 
58.12. - Office of building official created; appointment, term. 
    The office of building official is hereby established. The building official shall be appointed by the city council at its first regular meeting after the annual election each year, and shall hold office until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. 
58.13. - Interference with building official. 
    No person shall hinder or interfere with the building official or any of his assistants or subordinates in the discharge of their duties. 
58.14. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the building official in construing, interpreting or applying any of the terms and provisions of this part, or any of the terms and provisions of any code or codes adopted in this part, shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Building Code Board of Adjustments and Appeals established under the provisions of the Standard Building Code. The procedure in all such cases shall be the same as is provided by said Standard Building Code for appeals thereunder to said building code board of adjustments and appeals. 
58.15. - Building code adopted. 
    Adoption of the Building Code. The Florida Building Code, as published by the Florida Building Commission, shall be known as the Rockledge Building Code, as may hereafter be amended from time to time, and is hereby adopted by reference and is incorporated herein, as if fully set out. 
    The following appendix to the Florida Building Code is hereby adopted as Appendix A establishing exposure categories, wind speeds and wind borne debris areas for Rockledge. 
    Appendix A. The City of Rockledge is in a 125 mph, tree-second gust, Exposure Category B, and is considered a wind-borne debris region, pursuant to Section 1606 of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1014-91, § 1, 10-16-19; Ord. No. 1048-93, § 2, 4-21-93; Ord. No. 1120-96, § 20, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1153-97, § 2, 12-17-97; Ord. No. 1269-2002, § 6, 4-3-02) 
58.16. - Definitions for code to conform to zoning definitions. 
    Any definition set forth in Chapter II of the standard Building Code of an abbreviation, term, phrase, word or derivative that is also defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the city is hereby amended to read the same as the definition of the same abbreviation, term, phrase, word or derivative appearing in the Zoning Ordinance of the city. 
58.17. - Amendments to building code. 
    The Florida Building Code adopted by reference as part of this Code is hereby amended, modified, changed and enlarged in the following respects: 
Administration 
    Section 101-General. 
    101.3.3 Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan by the jurisdiction under the requirements of this Code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the jurisdiction nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting, unless the employee or jurisdiction is found to have acted in bad faith or with malicious purpose in a manner exhibiting wanton and willful disregard of the safety, health and welfare of the public. 
    101.4.2 Building. 
    101.4.2.3.2 Unsafe buildings shall be abated using the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, 1997 edition, promulgated by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., subject to all amendments, modifications or deletions hereinafter contained. 
    101.4.13 Rules of Construction. The rules set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction is inconsistent with the manifest intent of this chapter. The rules of construction and definitions set out here shall not be applied to any section of this chapter which contains any express provisions excluding such construction, or where the subject matter or content of such section would be inconsistent with this section. 
    104.4.13.2 Generally. All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this division shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the administration of the jurisdiction may be fully carried out. Terms used in this division, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall have the meanings prescribed by the statutes of this state for the same terms. 
    101.4.13.2 Text. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this division and any figure, the text shall control. 
    101.4.13.2 Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the building official or some other officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the building official or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize professional level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    101.4.13.4 Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    101.4.13.5 Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. The word "shall" takes precedence over "may". 
    101.4.13.6 Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures whether by printing or otherwise. 
    101.4.13.7 Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless a fiscal year is indicated. 
    101.4.14 Words not defined. 
    101.4.14.1 Words not defined herein shall have the meaning stated in the Florida Statutes or other nationally recognized codes, or other documents, manuals or standards adopted elsewhere in this chapter. Words not defined in those documents shall have the meaning stated in the Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised. 
    101.4.14.2 In case of a conflict in definitions or codes, the appropriate definition (or code) to be applied shall be the one (1) applicable to the trade in question. In case of a conflict between different parts of this chapter; conflicts within the same code; or conflicts between code; the more stringent requirements shall be applicable. 
    101.4.15 Words Defined. 
    Abandon or abandonment. (1) Termination of a construction project by a contractor without just cause or proper notification to the owner including the reason for termination. (2) Failure of a contractor to perform work without just cause for ninety (90) days. (3) Failure to obtain an approved inspection within one hundred eighty (180) days from the previous approved inspection. 
    Appraised value. For the purpose of this section, appraised value is defined as either (1) one hundred and twenty (120) per cent of the assessed value of the structure as indicated by the County Property Appraiser's Office or (2) the value as indicated in a certified appraisal from a certified appraiser. 
    Assessed value. The value of real property and improvements thereon as established by the County Property Appraiser. 
    Authorized agent. A person specifically authorized by the holder of a certificate of competency to obtain permits in his stead. 
    Basic Wind Speed Line. The basic wind speed line for the jurisdiction shall be as established by the wind speed contour map attached to, and made part of, this chapter if applicable. 
    Board. The appropriate City or County Board of Adjustment and Appeals, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
    Building component. An element or assembly of elements integral to or part of a building. 
    Building shell. The structural components that completely enclose a building, including, but not limited to, the foundation, structural frame, floor slabs, exterior walls and roof system. 
    Building system. A functionally related group of elements, components and/or equipment, such as the electrical, plumbing and mechanical systems of a building. 
    Certification. The act or process of obtaining a certificate of competency from the state or municipality through the review of the applicant's experience and financial responsibility as well as successful passage of an examination. 
    Certificate of competency (certificate). An official document evidencing that a person is qualified to engage in the business of contracting, subcontracting or the work of a specific trade. 
    Certificate of experience. An official document evidencing that an applicant has satisfied the work experience requirements for a certificate of competency. 
    Certificate of occupancy (C.O.). An official document evidencing that a building satisfies the requirements of the jurisdiction for the occupancy of a building. 
    Certificate of contractor. Any contractor who possesses a certificate of competency issued by the Department of Professional Regulation of the State of Florida. 
    Change of occupancy. A change from one (1) Building Code occupancy classification or subclassification to another. 
    Commercial building. Any building, structure, improvement or accessory thereto, other than a one- or two-family dwelling. 
    Cumulative construction cost. The sum total of costs associated with any construction work done to a building or structure either at one (1) time or at different times within a specified period of time. 
    Demolition. The act of razing, dismantling or removal of a building or structure, or portion thereof, to the ground level. Examination. An exam prepared, proctored and graded by a recognized testing agency unless otherwise implied in context or specifically stated otherwise. 
    FCILB. The Florida Construction Industry Licensing Board. 
    Imminent Danger. Structurally unsound conditions of a structure or portion thereof that is likely to cause physical injury to a person entering the structure; or due to structurally unsound conditions, any portion of the structure is likely to fall, be carried by the wind, or otherwise detach or move, and in doing so cause physical injury or damage to a person on the property or to a person or property nearby; or the condition of the property is such that it harbors or is inhabited by pests, vermin, or organisms injurious to human health, the presence of which constitutes an immediate hazard to people in the vicinity. 
    Inspection warrant. A court order authorizing the official or his designee to perform an inspection of a particular property named in the warrant. 
    Intensification of use. An increase in capacity or number of units of a residential or commercial building. 
    Interior finish. The preparation of interior spaces of a commercial building for the first occupancy thereof. 
    Licensed contractor. A contractor certified by the State of Florida or the local jurisdiction who has satisfied all the state or local requirements to be actively engaged in contracting. 
    Market value. As defined in floodplain regulations of this Code. 
    Owner's agent. A person, firm or entity authorized in writing by the owner to act for or in place of the owner. 
    Permit. An official document authorizing performance of a specific activity regulated by this chapter. 
    Permit card or placard. A document issued by the jurisdiction evidencing the issuance of a permit and recording of inspections. 
    Qualifying agent, primary. A person who possesses the requisite skill, knowledge, experience and certificate of competency, and has the responsibility to supervise, direct, manage, and control the contracting activities of the business organization with which he is associated; who has the responsibility to supervise, direct, manage and control construction activities on a job for which he has obtained a permit; and whose technical and personal qualifications have been determined by investigation and examination and is evidenced by his possession of a certificate of competency. 
    Qualifying agent, secondary. A person who possesses the requisite skill, knowledge, experience and certificate of competency, and has the responsibility to supervise, direct, manage and control construction activities on a job for which he has obtained a permit, and whose technical and personal qualifications have been determined by investigation and examination and is evidenced by his possession of a certificate of competency. 
    Reciprocity. To accept a verified affidavit from any municipality or county of the State of Florida that the applicant has satisfactorily completed a written examination in its jurisdiction equal in content with the examination required by this chapter. 
    Registered contractor. A contractor who has registered with the Department of Professional Regulation of the State of Florida pursuant to fulfilling the competency requirements of the local jurisdiction. 
    Registration. The act or process of registering a locally obtained certificate of competency with the state, or the act or process of registering a state issued certificate of competency with the municipality. 
    Remodeling. Work which changes the original size, configuration or material of the components of a building. 
    Residential building. Any one- or two-family building or accessory. 
    Spa. Any constructed or prefabricated pool containing water jets. 
    Specialty contractor. A contractor whose services do not fall within the categories specified in Section 489.105(3), Florida Statutes, as amended. 
    Start of construction: 
    Site. The physical clearing of the site in preparation for foundation work including, but not limited to, site clearing, excavation, dewatering, pilings and soil testing activities. 
    Building. The removal, disassembly, repair, replacement, installation or assembly of the building, structure, building system or building components in whole or parts thereof. 
    Stop work order. An order by the building official, or his designee, which requires the immediate cessation of all work and work activities described in the order. 
    Structural component. Any part of a system, building or structure, load bearing or non-load bearing, which is integral to the structural integrity thereof, including but not limited to walls, partitions, columns, beams and girders. 
    Structural work or alteration. The installation or assembling of new structural components into a system, building or structure. Also, any change, repair or replacement of any existing structural component of a system, building or structure. 
    Substantial completion. Where the construction work has been sufficiently completed in accordance with the applicable city, state and federal codes, so that the owner can occupy or utilize the project for the use for which it is intended. 
    Value. Job cost. 
    Section 102 Building Department. 
    102.1 Establishment. There is hereby established a department to be called the Building Department and the person in charge shall be known as the Building Official. 
    102.2 Employee qualifications. 
    102.2.1 Building Official Qualifications. The Building Official shall be licensed as a Building Code Administrator by the State of Florida. The Building official shall be appointed or hired by the applicable governing authority and shall not be removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has been given to be heard on specific charges before such applicable governing authority. 
    102.2.3 Employee qualifications. The Building Official, with the approval of the applicable governing authority, may appoint or hire such number of officers, inspectors, plans examiners, assistant and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. A person shall not be appointed or hired as inspector or plans examiner unless that person meets the qualifications for licensure as an inspector or plans examiner, in the appropriate trade as established by the State of Florida. 
    102.3 Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this Code, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, within the jurisdiction of the department, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interest of the department. 
    102.4 Records. The Building Official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of all the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
    102.5 Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals, charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provisions of this Code shall be defended by the department of law until the final termination of the proceedings, unless such person is found to have acted in bad faith or with malicious purpose or in a manner exhibiting wanton and willful disregard for the safety, health, and welfare of the public. 
    Section 103 Powers And Duties Of The Building Official. 
    103.1 General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this Code and adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this Code, and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code. 
    103.2 Right of entry. 
    103.2.1 Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this Code. If such building or premises are occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
    103.2.2 When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
    103.3 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
    103.4 Revocation of permits. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this Code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any provisions of this Code. 
    103.4.1 Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this Code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
    103.4.2 Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this Code. 
    103.5 Unsafe building or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe building, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code or other local ordinance. 
    103.6 Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
    Section 104 Permits. 
    104.1.6 Time limitations. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned and shall expire by limitation and become null and void 6 months after the date of filing for the permit, or plan approval, whichever is later unless before then a permit has been issued. One (1) or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
    104.2.1.2 Additional data. The building official shall be allowed to require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. 
    104.2.6 Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
1.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all building, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
2.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
    104.3.1.1 Minimum plan review criteria for buildings. 
Manufactured/mobile homes 
1.  Site requirements 
Setback/separation (assumed property lines) 
Location of septic tanks (if applicable) 
2.  Structural 
Wind zone 
Anchoring 
Blocking 
3.  Mechanical 
Exhaust systems 
Clothes dryer exhaust 
Kitchen equipment exhaust 
4.  Electrical 
Exterior disconnect location 
    104.5 Conditions of the permit. 
    104.5.1 Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 6 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 6 months after the time the work is commenced. Failure to obtain an approved inspection within 180 days of the previous approved inspection shall constitute suspension or abandonment. One (1) or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each, may be allowed by the building official for the permit, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated prior to the expiration date. The building official shall record the extension of time granted. 
    104.5.1.5 Permits issued for the demolition of a structure shall expire sixty (60) days from the date of issuance. For a justifiable cause, one (1) extension of time for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days may be allowed. Such request shall be in writing to the building official. 
    104.6.2 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the building official's approval or the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 100 per cent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees or as provided by local ordinance. This provision shall not apply to emergency work when delay would clearly have placed life or property in imminent danger. But in all such cases the required permit(s) must be obtained within three (3) business days and any unreasonable delay in obtaining those permit(s) shall result in the charge of a double fee. The payment of a double fee shall not preclude or be deemed a substitute for prosecution for commencing work without first obtaining a permit. The building official may grant extensions of time or waive fees when justifiable cause has been demonstrated in writing. 
    104.6.5 Types of fees enumerated. Fees may be charged for but not limited to the following: 
Permits 
Plans examination 
Certificates of competency (including fees for applications, examinations, renewal, late renewal, and reciprocity) 
Re-inspections 
Administrative fees (including fees for investigative and legal costs incurred in the context of certain disciplinary cases heard by the board) 
Variance requests 
Administrative appeals 
Violations 
Other fees as established by local ordinance 
    104.6.5 Building permit valuation. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. The permit valuation may be calculated using the latest Building Valuation Data published by the Southern Building Code Congress International or other applicable model code organization, at the option of the building official. 
    105.1 Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical code. 
    105.2 Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
    105.3 Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by 105. He or she may accept reports of department inspectors, independent inspectors or of recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their licensure, qualifications and reliability. A certificate required by any provision of this Code shall not be based on such reports unless the same are recorded by the building code inspector or the architect or engineer performing building code inspections in a manner specified by the building official. The building official shall ensure that all persons making such inspections shall be certified in accordance to Chapter 468 Florida Statutes. 
    105.6 Building. 
    1.2 Slab Inspection. To be made after the reinforcement is in place, all concealed conduit, piping, ducts and vents are installed and the electrical, plumbing and mechanical work is complete. Slab shall not be poured until all required inspections have been made and passed. 
    A form board survey prepared and certified by a registered surveyor shall be required for all new construction prior to approval of the rough plumbing inspection. The survey shall certify placement of the building on the site, illustrate all surrounding setback dimensions and shall be available at the job site for review by the building inspector. This survey must be stamped APPROVED by the Rockledge Building Department before any further construction or inspection commences. 
    The form board survey MUST include the following information: 
1.  Permit number 
2.  Street address 
3.  Property boundaries 
4.  All easements and rights-of-way 
5.  Setbacks. (From the slab side of form boards, or outside of block in stemwall construction to the property line at the nearest point on the front, both sides and rear.) 
6.  Firm Zone. (Noted within footprint of structure) 
7.  Inches above crown of road. (Noted within footprint of structure) 
8.  Finish floor elevation of abutting structures (in residential construction only). Indicate "vacant" if abutting lot(s) are vacant. 
9.  Dated and sealed. 
10.  Center line, center lot reference point. 
11.  All submitted surveys shall meet the minimum technical standards set forth by the rules of the Department of Professional Regulation, Board of Land Surveys, Chapter 61G17. 
NOTES: For properties located within a Special Flood Hazard Area: 
1.  Show base flood elevation 
2.  Indicate N.G.V.D. elevation 
    4.0 Roofing inspection: To be made as two inspections on tile, slate or similar roof coverings or as one (1) inspection on all other roof coverings, and shall at a minimum include the following building components: 
Dry-in 
Insulation 
Roof coverings 
Flashing 
Site debris 
    105.11.1 The contractor and/or owner of any active or inactive construction project shall be responsible for the clean-up and removal of all construction debris or any other miscellaneous discarded articles prior to receiving final inspection approval. Construction job sites must be kept clean, such that accumulation of construction debris must not remain on the property for a period of time exceeding 14 days. 
    2. All debris shall be kept in such a manner as to prevent it from being spread by any means. 
    Section 106 Certificates. 
    Section 106.1.1.1. A new Section 106.1.1.1 is added to Section 106 and reads as follows: 
    106.1.1.1 Before any certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any structure other than a single-family residence or duplex, the building official may require the applicant to submit the following items: A statement under the seal of an architect or professional engineer licensed by the State of Florida certifying that based on periodic inspection made by such architect or engineer, the building is built in accordance with the approved plans and specifications on file with the city and that the building is in compliance with all applicable city codes; and a statement under the seal of an architect or professional engineer licensed by the State of Florida certifying that based on a final inspection made by such architect or engineer, the site construction has been done according to the approved site plan on file with the city and all site construction has been in compliance with applicable city codes. 
    106.1.2 Issuing Certificate of Occupancy. Upon completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specification, and after the final inspection, and after verification that all septic system permits have received an approved final inspection where applicable, the building official shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
    Section 107 Tests. 
    107.1 For products not covered under the statewide product evaluation and approval system, the building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
    Section 108 Construction Boards Of Adjustment And Appeals. 
    108.1 Appointment. There may be established a Board to be called the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals, which should consist of nine members but not less than seven. The Board shall be appointed by the applicable governing body. 
    108.2 Membership and terms. 
    108.2.1 Membership. The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals should be composed of two (2) division 1 contractors, one (1) electrical contractor, one (1) mechanical contractor, one (1) plumbing contractor, (1) architect, (1) engineer and two (2) members of the general public whenever possible. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
    108.2.2 Terms. The terms of office of the board members shall be staggered so no more than 1/3 of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12 month period. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
    108.2.3. Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this Code, the affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three affirmative votes, shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than four affirmative votes, but not less than a majority of the board, shall be required. 
    108.2.4 Secretary of board. A person shall be appointed by the local jurisdiction, to act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all of its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
    108.3 Powers. The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have the power, further defined in 108.4 to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the technical codes. 
    108.4 Appeals. 
    108.4.1 Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals whenever any one (1) of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
1.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
2.  The provisions of this Code do not apply to this specific case. 
3.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
4.  The true intent and meaning of this Code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
    108.4.2 Variances. The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals, when so appealed to after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
1.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
2.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
3.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Code to other buildings, structures or service system. 
4.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
5.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this Code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    108.4.2.1 Conditions of the variance. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
    108.4.3 Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is tendered by the building official. Appeals relating to provisions of the Florida Building Code, other than local amendments, may be appealed to the Florida Building Commission, pursuant to section 120.569 Florida Statutes, regarding the local government's action. Notice of Administrative Rights may be obtained from the local building department. 
    108.4.4 Unsafe or dangerous building or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such appeals to a shorter period. 
    108.5 Procedures of the Board. 
    108.5.1 Rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
    108.5.2 Decisions. The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of this Code, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as an aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
    Section 109 Severability. 
    109.1 If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
    Section 110 Violations And Penalties. 
    110.1 Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed or continued. Upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits as provided by law and local ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1014-91, § 2, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 1048-93, §§ 3, 4, 4-21-93; Ord. No. 1058-93, § 1, 8-4-93; Ord. No. 1069-94, § 1, 3-2-94; Ord. No. 1120-96, § 21, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1144-97, § 5, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1240-2000, §§ 6, 7, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1268-2002, §§ 7-17, 4-3-02) 
58.18. - Standards for accessibility by handicapped persons adopted. 
    The city does hereby adopt by reference as fully and completely as though set out at length herein Part V of Chapter 553, Florida Statutes, entitled "Accessibility by Handicapped Persons," as said Part V may hereafter be amended from time to time. 
58.20. - Florida energy efficiency code for building construction. 
    The city does hereby adopt by reference, as fully and completely as though set out at length herein, Part VII of Chapter 553, Florida Statutes, cited as the "Florida Thermal Efficiency Code," as said Part VII may hereafter be amended from time to time. 
58.21. - Housing code-Adopted; amendments, modifications and changes. 
(a)  The Standard Housing Code, being particularly the 1997 Edition thereof and the whole thereof, promulgated by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., except as said housing code is amended, modified or changed by paragraph (b) of this section, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as if set forth at length herein, and the provisions therein shall be controlling in the use, maintenance and occupancy of all dwellings, dwelling units and structures within the area of jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  The Standard Housing Code, as adopted by reference in this section, is hereby amended, modified and changed in the following respects: 
    Section 106.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    106.1-Appointment. 
(a)  There is hereby created by the Rockledge City Council a board to be known as the housing board of adjustments and appeals which shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Rockledge City Council. The members shall be residents of the City of Rockledge. Members of the board shall be appointed for four-year terms, except that on the initial appointment two (2) shall be appointed for one (1) year, two (2) for two (2) years, and one (1) for three (3) years. Any one (1) or more members of said board shall be subject to removal or replacement by the Rockledge City Council at any time for cause of stated charges after a public hearing before said city council, and a vacancy on said board shall be filled by said city council for the unexpired term of such vacancy. The members of said board shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  As soon as practical after their appointment, the members of the housing board of adjustments and appeals shall meet and organize by electing a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary. Thereafter officers of the board shall be elected by the members at the first annual meeting of the board. 
(c)  The members appointed by the Rockledge City Council to the Building Code Board of Adjustments and Appeals, which said board was established pursuant to the provisions of the Standard Building Code adopted by reference as part of the Rockledge Code, shall constitute the membership of the housing board of adjustments and appeals hereby created, and the terms of office of the members of the housing board of adjustments and appeals created by this section shall be the same as the terms of office of the members of said building code board of adjustments and appeals until and unless the Rockledge City Council hereafter appoints members of the housing board of adjustments and appeals different from the members of the building code board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1048-93, § 5, 4-21-93; Ord. No. 1153-97, § 3, 12-17-97) 
58.22. - Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code-Adopted; amendments, modifications and changes. 
(a)  The city does hereby adopt by reference, as fully and completely as though set out at length herein, that certain published code known as the 1985 Edition of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., except as said code is amended, modified or changed by paragraph (b) of this section. 
(b)  The 1985 Edition of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, as adopted by reference in this section, is hereby amended, modified and changed in the following respects: 
    Section 105.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    105.1. The members appointed by the Rockledge City Council to the building code board of adjustment and appeals, which said board was established pursuant to the provisions of the Standard Building Code adopted by reference as part of the Rockledge Code, shall constitute the membership of the board of adjustment and appeals referred to in subsection (a) of this section, and the terms of office of the members of the board of adjustment and appeals established pursuant to the provisions of the Standard Building Code shall be the same as the terms of office of the members of said building code board of adjustment and appeals until and unless the Rockledge City Council hereafter appoints members of the board of adjustment and appeals referred to in subsection (a) of this section different from the members of the building code board of adjustment and appeals. 
    A new Section 107 is added which reads as follows: 
    107. Any building, structure or portion thereof that is vacant, abandoned, damaged, or deteriorated must be secured to assure public safety, until properly abated by this Code. All exterior openings must be closed and locked or properly boarded. Any building, structure or portion thereof not properly secured shall constitute a public nuisance. 
    In cases of fire, wind or other damage, or emergency as determined by the building official, or if the owner fails to abide by a lawful order in the time allowed by this Code, the city shall take appropriate action necessary to secure the property. 
    Authorized representatives of the city shall have the right to go upon the land to close the building. The invoicing, hearings and liens for cost of abatement by the city shall be conducted pursuant to Sections 10-23, 10-25 and 10-26 of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 22, 8-14-96) 
58.23. - Standard Amusement Device Code. 
(a)  Adoption. The city does hereby adopt by reference, as fully and completely as though set out at length herein, that certain published code known as the 1997 Edition of the Standard Amusement Device Code, published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. Three (3) copies of said 1997 Edition of the Standard Amusement Device Code are now, and have been for the ten (10) days next preceding passage of this section, on file in the office of the city clerk and there kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
(b)  Remedies for violations; enforcement authority. Any person willfully violating any provisions of the 1997 Edition of the Standard Amusement Device Code adopted by reference by this section shall be guilty of an offense against the City of Rockledge, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to the punishment hereinabove authorized, or as an alternate thereto, the provisions of said Standard Amusement Device Code may be enforced through the powers and authority of the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board as authorized by Florida Statutes and Rockledge city ordinances." 
(Ord. No. 1153-97, § 4, 12-17-97) 
58.24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1120-96, § 23, adopted Aug. 14, 1996, repealed § 58.24, which pertained to violations and penalties. See the Table of Amendments. 
SECTION 58.30. - CONTRACTORS 

58.31. - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Contractor means any person who in any capacity undertakes, or offers to undertake, or purports to have the capacity to undertake, or accepts an order or contract, either on a fixed sum, cost plus a per centage or a fixed fee, or any combination thereof, or for any other type of compensation, or submits a bid or does himself, or by or through others, to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck, or demolish any building or other structure, to excavate, or commence any project, development or improvement or do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding, or other structures or works in connection therewith or the importation of labor or materials therein. 
    Firm includes a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, agency or any other type of business organization. 
    H.A.R.V. is an abbreviation for the general term "heating, air conditioning, refrigeration and ventilating." 
    Owner-occupier means any person who owns property, either individually, or jointly, or by an estate by the entirety with another person who resides with said owner-occupier. When the provisions of this section provide for the issuance of a building permit to an owner-occupier, and the title to the property upon which the building permit is issued shall be held other than individually but within the limitations of this definition, such other person holding title together with the owner-occupier shall join in the application for such permit. Ownership in this definition shall be the fee simple ownership and nothing herein contained shall require a mortgagee or other lien holder to join in such application. 
    Subcontractor means one who contracts with a contractor to perform part of or all of the latter's work. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 24, 8-14-96) 
58.31.1. - Posting of information on vehicles and advertisement. 
(a)  Each vehicle used by any contractor who is required to obtain a certificate of competency that is used by such contractor in the performance of the work for which such contractor is certified shall have prominently displayed thereon the name of such contractor or his business designation if such contractor is doing business as a firm and the number of such certificate in three-inch letters by means of an affixed sign or decal or by painting such information on the vehicle. 
(b)  The certificate number, state registration number and business name of each contractor shall appear in any newspaper, airwaves transmission, telephone directory and any other advertising medium used by a contractor who holds a certificate of competency pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1174-98, § 4, 11-4-98) 
58.32. - Revocation of license for cause. 
    The occupational licenses of a contractor may be suspended or revoked for cause by majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 24, 8-14-96) 
58.33. - Denial of permits to violators; license suspension or revocation for violations. 
    Any person engaging in the business of a contractor within the city who shall fail to promptly correct any defect in any construction work done or installations made by him, or by any person in his employ, contrary to, or in violation of the building code or other ordinances of the city, or the provisions of this Code, after having been notified thereof by the building official or other authorized inspector, verbally or in writing, shall be issued no further permits until such defect shall have been corrected. In case such person shall persistently violate the provisions of the building code, or other ordinances of the city, or the provisions of this Code, or does not, or refuses or neglects to abide by the orders and instructions of the building official or other authorized inspectors, his occupational license may be suspended or revoked by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 24, 8-14-96) 
58.34. - Conviction as grounds for license suspension or revocation. 
    The conviction of any person holding an occupational license as a contractor, for violations of the building code or other ordinances of the city, or the provisions of this Code, by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be sufficient cause for the suspension or revocation of the occupational license of the person so convicted. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 24, 8-14-96) 
58.35. - Procedure for license suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The building official and other authorized inspector shall report to the city council any continuous or persistent violation of the building code or other ordinances of the city, or the provisions of this Code, by any general contractor, or the refusal or neglect of any general contractor to abide by the orders or instructions of the building or other authorized official. 
(b)  If the city council, upon such report, or upon the complaint of others of any such failure or violation, or upon its own knowledge of such, shall suspend the occupational license of the contractor and it shall so notify the contractor. 
(c)  At the meeting of the city council next following the meeting at which the occupational license of a general contractor was suspended, the contractor may appear and be heard upon the questions of making the suspension permanent and revoking the license, or reinstating the occupational license. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 24, 8-14-96) 
58.35.1. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of this section or any code or standard adopted by this section or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or have erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of this section or any code or standard adopted by this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished as for a violation of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 24, 8-14-96) 
SECTION 58.36. - CERTIFICATES OF COMPETENCY (RESERVED) 

58.37-58.42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1120-96, § 25, adopted Aug. 14, 1996, repealed §§ 58.37-58.42, which pertained to certificates of competency. See the Code Comparative Table. 
SECTION 58.50. - ELECTRICITY 

58.51. - Definitions. 
    As used in this part: 
    Approved means acceptable to the building official. 
    Electrical construction means all work and materials used in installing, maintaining, repairing or extending any system of electrical wiring for light, heat or power and all apparatus and equipment used in connection therewith, inside of or attached to any building, lot or premises. 
    Electrical contractor means any person engaged in the business of contracting electrical construction. 
    Electrical utility. See Utility. 
    Electrician means any person who is engaged in the trade of electrical construction. 
    Journeyman electrician means a person who possesses the necessary qualifications, training and technical knowledge to install electrical wiring and apparatus and equipment. 
    Maintenance electrician means an unlicensed electrician engaged in working for a utility, telephone, telegraph or signaling company, or any industrial firm, corporation or company, other than an electrical contractor. 
    Master electrician means a person who possesses the necessary qualifications, training and technical knowledge to plan, supervise and install electrical wiring, apparatus and equipment. 
    National Electrical Code means the code adopted by this section hereof. 
    Utility means the person supplying electric current for lighting, heating or power in the city. 
58.52. - Right of entry in line of duty. 
    The building official shall have the right to enter any property, building, manhole or subway during any reasonable hour of the day in the discharge of his duties or for the purpose of making any tests on the wiring apparatus or equipment therein contained. He shall be given prompt access to all buildings private or public, and to all manholes and subways, on application to the person owning or in charge thereof. 
58.53. - Inspection, ordering correction of hazardous conditions. 
    The building official is empowered to inspect or reinspect, at his option, all interior wires and apparatus, conducting or using electric current for lights, heat or power, and when such conductors or apparatus are found to be unsafe to life or property, he shall notify the person owning, using or operating them, to place them in a safe condition within twenty-four (24) hours, or within such further time as the building official shall determine to be necessary. 
58.54. - Discontinuing service to hazardous conditions. 
(a)  Whenever any wiring, apparatus or fixture conducting or using current for lights, heat or power is found upon inspection to be especially or immediately hazardous to life and property, the building official shall immediately open the switch or circuit breaker controlling the supply of current to such wiring, apparatus or fixture, and shall post in a conspicuous place near such switch or circuit breaker, a notice, printed to read as follows: 
NOTICE 
WIRING CONDEMNED 
The use of electric current is prohibited through this wiring or equipment until proper repairs have been made and approved by the building official. Repairs must be made by a licensed electrician or by the owner of this property in compliance with the Rockledge Code and the building official must be notified when completed. 
(b)  After such notice is posted no person shall close the switch or circuit breaker which has been opened by the official, nor use nor attempt to use any current through such wiring, apparatus or fixtures, until necessary repairs have been made and approved by the official. 
(c)  The building official may also notify the public utility company or other person furnishing current to such wiring, apparatus or fixture, to disconnect the supply wires and cut off the current from the premises where such wiring, apparatus or fixture is located, and such supply wires shall be disconnected and the current cut off until necessary repairs are made, and approved by the official. 
58.55. - General supervision of poles and wires in public places. 
    The building official shall have the power to direct the placing of poles and wires in the streets, alleys and public places of the city so as to cause as little obstruction as possible to public travel and use of such streets, alleys and public places and as little interference as possible to the private use and enjoyment of adjoining property. He shall have the authority to compel the removal of unsafe poles and the resetting of poles. 
58.56. - Joint use of poles. 
    Where any poles are used jointly by any utility or other person, each user shall be allotted a special zone on each pole and shall confine its wires to that zone. Suitable zones on every such pole shall at all times be reserved for the free use by the city for its fire alarm and police telegraph wires. 
SECTION 58.57. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1120-96, § 25, adopted Aug. 14, 1996, repealed §§ 58.57-58.61, which pertained to electricians. See the Code Comparative Table. 

58.58-58.61. - Reserved. 
SECTION 58.62. - [ELECTRICAL] PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

58.63. - Permit required. 
    A permit shall be required to install, alter or repair any electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment within the city, except that permits shall not be required for making emergency repairs to existing wiring provided that such repairs will not alter the wiring or apparatus connected thereto. 
58.64. - Meter service defined; separate permits for separate services. 
    For the purpose of regulating the issuance of permits, each recording watt-hour meter and all feeder wires, subfeeder wires and branch circuit wires connecting thereto shall be construed as one (1) meter service. A separate permit shall be obtained for work requiring a permit performed on each such meter service. 
58.65. - Permit application form. 
    Every application for a permit to install, change, alter or repair any electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment within the city shall be in writing on blank forms furnished by the city. Master electricians, and homeowners intending to perform electrical work on their own home pursuant to section 60.51(h) of this Code, may obtain application forms from the office of the building official. 
58.66. - Persons entitled to permits. 
    Permits shall be issued only to master electricians, and homeowners applying for a permit to wire or perform electrical work on their own home pursuant to section 60.51(h) [section 58.58(h)] of this Code. 
58.67. - Plans, specifications, information required. 
    Applicants for electrical permits shall furnish a complete set of plans and specifications on all large and complicated jobs, and such other information as shall be required, before the permit is issued. 
58.68. - Examination of application; notice of defects. 
    The building official shall examine all applications for electrical permits to determine whether they conform to the provisions of this Code. Should the building official find that the application is incomplete or does not conform to the provisions of this Code, he shall promptly notify the applicant to that effect. 
58.69. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 9 of Ordinance No. 1014-91, adopted October 16, 1991, repealed Section 58.69, regarding permit fees, in its entirety, and reserved the section for future use. 
58.70. - Issuance and signing of permit. 
    All permits shall be issued and signed by the building official or his agent. 
58.71. - Permit refusal. 
    The building official shall have the authority to refuse any application for a permit which does not comply with the provisions of this Code. 
58.72. - Permits for temporary connections. 
    The building official may permit temporary connection of any system of wiring, either during the course of construction or for temporary light, heat or power. No temporary connection shall be for over thirty (30) days or such time, more or less, as shall be specified in writing by the official. 
58.73. - General duty to inspect and supervise work. 
    The building official shall inspect all electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment for lights, heat or power, inside of or attached to buildings within the city. He shall be responsible for the enforcement of laws, rules and regulations, relating thereto, and to exercise a general supervision over all electrical work performed in the city and general supervision over all electricians carrying on their business or trade under the provisions of this Code, and general supervision over all homeowners performing electrical work on their own home under the provisions of this part. 
58.74. - Prerequisites to application for inspection. 
    Every electrician installing interior wiring in any building, structure or premises, and every homeowner performing electrical work on his own home pursuant to [this] Code, shall see that all equipment is protected from the weather before applying for final inspection, and that the installation is complete in every detail. 
58.75. - Notice to inspect. 
    After the wiring is completed and all plumbing and piping in place, the master electrician or homeowner performing electrical work on his own home under authority of this Code shall notify the building official that the wiring is ready for inspection. 
58.76. - Inspection; approval or disapproval. 
    The building official shall, as soon as possible after receiving a notice to inspect, inspect the wiring, apparatus, equipment or appliance, and should he find that they have been installed in a satisfactory manner and in accordance with the provisions of this Code, he shall place a notice at the service equipment, or some other suitable place, stating that the electrical wiring and equipment in connection therewith has been inspected and approved. If the building official should find that the wiring or apparatus does not conform with the provisions of this Code, he shall notify the contractor, owner, or agent in charge of the property that the wiring, apparatus or equipment has been condemned and that it shall not be covered nor concealed until after it has been changed to conform with the provisions of this Code. 
58.77. - Piecemeal inspection of complicated jobs. 
    On large and complicated jobs, the wiring may be inspected in sections. 
58.78. - Certificate of inspection. 
    When any electrical wiring, apparatus or fixture covered by a permit shall be found, on inspection, to conform to the provisions of this Code, the building official shall issue a final certificate of inspection certifying that the wiring, apparatus or fixture has been inspected and found to comply with the provisions of this Code. No such certificate shall be issued until such equipment is made to conform to this Code. 
58.79. - Permit for temporary connection before certification. 
    Upon written application, the building official may, before a final certificate of inspection is issued, give temporary permission to connect and furnish electric current to any wiring, apparatus or fixtures for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, if, in his opinion, such wiring, apparatus or fixtures are in such condition that current may safely be connected therewith and there exists an urgent necessity for such use. 
58.80, 58.81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1120-96, § 25, adopted Aug. 14, 1996, repealed §§ 58.80 and 58.81 which pertained to reinspection after failure and charge or reinspection. See the Code Comparative Table. 
58.82. - Concealing wiring before inspection and approval. 
    All electrical conduits and conductors shall be inspected before being covered and no person shall conceal any wiring before it has been inspected and approved by the building official. 
58.83. - Use of current in uninspected premises. 
    No person shall use any electrical current in or through any wiring, apparatus or fixtures for lights, heat or power in or on any building or structures within the city until the wiring, apparatus or fixtures shall have been inspected and approved by the building official and a certificate of inspection shall have been issued therefor. 
58.84. - Furnishing current to uninspected premises. 
    No person furnishing electric current for lights, heat or power shall connect his distribution system with any installation of wiring apparatus or fixtures in or on any building within the city without having first received written permission from the building official to furnish current for such wiring, apparatus or fixtures. Unless otherwise stated in the certificate of inspection, the certificate of inspection shall constitute such permission. Where such permission is separately required, it shall be given by the building official at any time the certificate of inspection shall have been issued. 
SECTION 58.85. - ADOPTION OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE[4] 
    That edition of the National Electrical Code referenced by the latest edition of the Florida Building Code, published by the National Fire Protection Association and as may hereafter be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out. 
(Ord. No. 1268-2002, § 18, 4-3-02) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1268-2002, § 18, adopted April 3, 2002, deleted §§ 58.85-58.102 and added a new § 58.85 as herein set out. Formerly, such section pertained to electrical code technical provisions and derived from Ord. No. 1014-91, §§ 3, 6, 7, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 1186-99, §§ 8, 9, 7-21-99. 

SECTION 59.00. - ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE[5] 
    The Florida Plumbing Code, as published by the Florida Building Commission, as may hereafter be amended from time to time, shall be known as the Rockledge Building Code and is hereby adopted by reference and is incorporated herein, as if fully set out. 
(Ord. No. 1268-2002, § 19, 4-3-02) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1268-2002, § 19, adopted April 3, 2002, deleted §§ 59.00-59.10 and added a new § 59.00 as herein set out. Formerly, such section pertained to plumbing and derived from Ord. No. 1014-91, § 10, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 1048-93, § 6, 4-21-93; Ord. No. 1120-96, § 26, 8-14-96. 

SECTION 59.20. - ADOPTION OF FUEL GAS CODE[6] 
    The Florida Fuel Gas Code published by the Florida Building Commission, as may hereafter be amended from time to time, shall be known as the Rockledge Building Code and is hereby adopted by reference and is incorporated herein, as if fully set out. 
    The following appendices of the Florida Fuel Gas Code are hereby adopted: Appendix A and Appendix B. 
(Ord. No. 1268-2002, § 20, 4-3-02) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1268-2002, § 20, adopted April 3, 2002, deleted §§ 59.20-59.34 and added a new § 59.20 as herein set out. Formerly, such section pertained to gas and derived from Ord. No. 1048-93, § 7, 4-21-93; Ord. No. 1120-96, § 28, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1153-97, § 5, 12-17-97. 

SECTION 59.50. - EXCAVATIONS 

59.51. - Compliance required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain upon his property, or to permit the construction or maintenance thereon, of any dangerous excavation in the earth, or of any pool, pond or lake which is man-made, except under the provisions of this section. 
59.52. - Permit required; fee. 
    An excavation permit shall be obtained from the building official prior to the use of any equipment upon the site of any proposed excavation. The fee for such permit shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(Ord. No. 1048-93, § 11, 4-21-93) 
59.53. - Steepness of sides. 
    An excavation in the earth which changes the elevation or topography of land in the city shall have sides of no greater than one (1) foot vertical drop of each five (5) feet of horizontal distance measured from setback lines into the excavated area, except in regular swimming pools. 
(Ord. No. 1048-93, § 12, 4-21-93) 
SECTION 59.60. - ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE[8] 
    The Florida Mechanical Code, as published by the Florida Building Commission, as may hereafter be amended from time to time, shall be known as the Rockledge Building Code and is hereby adopted by reference and is incorporated herein, as if fully set out. 
(Ord. No. 1268-2002, § 22, 4-3-02) 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1268-2002, § 22, adopted April 3, 2002, deleted §§ 59.60-59.62 and added a new § 59.60 as herein set out. Formerly, such section pertained to mechanical regulations and derived from Ord. No. 1014-91, § 5, 10-16-91; Ord. No. 1048-93, § 13, 4-21-93; Ord. No. 1120-96, § 30, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1153-97, § 7, 12-17-97. 

SECTION 59.70 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

59.71. - Administration. 
A.  General. 
1.  Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Rockledge, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
2.  Scope. The provisions of this Code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
3.  Intent. This Code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare in so far as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. 
4.  Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  General. The provisions of this Code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in Section 59.71. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this Code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
2.  Maintenance. Equipment systems, devices and safeguards required by this Code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this Code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. 
3.  Existing remedies. The provisions in this Code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary. 
4.  Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this Code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
5.  Historic building. The provisions of this Code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
6.  Requirements not covered by Code. Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this Code, shall be determined by the code official. 
C.  Responsibility for maintenance inspection. 
1.  General. The building department under the direction of the building official and his/her designees shall be responsible for all necessary inspections to insure enforcement of this Property Maintenance Code. Those persons acting under this provision shall be known as the "Maintenance Code Official" (MCO). 
D.  Duties and powers of the MCO. 
1.  General. The MCO shall enforce the provisions of this Code. 
2.  Rule-making authority. The MCO shall have authority as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; to interpret and implement the provisions of this Code; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this Code, or of violating accepted engineering methods involving public safety. 
3.  Inspections. The MCO or designee shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. 
4.  Right of entry. The MCO is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the MCO is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law. 
5.  Identification. The MCO shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this Code. 
6.  Notices and orders. The MCO shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this Code. 
7.  Department records. The MCO shall keep official records of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this Code. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other regulations. 
E.  Approval. 
1.  Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this Code, the MCO shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the MCO shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this Code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this Code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files. 
2.  Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this Code are not intended to prevent the installation of any materials or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the MCO finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and compliant with the intent of the provisions of this Code, and that the materials, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
3.  Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this Code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this Code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the MCO shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction. 
a.  Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this Code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the MCO shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency. 
b.  Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period required for retention of public records. 
4.  Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved. 
F.  Violations. 
1.  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
2.  Notice of violation. The MCO shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with Section 59.71(G). 
3.  Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section 59.71(G) shall be deemed guilty of a civil infraction and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the MCO shall institute the appropriate proceeding before the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the direction made pursuant thereto. 
4.  Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
5.  Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises. 
G.  Notices and orders. 
1.  Notice to person responsible. Whenever the MCO determines that there has been a violation of this Code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in Sections 59.71(G)(2) and 59.71(G)(3) to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this Code. Notice for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section 59.71(H)(3). 
2.  Form. Such notice prescribed in Section 59.71(G)(1) shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
a.  Be in writing. 
b.  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
c.  Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued. 
d.  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
e.  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal. 
3.  Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
a.  Delivered personally; 
b.  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or 
c.  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
4.  Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in Section 59.71(F)(4). 
5.  Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the MCO and shall furnish to the MCO a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
H.  Unsafe structures and equipment. 
1.  General. When a structure or equipment is found by the MCO to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
a.  Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
b.  Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
c.  Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the MCO finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this Code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public. 
d.  Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this Code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 
2.  Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the MCO is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the MCO shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource. 
3.  Notice. Whenever the MCO has condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with Section 59.71(G)(3). If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in Section 59.71(G)(2). 
4.  Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the MCO shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard. 
a.  Placard removal. The MCO shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the MCO shall be subject to the penalties provided by this Code. 
5.  Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the MCO shall be vacated as ordered by the MCO. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this Code. 
I.  Emergency measures. 
1.  Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the MCO, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the MCO is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The MCO shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Code Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same. 
2.  Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, whenever, in the opinion of the MCO there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the MCO shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the MCO deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
3.  Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the MCO shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
4.  Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the MCO shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
5.  Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the city. The city attorney shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
6.  Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this Code. 
J.  Demolition. 
1.  General. The MCO shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official's judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period more than two years, to demolish and remove such structure. 
2.  Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with Section 59.71(G). 
3.  Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the MCO shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
4.  Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the city or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state. 
K.  Means of appeal. 
1.  Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the MCO or a notice or order issued under this Code shall have the right to appeal to the board of adjustment and appeals (the board), provided that a written application for appeal is filed within twenty (20) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied by other means. 
2.  Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within twenty (20) days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
3.  Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the MCO and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of not less than one-half (1/2) the board membership. 
a.  Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
4.  Postponed hearing. When the full board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement for the hearing. 
5.  Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the MCO only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of appointed board members. 
a.  Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the MCO. 
b.  Administration. The MCO shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
6.  Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
7.  Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the appeals board. 
(Ord. No. 1506-2008, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-08) 
59.72 - Definitions. 
A.  General. 
1.  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this Code, have the meanings shown in this chapter. 
2.  Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular. 
3.  Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined in the Florida Building Code - Building, Florida Building Code - Plumbing, Florida Building Code - Mechanical, Florida Fire Prevention Code or the National Electrical Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes. 
4.  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
5.  Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit", "dwelling", "premises", "building", "rooming house", "rooming unit", "housekeeping unit" or "story" are stated in this Code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
B.  General definitions. 
    Approved. Approved by the MCO. 
    Basement. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
    Bathroom. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
    Bedroom. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit. 
    Condemn. To adjudge unfit for occupancy. 
    Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Easement. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or lots. 
    Exterior property. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators. 
    Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods. 
    Garbage: The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Guard. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level. 
    Habitable space. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
    Housekeeping unit. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
    Imminent danger. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
    Infestation. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power. 
    Labeled. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards. 
    Let for occupancy or let. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land. 
    Maintenance code official (MCO). The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized representative. 
    Occupancy. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
    Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
    Openable area. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
    Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
    Owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
    Person. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit. 
    Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon. 
    Public way. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use. 
    Rooming house. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling. 
    Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes. 
    Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
    Sleeping unit. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also party of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units. 
    Strict liability offense. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do. 
    Structure. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof. 
    Tenant. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
    Toilet room. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
    Ventilation. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space. 
    Workmanlike. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
    Yard. An open space on the same lot with a structure. 
(Ord. No. 1506-2008, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-08) 
59.73. - Requirements. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property. 
2.  Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this Code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control. 
3.  Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
B.  Exterior property areas. 
1.  Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
2.  Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. 
Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs. 
3.  Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
4.  Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of twelve (12) inches in height. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 59.71(F)(3) and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the city shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. 
5.  Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. 
6.  Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant. 
7.  Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
8.  Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. 
9.  Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
C.  Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. 
1.  Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. 
2.  Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than twenty-four (24) inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least forty-eight (48) inches (1219 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. When the self-latching device is less than fifty-four (54) inches (1372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position six (6) inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. Residential swimming pools shall be in compliance with the requirements of the Residential Swimming Pool Safety Act as found in F.S. § 515. 
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
D.  Exterior structure. 
1.  General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
2.  Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and watertight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. 
3.  Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of one-half (0.5) inch (12.7 mm). 
4.  Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
5.  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. 
6.  Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
7.  Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
8.  Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
9.  Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
10.  Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
11.  Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weathercoating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
12.  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
13.  Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight. 
a.  Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
b.  Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. 
14.  Insect screens. During the operating hours of any activity described herein, on every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 26 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
15.  Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 59.77(B)(3) 
16.  Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water. 
17.  Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents. 
18.  Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. 
a.  Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a lock throw of not less than one (1) inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. 
b.  Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six (6) feet (1828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device. 
c.  Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry. 
E.  Interior structure. 
1.  General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two (2) or more dwelling units or two (2) or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property. 
2.  Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
3.  Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. 
4.  Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
5.  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
6.  Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jams, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. 
F.  Handrails and guardrails. 
1.  General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having three or more risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than thirty-six (36) inches (915 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) high or more than forty-two (42) inches (1067 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than thirty-six (36) inches (915 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface. 
Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code. 
G.  Rubbish and garbage. 
1.  Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
2.  Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers. 
a.  Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish. 
b.  Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored without first removing the doors. 
3.  Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers. 
a.  Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one (1) of the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in each dwelling unit; or an approved leakproof, covered, outside garbage container. 
b.  Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal. 
H.  Extermination. 
1.  Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
2.  Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure. 
3.  Single occupant. The occupant of one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises. 
4.  Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination. 
5.  Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. 
Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. 
(Ord. No. 1506-2008, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-08) 
59.74. - Light, ventilation and occupancy limitations. 
A.  General. 
1.  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure. 
2.  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
3.  Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the Florida Building Code shall be permitted. 
B.  Light. 
1.  Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one (1) window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be eight (8) percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three (3) feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. 
Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight (8) percent of the floor area of the interior room. or space, but not less than twenty-five (25) square feet (2.33m 2 ). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served. 
2.  Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a sixty-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each two hundred-square foot (19 m 2 ) of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than thirty (30) feet (9144 mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one (1) footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads. 
3.  Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures. 
C.  Ventilation. 
1.  Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one (1) openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum glazed area required in Section 59.74(B). 
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight (8) percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than twenty-five (25) square feet (2.33 m 2 ). The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated. 
2.  Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by Section 59.74(C), except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated. 
3.  Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Where specifically approved in writing by the MCO. 
b.  Devices such as coffee pots and microwave oven shall not be considered cooking appliances. 
4.  Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or obnoxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space. 
5.  Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust system shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
D.  Occupancy limitations. 
1.  Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces. 
2.  Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven (7) feet (2,134 mm) in any planned dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three (3) feet (914 mm) between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls. 
3.  Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet (2134 mm). 
Exceptions: 
a.  In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four (4) feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting not more than six (6) inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height. 
b.  Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than six (6) feet eight (8) inches (2033 mm) with not less than six (6) feet four (4) inches (1932 mm) of clear height under beams girders, ducts and similar obstructions. 
c.  Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet (2134 mm) over not less than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five (5) feet (1524 mm) or more shall be included. 
4.  Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living room shall comply with the requirements of Sections 59.74(D)(4)(a) through 59.74(D)(4)(e). 
a.  Room area. Every living room shall contain at least one hundred twenty (120) square feet (11.2m 2 ) and every bedroom shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet (6.5 m 2 ). 
b.  Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces. 
Exception: Units that contain fewer than two (2) bedrooms. 
c.  Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one (1) water closet and one (1) lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one (1) water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story. 
d.  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
e.  Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this Code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of Section 59.75; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of Section 59.76; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of Section 59.77. 
5.  Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not create conditions that, in the opinion of the code official, endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants. 
6.  Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements: 
a.  A unit occupied by not more than two (2) occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet (20.4 m 2 ). A unit occupied by three (3) occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet (29.7 m 2 ). These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by Items 2 and 3. 
b.  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this Code shall be provided. 
c.  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
d.  The maximum number of occupants shall be three (3) . 
7.  Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage. 
(Ord. No. 1506-2008, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-08) 
59.75. - Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements. 
A.  General. 
1.  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided. 
2.  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises, which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Required facilities. 
1.  Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory. 
2.  Rooming houses. At least one (1) water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four (4) rooming units. 
3.  Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten (10) occupants. 
4.  Employees' facilities. A minimum of one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) drinking facility shall be available to employees. 
a.  Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms. 
C.  Toilet rooms. 
1.  Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling. 
2.  Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more than one (1) flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway. 
3.  Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees' working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one (1) story above or below the employees' working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of five hundred (500) feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities. 
Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of five hundred (500) feet (152 m) from the employees' regular working area to the facilities. 
4.  Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
D.  Plumbing systems and fixtures. 
1.  General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
2.  Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning. 
3.  Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the MCO shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
E.  Water system. 
1.  General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatory, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the Florida Building Code-Plumbing. 
2.  Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
3.  Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks. 
4.  Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. 
F.  Sanitary drainage system. 
1.  General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
2.  Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. 
G.  Storm drainage. 
1.  General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1506-2008, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-08) 
59.76. - Mechanical and electrical requirements. 
A.  General. 
1.  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided. 
2.  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Heating facilities. 
1.  Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section. 
2.  Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 65°F (18°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section. 
3.  Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one (1) or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
4.  Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work space shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
b.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
5.  Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured three (3) feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the room and two (2) feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall. 
C.  Mechanical equipment. 
1.  Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water hearing appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 
2.  Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. 
Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation. 
3.  Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained. 
4.  Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
5.  Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment. 
6.  Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved. 
D.  Electrical facilities. 
1.  Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and Section 59.76(E). 
2.  Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than sixty (60) amperes. 
3.  Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the MCO shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
E.  Electrical equipment. 
1.  Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. 
2.  Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two (2) separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one (1) grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one (1) receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. 
3.  Luminaries. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one (1) electric luminary. 
F.  Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters. 
1.  General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with ASME A17.1. The most current certification of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, or the certificate shall be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator. The inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodical intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N., except where otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction. 
2.  Elevators. In building equipment with passenger elevators, at least one (1) elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied. 
Exception: Buildings equipped with only one (1) elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing. 
G.  Duct systems. 
1.  General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function. 
(Ord. No. 1506-2008, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-08) 
59.77. - Fire safety requirements. 
A.  General. 
1.  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including the fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided. 
2.  Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Means of egress. 
1.  General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the Florida Building Code. 
2.  Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the Florida Building Code shall be unobstructed. 
3.  Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the Florida Building Code. 
4.  Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a keep, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. 
C.  Fire-resistance ratings. 
1.  Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained. 
2.  Opening protective. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable. 
D.  Fire protection systems. 
1.  General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
2.  Smoke alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations: 
a.  On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 
b.  In each room used for sleeping purposes. 
c.  In each story within a dwelling unit, including basement and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one (1) full story below the upper level. 
Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
3.  Power source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection. 
Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes. 
4.  Interconnection. Where more than one (1) smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one (1) alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Interconnection is not required in buildings that are not undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind. 
b.  Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes. 
(Ord. No. 1506-2008, § 1(Exh. A), 10-15-08) 
SECTION 59.80. - REGISTRATION OF MORTGAGED REAL PROPERTY 

59.81. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish a process to limit and reduce the amount of deteriorating property located within the city, which property is in foreclosure, or about which a public notice of default has been filed, or where ownership has been transferred to lender or mortgagee by any legal method. It is further intended to establish a registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of inadequate maintenance of abandoned and vacated properties subject to a mortgage or properties subject to mortgages that are in default. 
(Ord. No. 1533-2009, § 1, 10-7-09) 
59.82. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where the context will permit and no definitions are provided herein, the definitions provided in the Florida Building Code shall prevail. 
    Abandoned real property means any real property that is vacant and/or is under a public notice of default, a notice of mortgagee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale and/or properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title is retained by the mortgagee, and any properties transferred under a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure sale or a short sale. 
    Default means that the mortgagee files a foreclosure action or public notice of default on the mortgage. A mortgage shall be considered in default at such time as the mortgagee declares said mortgage to be in default either in writing, by recording a lis pendens, or by its actions, or commences foreclosure proceedings. 
    Evidence of vacancy means any condition that, on its own or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to: overgrown and/or dead vegetation; electricity, water or other utilities turned off; stagnant swimming pool; or statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents, among other evidence. 
    Enforcement officer means any full time law enforcement officer, building official, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by the city. 
    Foreclosure means the judicial process by which a property, placed as security for a mortgage loan, after a judicial process, is to be sold at an auction to satisfy a debt upon which the borrower has defaulted. 
    Vacant means any building or structure that is not lawfully occupied or inhabited by human beings. 
(Ord. No. 1533-2009, § 1, 10-7-09) 
59.83. - Applicability. 
    This section is related to abandoned and vacant property and to property subject to a mortgage that has been determined by the mortgagee to be in default. 
(Ord. No. 1533-2009, § 1, 10-7-09) 
59.84. - Penalties. 
    Violations of this section shall be subject to enforcement by the code enforcement board of the city, and under appropriate circumstances the city nuisance abatement board. 
(Ord. No. 1533-2009, § 1, 10-7-09) 
59.85. - Registration of real property mortgagee holding mortgages in default. 
(a)  Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the city shall perform an inspection of the property upon default by the mortgagor or prior to the issuance of a notice of default. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it shall be deemed vacant or abandoned and the mortgagee shall, within two (2) days of the inspection, register the property with the code enforcement office on forms provided by the office or its designee, even though the real property may not be vacant. If the mortgage on the property is in default, no later than ten (10) days after the date that a default is declared, the mortgagee shall register the property with the code enforcement office electronically via the internet. The code enforcement office shall provide the internet address to mortgagee upon request. 
(b)  If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected monthly by the mortgagee or mortgagee's designee. 
(c)  Within ten (10) days of the date the mortgagee declares its mortgage to be in default, the mortgagee shall register the real property with the city's designee and, at the time of registration, shall designate in writing a local property manager to inspect, maintain and secure the real property subject to the mortgage in default. 
(d)  Registration. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the mortgagee, the mailing address, e-mail address, and telephone number of the mortgagee, and name of the local property manager and said person's address, e-mail address, and telephone number. The local property manager shall be responsible to inspect, secure and maintain the property. The property manager named in the registration shall be located within twenty (20) miles of Brevard County and available to be contacted by the city, Monday through Friday between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., holidays and lunch hours excepted. The city shall charge a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for any registration or a modification of registration and it may assign and delegate the collection of such fee to an independent contractor. 
(e)  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as well as any properties transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(f)  Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual registration requirement, inspection, security, and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain vacant or subject to having been declared by a mortgagee to be in default. 
(g)  Any person or other legal entity that has registered a property under this section must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of the change. 
(h)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly register or to revise from time to time the registration to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this section is a violation of the codes of the city and may result in the issuance of a notice of violation by the code enforcement officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the code enforcement board or the nuisance abatement board that any property is in violation of the codes of the city, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with its codes and place a lien(s) on the property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and to bring it into compliance, which lien may be assigned to either the entity that performs the work or arranges to have the work performed. 
(Ord. No. 1533-2009, § 1, 10-7-09) 
59.86. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this section shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned or not being properly maintained. Weeds, grass, overgrown brush or dead vegetation over twelve (12) inches tall are prohibited. 
(b)  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. 
(c)  Yards shall be landscaped and maintained pursuant to the standards set forth in the Code. 
(1)  Landscaping shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground cover, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential, commercial or industrial installation, as applicable. Landscaping shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material. 
(2)  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation, cutting and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings and weeds. 
(d)  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that pool and spa water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris. Pools and spas shall comply with the enclosure requirements of the city's code and the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly maintain the property is a violation of the ordinances of the City of Rockledge and may result in the issuance of a notice of violation by the code enforcement officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the code enforcement board, or the nuisance abatement board, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with its ordinances and place a lien/s on the property and assign it as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1533-2009, § 1, 10-7-09) 
59.87. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child or adult to access the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing or boarding. 
(c)  If a mortgage on the property is in default and the property has become vacant or abandoned, a local property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee to perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance with the code of ordinances and the local property manager must perform weekly inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws or ordinances of the city. 
(d)  When the property becomes vacant or abandoned, it shall be posted with the name, address and twenty-four-hour contact telephone number of the local property manager. The posting shall be no less than 18 inches × 24 inches, and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five (45) feet. The posting shall contain the following language: 
THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY: _____ 
ADDRESS: _____ 
24 HR. PHONE NUMBER: _____ 
(e)  The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street or if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is at all times visible from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant materials. 
(f)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly inspect and secure the property, and post and maintain the signage noted in this section, is a violation of this section and shall result in the issuance of a notice of violation by a code enforcement officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the code enforcement board or the nuisance abatement board, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section, and place a lien(s) on the property and assign it as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1533-2009, § 1, 10-7-09) 
59.88. - Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty. 
    Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcement officer, or any person authorized by the city, in the discharge of duties as provided in this section, may, upon conviction, be sanctioned as provided in the Rockledge Code of Ordinances or F.S. ch. 162. 
(Ord. No. 1533-2009, § 1, 10-7-09) 
59.89. - Immunity of enforcement officer. 
    Any enforcement officer, or any person authorized by the city to enforce this section, shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry or trespass upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1533-2009, § 1, 10-7-09) 
59.90. - Additional authority. 
    The code enforcement officer shall have authority to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section to require an on-site security guard. Failure to comply with the terms of this section shall constitute a continuing public nuisance. The city shall have the authority to promptly abate the public nuisance, in whole or in part, at the expense of the mortgagee or other responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 1533-2009, § 1, 10-7-09) 
59.91. - Supplemental provisions. 
    Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to, injunction, abatement or as otherwise provided by Code. 
(Ord. No. 1533-2009, § 1, 10-7-09) 
Part VI - PLANNING DISTRICTS/ZONING 
SECTION 60.00. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 60.00 was originally unnumbered. The section number and title have been added by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. Provisions originally numbered as § 60.00 have been renumbered as § 60.01. 

60.01. - Comprehensive plan relationship. 
    The City of Rockledge Comprehensive Plan has been developed pursuant to Chapter 163, F.S., Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act and Chapter 9J-5, F.A.C., Minimum Criteria for Review of Local Government Comprehensive Plans and Determination of Compliance. The plan is designed to provide policy direction for the city in managing their growth and development over the next ten-year period. It is presented in two separate volumes. 
Objective 1.2: Within one year after plan submission or as required by Florida State Statutes whichever is greater, the city shall eliminate inconsistencies between the zoning regulations and adopted land use plan as a means of encouraging the reduction of uses inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
Policy 1.2.1: The city shall amend its Zoning Ordinance consistent with the permitted land uses established through the planning district guidelines (Appendix A) and the Future Land Use Map. 
Policy 1.2.2: The compatibility criteria established in the planning district guidelines (Appendix A) shall be applied in the review of new development to ensure its compatibility with existing land uses. 
Note- See the editor's note to the title of § 60.00. 
60.02. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the regular and overlay districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines; land lot lines; center lines of streets, highways, alleys or railroads; shorelines of streams, reservoirs or other bodies of water; or civil boundaries, and they shall be construed to follow such lines. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are approximately parallel to the center lines of streets, highways or railroads, streams, reservoirs or other bodies of water, or said lines extended, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map. 
(3)  Where a district boundary line, as appearing on the zoning map, divides a lot which is in single ownership at the time of enactment, the use classification of the larger portion may be extended to the remainder by the zoning official without recourse to amendment procedure. 
(4)  Where a public road, street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it is reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street or alley. 
(5)  In case the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the board of adjustment shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
60.03. - General restrictions upon land, buildings and structures. 
(a)  Use. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, structure or premises be used, designed or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than a use designated in this part, as permitted in the district in which such land, building, structure or premises is located. 
(b)  Height. No structure or building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building or structure be moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building or structure be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the building site requirements and the area and parking space and yard regulations established by this part for the district in which such building or structure is located. 
(c)  Percentage of lot occupancy. No building or structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building or structure be moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building or structure be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the building site requirements and the area and parking space and yard regulations established by this part for the district in which such building or structure is located. 
(d)  Density of population. 
(1)  Limit on number of dwelling units. No building, structure or premises shall be erected or occupied or used so as to provide a greater density of population than is allowed under the terms of this part for the district in which such building, structure or premises is located. 
(2)  Voluntary designation of lower maximum density in applications for rezoning. Any person, firm or corporation owning an interest in real property that files an application for a change in land use classification to the R2A (multifamily dwelling low-density) district, or the R3 (multifamily dwelling high-density) district, or to the TH (town house dwelling) district, or to the C2 (general commercial) district may, at his option, request such change with a maximum density limitation of less than the maximum number of dwelling units per acre permitted in the zoning district to which the applicant desires his property to be rezoned. Said request shall designate the exact lower maximum density limitation in terms of a specified number of dwelling units per acre. Said request may be specified in the application for the change in land use classification or at any time prior to final action by the City of Rockledge on said application. 
(3)  Legal effect of voluntary designation of lower density. Upon final approval by the city council of a change in land use classification with a requested designation of a lower maximum density limitation, such designation shall become a binding condition on the use of said land and the designation shall be noted on the official zoning map of Rockledge. In such event, the maximum density generally applicable in the zoning district to which such land is rezoned shall be rendered inapplicable to said land and the lower maximum density limitation designated by the applicant shall control and be the maximum density permitted in the development and use of said land. 
(e)  Open space use limitation. No yard or other open space provided about any building or structure for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this part shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building or structure. 
(f)  Required lot and occupancy. Every building or structure hereafter erected shall be located on a lot or tract as defined herein; and in no case shall there be more than one principal dwelling building on any one lot located in any of the following zoning districts, viz: RCE, R1, R2, R2A, TH or MH. 
(g)  Acceptance of substandard-sized property. After the effective date of the ordinance adding this paragraph, if any land is divided, subdivided, partitioned or sectioned off by deed or other instrument of conveyance so that any part or parcel thereof held under separate ownership is smaller in size than the minimum size building lot required by the Rockledge Zoning Code for the classification wherein such land is located, the grantee or grantees in such deed or other instrument of conveyance and their successors in title shall be deemed to have accepted delivery of such conveyance and ownership of the property therein described with full knowledge and notice that the property described in the conveyance is of substandard size and will not qualify for issuance of a building permit for the construction, repair or restoration of any building or structure on said property. 
(h)  Construction material of building exteriors in non-residential zoning districts. Any portion of a structure facing a public road right-of-way shall be constructed of, or facaded by, a permanent non-metal material such as lap siding, brick or stone veneered masonry, or finished masonry. In no case shall this portion of the structure be less than sixty (60) percent permanent non-metal material and no less than eight (8) feet in elevation from the finished floor elevation. The roof line shall be architecturally designed and constructed with a mansard roof or other acceptable industry equivalent, including metal, to enhance the appearance of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 31, 8-14-96) 
60.03.1. - Yards. 
(a)  Generally: 
(1)  Obstructions. Every part of a required yard shall be open from its lowest point to the sky, unobstructed except for the ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features, chimneys, flues and eaves. No such projection shall exceed thirty (30) inches in width. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Lot abutting an alley. Whenever a lot abuts upon an alley, one-half (1/2) of the alley width may be considered as a portion of the required rear yard; however, such width shall not exceed ten (10) feet. 
(4)  Terraces in front yards. An open, paved terrace may project into a required front yard for a distance of not exceeding ten (10) feet. 
(5)  Determination of front and depth dimensions. The narrow width of a corner lot shall determine its front for purposes of meeting the requirements of front and side yards. In cases of reversed frontages, the determination of front and side yard depths shall be made by the board of adjustment. 
(b)  Yards on corner lots with established setback lines. Where building setback lines have been established for lots fronting on streets, roads or highways, the front yard of a corner lot shall be not less than the area lying between the street right-of-way line and the established setback line for lots fronting on such street; and the side yard adjacent the side street of a corner lot shall be not less than the area lying between the street right-of-way line and the established setback line for lots fronting on such side street; except that on corner lots in MH zoning districts, the minimum setback requirements for the side yard adjacent to the side street shall be twelve and one-half (121/2) feet. 
(c)  Lot width on lots fronting a cul-de-sac or curved street. On pie-shaped or irregular shaped lots fronting on a cul-de-sac or curved street, or other location, the building line shall be parallel or tangent to the street and the building line shall be at a point where the lot width measures a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet or the measurement at the building line shall comply with the minimum lot width for the respective zone classification. In no case shall the front setback be less than that required for a standard lot in the same zone. 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, subsections (a)(1), (3)-(5), (b) and (c) of former § 25-25 of the Code of Ordinances have been included herein as § 60.03.1. 
60.04. - Exceptions to height limitations. 
(a)  Upon specific application therefor, the board of adjustment may make exceptions to the limitations and restrictions on height of buildings in all zone districts described in this part, except the single-family residential zoning districts; provided, however, that in any instance wherein such an exception is granted, the board of adjustment shall prescribe the maximum allowable height of the building or buildings involved. 
(b)  Chimneys, water, fire, radio and television towers, church spires, domes, cupolas, stage towers and scenery lofts, cooking towers, elevators and stair bulkheads, smokestacks, flagpoles, parapet walls and similar structures and their necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected above the height limits established by this part without the necessity of obtaining a waiver of or exception to the height limitation by the board of adjustment. 
60.05. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
(a)  Generally. Where, at the time of adoption of this part, lawful uses of land exist which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this part, the uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, provided: 
(1)  No such nonconforming uses shall be enlarged or increased, nor intended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this part. 
(a)  Unsafe buildings or structures. Any structure or building or portion thereof declared unsafe may be restored to a safe condition. 
(b)  Alterations. A nonconforming building may be maintained, and repairs and alterations may be made, except that no structural alterations shall be made except those required by law including eminent domain proceedings. Repairs, as plumbing or changing of partitions or other alterations, are permitted. 
(c)  Any portion of a structure that existed at the time of the adoption of the Land Development Regulations that now encroaches into the setback is considered a non-conforming building; those remaining areas will be considered conforming. 
(d)  No nonconforming building may be reconstructed when sustaining substantial damage, which shall be defined as damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its original pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure (from the date on which it was damaged). 
(2)  No such nonconforming uses shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this part. 
(3)  If any such nonconforming uses of land are discontinued or abandoned, either voluntarily or in accordance with the amortization requirements for that use, for a period of at least six (6) months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this part for the district in which such land is located. 
(4)  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this part shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
(5)  Any residential duplex that was lawfully in existence on December 5th, 1957, and located on property that first became zoned in an R2 (Single Family Dwelling) zoning district of the City of Rockledge by Rockledge City Ordinance No. 60-57 adopted by the Rockledge City Council on December 4th, 1957, and which duplex was rendered a preexisting nonconforming use in an R2 (Single Family Dwelling) district by virtue of the enactment of said Ordinance No. 60-57, and has continuously been used as a residential duplex at all times since the property on which it is located was zoned R2 (Single Family Dwelling) zoning district by Ordinance No. 60-57 aforesaid, may, in the event of the partial or total destruction of said duplex, be repaired or reconstructed in whole or in part, in accordance with the following terms and conditions: 
(i)  The building permit for the repair or reconstruction work is applied for within one year after the damage to or destruction of the duplex, and such work is progressed to completion with reasonable diligence after issuance of the building permit; and 
(ii)  Such repair or reconstruction work results in the restoration of the duplex in substantially the same structural plan and configuration as the preexisting duplex, in the footprint of the preexisting duplex, and without enlargement or expansion of the preexisting duplex; and 
(iii)  Such repair or reconstruction work conforms to all applicable building codes in effect at the time the repair or reconstruction work is performed. 
(b)  Reversion. A nonconforming use which is changed to a conforming use shall not be permitted to revert to any nonconforming use. 
(c)  Nonconformance not grounds for variance. The presence of a nonconforming use or structure in a zoning district shall not in and of itself be allowable as legal grounds for granting of variances for other surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 1008-91, § 1, 9-4-91; Ord. No. 1174-98, § 5, 11-4-98) 
60.08. - Substandard lots of record. 
    Where a lot or parcel of land has an area or frontage which does not conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot of record in Brevard County, Florida, at the effective date of this part, such lot or parcel of land may be used for a single-family dwelling in any residential district, providing the minimum yard requirements for substandard lots (see definition) are maintained. 
APPENDIX A. PLANNING DISTRICT GUIDELINES 
    Goal: Ensure a development pattern which recognizes land as a natural resource and promotes its most efficient and effective use in order to provide adequate space for all land use activities. 
60.10. - Boundary limits of Planning District 1. 
    The area is bounded by the following: 
1.  North-City limit line with Cocoa. 
2.  East-The Indian River. 
3.  South-The City limits. 
4.  West-A line starting at the south city limits three hundred feet (300') east and parallel to the east right-of-way line of U.S. 1, running north to Seminole Drive, excepting those platted residential lots west of the referenced line and contiguous to the east right-of-way line of U.S.1 which shall remain in Planning Area 1, continuing north on Seminole Drive to Orange Avenue, then east to the east property line of lots adjacent to Florida Avenue; then north along the east property lines of properties along Florida Avenue or three hundred feet (300') from the east Florida Avenue right-of-way line, whichever is less, with the exception of existing lots 1 and 28 located on Little John Lane in Sherwood Forest Subdivision #84 as recorded in Plat Book 10, page 5, and Taylor Park which shall remain in Planning Area 1. 
Planning District 1-Rockledge Drive Area 
Area Objective 
    To maintain and improve this area primarily for low and medium density residential development and ensure that future development will not substantially alter or depreciate the existing character of the area and encourage the establishment of historic districts to protect historically significant buildings in the area. 
Type of Land Use 
1.  New development in this area will be primarily limited to single family dwellings and directly related land uses such as parks, schools, utilities, streets, and other non-commercial activities whose primary purpose is to serve and improve the quality of the residential districts. 
2.  Zoning districts that may be appropriate for this area after due consideration by the City include, R1, R2 or historic zoning districts. Other zoning districts shall be approved only if consistent with, and compatible to the intent or criteria of this district. 
3.  To prohibit commercial and multi-family residential development in this area except the block bordered by Rockledge Drive on the east, Shares Drive on the west, Barton Avenue on the south and Orange Avenue on the north. Commercial uses, including marinas, piers, and docks, shall not be allowed on the property located between the east right-of-way line of Rockledge Drive and the east boundary of the City limit (Channel of the Indian River). 
4.  Encourage the establishment of historic districts to protect and enhance the historically significant sites and structures in the area. 
Density 
5.  The density of new residential development will be limited to that established by the applicable zoning district. The maximum residential density shall not exceed four (4) units per acre. 
Compatibility 
6.  Scale, materials, building orientation, signing, landscaping, detailing, and other physical features that are compatible with the intent to maintain the residential character of this district shall be incorporated in any new development. 
7.  Adequate vegetation and/or constructed (fences, walls, berms, etc.) buffers and/or open space will be used between different land uses. 
Special features to accomplish appropriate compatibility of new development with existing development shall be required through the land development regulations when the need has been identified in the site plan review process. 
Transportation 
8.  The transportation system will be maintained in accordance with the policies contained in the Traffic Circulation Element. 
9.  Strategies will be developed and coordinated with Cocoa to minimize the amount of non-residential traffic on Rockledge Drive. 
10.  Provisions for pedestrian and bicycle improvements as addressed in the Traffic Circulation Element will be incorporated into any new development. 
11.  Adequate access for sanitation, police, fire and rescue vehicles will be provided by all new development. 
Conservation 
12.  One inch of stormwater shall be detained in all new developed or redeveloped areas. 
13.  Areas east of Rockledge Drive which are within the 100 year floodplain and the Coastal High Hazard Area shall only be used for recreational purposes with construction limited to docks or piers appurtenant to upland residential properties on the Indian River or recreational facilities identified in the Recreation and Open Space Element. 
Recreation and Open Space 
14.  Development of recreational amenities within this area to take advantage of the Indian River should proceed in accordance with the policies and strategies outlined in the Recreation and Open Space Element, but shall not have an adverse effect on adjoining or historic properties. 
PLANNING DISTRICT 1 
add figure page 6-9 
60.20. - Boundary limits of Planning District 2. 
    [This area is bounded by the following:] 
1.  North-City limit line with Cocoa. 
2.  East-A line beginning at the north City limits with Cocoa and extending south along the east property lines of those properties adjacent to Florida Avenue to three hundred (300') east of the right-of-way line of Florida Avenue, whichever is less, to the Florida East Coast Railroad east right-of-way line, with the exception of existing Lots 1 and 28 located on Little John Lane in Sherwood Forest Subdivision #84 as recorded in Plat Book 10, Page 5, and Taylor Park which will remain in Planning Area 1. 
3.  Southwest-The Florida East Coast Railroad east right-of-way line. 
Planning District 2-Florida Avenue Area 
Area Objective 
    To maintain and improve this area primarily for commercial and business development while upgrading the overall existing character and appearance of the area. 
Type of Land Use 
1.  Development in this district will be primarily wholesale trade, retail trade, business and professional offices, public and semi-public services and such other uses which support and are compatible with the intent of this district. 
2.  Existing residential development shall be retained on Florida Avenue. 
3.  Development in this district may be neighborhood, community, or large-scale in nature, but may not attract such significant volumes of traffic as to create conditions on roads or intersections within or immediately adjacent to this district that result in a Level of Service below "E." 
4.  All new development proposals for this area shall be coordinated with the City of Cocoa and the City's Redevelopment Agency to ensure that it is compatible with and supportive of that City's downtown redevelopment efforts. 
Density 
5.  Residential development will be limited to existing densities. 
Compatibility 
6.  Scale, materials, building orientation, signing, landscaping, detailing, and other physical features that are compatible with the intent of this district shall be incorporated in all new development plans. 
7.  Vegetative, constructed buffers (fences, walls, berms, etc.) and/or open space will be used between different land uses, particularly between residential and non-residential. 
Special features to accomplish appropriate compatibility of new development with existing development may be required through the land development regulations when the need has been identified in the site plan review process. 
8.  Efforts will be undertaken to coordinate with the Brevard County School Board to ensure compatibility of their property with neighboring land uses. 
Transportation 
9.  Access from property fronting on U.S. 1 should, where feasible and appropriate, be strictly limited by use of shared access by different land uses or access to the property from existing side streets. 
10.  An annual monitoring program for Florida Avenue should be initiated as part of an effort to ensure adequate traffic flow on the road. 
11.  Strict limitation of access from property fronting Florida Avenue should be encouraged through the use of shared access points by different land uses or any other available means. 
12.  Where feasible, provisions for pedestrian and bicycle improvements will be made as new development occurs. 
13.  A corridor study shall be undertaken and draft development guidelines prepared which will define the potential of Florida Avenue as a major north-south arterial. 
Conservation 
14.  One inch of stormwater shall be retained in all newly developed or redeveloped areas. 
Recreation and Open Space 
15.  Land dedicated for recreation and open space or fees in lieu of shall be in conformance with the provisions of the Recreation and Open Space Element. 
PLANNING DISTRICT 2 
add figure page 6-13 
60.30. - Boundary limits of Planning District 3. 
    The hospital area is bounded by the following: 
1.  North-Orange Avenue. 
2.  Southwest-Florida East Coast Railroad east right-of-way line. 
3.  East-Seminole Avenue. 
Planning District 3-Hospital Area 
Area Objective 
    To guide and control this area as primarily a high intensity center for medical services while ensuring compatibility of future development with regional thoroughfares, local roads, and adjacent residential development. 
Type of Land Use 
1.  Development in this district will be limited to the hospital and related medical facilities and offices. 
2.  The City shall prepare urban design guidelines for the area around the Wuesthoff Hospital to assist in the orderly transition of this area from residential to medical related uses to be coordinated with the hospital. 
Density 
3.  Intensity will be limited to the maximum building height, floor area ratio and lot coverage as prescribed in the existing zoning for this area. 
Compatibility 
4.  New development will incorporate scale, materials, building, orientation, signing, landscaping, detailing, and other physical features that are compatible with the intent of this district. 
5.  Adequate vegetation constructed buffers (fences, walls, berms, etc.) and/or open space will be used to define and separate different land uses. 
Special features to accomplish appropriate compatibility of new development with existing development may be required through the urban design guidelines established for this area if determined to be necessary during the site review process. 
Transportation 
6.  A long-range program will be established for the purpose of removing all on-street parking from the area. No new development will be permitted without adequate off-street parking. 
7.  Access from property fronting U.S. 1 should, where feasible and appropriate, be strictly limited through the use of shared access by different land uses or access to the property from existing side streets. 
8.  Where feasible, provisions for pedestrian and bicycle improvements will be made by new development. 
9.  Adequate access for sanitation, police, fire, and rescue agencies shall be provided by all new development. 
10.  Efforts to beautify the US 1 corridor shall be undertaken with emphasis given to landscaping and irrigating the medians. 
Conservation 
11.  One inch of stormwater shall be retained in all newly developed or redeveloped areas. 
Recreation and Open Space 
12.  No lands are anticipated to be dedicated to the provision of parks within this district. 
PLANNING DISTRICT 3 
add figure page 6-16 
60.40. - Boundary limits of Planning District 4. 
    The Poinsett Area is bounded by the following: 
1.  North-Orange Avenue. 
2.  East-Florida East Coast Railroad east right-of way line. 
3.  South-The drainage ditch located in the vicinity of the half section line of section 4. 
4.  West-The west right-of-way line of the Huntington Boulevard extension from the half section line of section 4 north to the City limits. 
Planning District 4-The Poinsett Area 
Area Objective 
    To guide and control this area for future light industrial development while ensuring compatibility with the area's natural systems, adjacent land uses and local access roadways. 
Type of Land Use 
1.  Development in this area will be limited primarily to light industrial uses and directly related land uses. 
2.  Neighborhood commercial development, consistent in scale and intensity with adjacent residential land uses, may be allowed on property fronting Poinsett Drive. 
Density 
3.  The intensity of development will be limited by the capacity of the area to accommodate development given the natural constraints to development. 
Compatibility 
4.  New development will incorporate scale, materials, building orientation, signing, landscaping, detailing and other physical features that are compatible with the intent to establish a quality and site sensitive development. 
5.  Adequate vegetative buffers, constructed buffers (fences, walls, berms, etc.) and/or open space will be used between differing land uses. 
Transportation 
6.  New development will provide for adequate access to land uses within the area for sanitation, police, fire, and rescue vehicles. 
7.  Where feasible, provisions for pedestrian and bicycle improvements as addressed in the Traffic Circulation Element will be made by new development. 
Conservation 
8.  All new development will conform to the floodplain requirements found within the Conservation Element. 
9.  All new development will be responsible for ensuring adequate drainage for their facilities so that no additional burden is placed on public drainage facilities. 
Recreation and Open Space 
10.  This district is considered appropriate for a community park as addressed in the Recreation and Open Space Element. 
PLANNING DISTRICT 4 
add figure page 6-19 
60.50. - Boundary limits of Planning District 5. 
    [This area is bounded by the following:] 
1.  North-The north and east boundary of the Village Green Shopping Center, then east along Barton Blvd. to the west line of section 4, then north to the north boundary of McLarty Park, then east to the east boundary of Barton Park Manor Subdivision, then north to the drainage ditch located in the vicinity of the half section line of section 4, then east to the Florida East Coast Railroad east right-of-way line. 
2.  East-The Florida East Coast Railroad east right-of-way line south to the west line of Section 10, continuing due south to the intersection of Murrell Road and Eyster Boulevard. 
3.  West-Fiske Boulevard. 
4.  South-Eyster Boulevard, west to Fiske Boulevard. 
Planning District 5-Barton Boulevard Area 
Area Objective 
    To guide development in this area toward the establishment of a mixed use area consisting of highly intensive mixed uses while maintaining compatibility with regional thoroughfares, local roads, municipal systems, and adjacent land uses. 
Type of Land Use 
1.  Development in this district will be limited to retail trade, business and professional offices, multiple family attached dwellings, public and semi-public service, parks and open space, and directly related land uses such as utilities, streets, parking facilities, and other such activities that are compatible with and support the intent of this district. 
Density 
2.  The density of new residential development in this Planning District is limited to a maximum of fourteen (14) dwelling units per acre, except that the maximum density for an older adult living facility qualifying as "housing for older persons" under the provisions of F.S. § 760.29(4), is twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre if all of such facility, or the major portion thereof, is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a community park as defined in the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan, and a special exception for the older adult living facility is first granted by the city. In order to qualify for the special exception a proposed older adult living facility must be located more than one thousand (1,000) feet distant from any other older adult living facility, such distance being measured from the nearest property line of any one such facility to the nearest property line of any other such facility, and must meet other specific site and construction requirements established by the Rockledge Land Development Regulations. An older adult living facility that qualified for a special exception will be entitled to a reduction in the minimum room size requirement otherwise applicable to multifamily dwelling units in Planning District 5, the extent of such reduction to be established by Rockledge Land Development Regulations. The increased density and smaller room size allowances for older adult living facilities will help to lower the per unit rental cost of the project and will help to accommodate the special housing needs of the elderly and handicapped population of the city. 
Compatibility 
3.  Urban design guidelines shall be developed which address appropriate scale, materials, building orientation, signing, landscaping, detailing, and other physical features within the District. 
4.  Adherence to the design guidelines shall be required to ensure orderly development of the area and compatibility of uses within and adjacent to the district. 
5.  Adequate vegetation, constructed buffers (fences, walls, berms, etc.) and/or open space will be used between different land uses. 
Transportation 
6.  Where possible, direct ingress and egress by new development on regional thoroughfares will be prohibited or severely limited. 
7.  A corridor improvement study for Barton Boulevard will be undertaken in conjunction with the appropriate transportation agencies to ensure a continued acceptable Level of Service and an aesthetically pleasing design supportive of the intent of the district. The four-laning of Eyster Boulevard should be given a high priority. 
8.  Where feasible, provisions for pedestrian and bicycle improvements will be made. 
Conservation 
9.  New development will provide adequate treatment of stormwater prior to discharge. 
Recreation and Open Space 
10.  New multi-family development will provide adequate open space and/or recreational facilities for occupants of the development. 
(Ord. No. 1049-93, § 2, 4-21-93) 
PLANNING DISTRICT 5 
add figure page 6-22 
60.60. - Boundary limits of Planning District 6. 
    The Murrell Road Area is bounded by the following: 
1.  Northeast-A line parallel to and three hundred feet (300') east of the east right-of-way line of U.S. 1, excepting those platted single-family subdivision lots recorded as October 5, 1988, which shall remain in Planning Area 1. 
2.  South-The north boundary of Section 22. 
3.  West-A line parallel to and six hundred thirty feet (630') west of Murrell Road from the South city limits to Eyster Boulevard, excepting those platted single family subdivision lots recorded as of October 5, 1988, which shall remain in Planning Area 8, Fiske Boulevard Area, then east to Murrell Road, then due north to U.S. 1. 
Planning District 6-Murrell Road Area 
Area Objective 
    To establish this area as a high quality office/industrial park, with varying peripheral land uses, which is compatible with and incorporates within its design the area's natural systems. 
Type of Land Use 
1.  Development in this area shall consist primarily of light industrial uses and professional or business offices. 
2.  Residential uses may be allowed to locate on the west side of Murrell Road to a depth of six hundred thirty (630) feet. Commercial uses may also be allowed to a depth of three hundred (300) feet. 
3.  New development between U.S. 1 and the Florida East Coast Railroad should be limited to commercial uses. Existing industrial uses currently located within this area shall be discouraged from expanding. 
4.  Development east of U.S. 1 will be limited to commercial uses. 
Density 
5.  New residential development shall be developed at a maximum of fourteen (14) dwelling units per acre on the west side of Murrell Road to a depth of three hundred (300) feet and eight (8) dwelling units per acre to a depth of three hundred thirty (330) feet beyond the front three hundred (300) feet. 
Compatibility 
6.  Scale, materials, building orientation, signing, landscaping, detailing, and other physical features that are compatible with the intent to maintain the residential character of this district shall be incorporated in any new development. 
7.  Adequate vegetation constructed (fences, walls, berms, etc.) buffers and/or open space will be used between different land uses. 
Special features to accomplish appropriate compatibility of new development with existing development shall be required through the land development regulations when the need has been identified through the site plan review process. 
8.  County lands on Murrell Road should be encouraged to develop consistent with the policies of this planning area and when appropriate, annexed into the City. 
Transportation 
9.  An internal circulation and access plan for the district shall be prepared by City staff and approved by the governing body. 
10.  As part of the internal circulation and access plan, consideration shall be given to strictly limiting direct ingress and egress by new development onto the major thoroughfares within the district. 
11.  Where appropriate, provisions for pedestrian and bicycle improvements shall be made by new development. 
12.  Efforts to beautify the U.S. 1 corridor shall be undertaken with emphasis given to landscaping and irrigating the medians. 
Conservation 
13.  All development in the district shall adhere to the floodplain policies and requirements addressed in the Conservation Element. 
Recreation and Open Space 
14.  New residential development will provide the necessary open space and/or recreational facilities to serve their occupants. 
(Ord. No. 1049-93, §§ 3-5, 4-21-93) 
PLANNING DISTRICT 6 
add figure page 6-26 
60.70. - Boundary limits of Planning District 7. 
    The Barnes Boulevard Area is bounded by the following: 
1.  North-The north boundary line of Section 21 and the south line of the 50' road and utility easement in section 22. 
2.  East-The Florida East Coast Railroad. 
3.  South-The City limits line. 
4.  West-The City limits line. 
Planning District 7-Barnes Boulevard Area 
Area Objective 
    To create a mixed use district having a mixture of residential types with limited commercial, industrial, and office uses. 
Type of Land Use 
1.  Development in this district will primarily consist of single family, multiple family, manufactured housing, and directly related land uses such as parks, schools, utilities, streets and other such activities whose primary purpose is to serve the residents of the area. 
2.  Commercial development may be allowed along Barnes Boulevard consistent with traffic design requirements for protecting the capacity of roadway and based upon an established need for commercial development within the district and unincorporated areas adjacent to the district. 
3.  Through a joint planning agreement with Brevard County, determine appropriate land uses and guidelines for future development around the I-95/Fiske Boulevard Interchange. 
4.  Industrial park development with limited commercial and office uses shall be encouraged to locate east of Murrell Road. 
5.  The City shall undertake steps to execute an interlocal agreement with Brevard County which identifies as an Urban Reserve Area land adjacent to this district. 
Density 
6.  The density of new residential development will be limited to a maximum of ten (10) dwelling units per acre and will be subject to extensive compatibility tests for consistency with this area. 
Compatibility 
7.  Scale, materials, building orientation, signing, landscaping, detailing, and other physical features that are compatible with the intent to maintain the residential character of this district shall be incorporated in any new development. 
8.  Adequate vegetation constructed (fences, walls, berms, etc.) buffers and/or open space will be used between different land uses. 
Special features to accomplish appropriate compatibility of new development with existing development shall be required through the land development regulations when the need has been identified through the site plan review process. 
Transportation 
9.  Encourage the extension of Murrell Road south. 
10.  Direct ingress and egress by new development on major roadways will be severely limited. 
11.  Where appropriate, provisions for pedestrian and bicycle improvement will be made. 
12.  The City shall encourage and support improvements to Barnes Boulevard as a priority item of Brevard County. 
Conservation 
13.  All development within the district will occur in a manner consistent with the policies contained in the Conservation Element. 
14.  New development will provide adequate treatment of stormwater. 
Recreation and Open Space 
15.  Consistent with the policies of the Recreation and Open Space Element, a community or larger park should be established. 
PLANNING DISTRICT 7 
add figure page 6-29 
60.80. - Boundary limits of Planning District 8. 
    The Fiske Boulevard Area is bounded by the following: 
1.  North-The City limit line. 
2.  East-A line running south along the Huntington Lane west right-of-way to the south boundary line of Barton Park Manor then west to the west boundary line of Section 4, then south to Barton Blvd., then west along Barton Blvd. to the east boundary of Village Green Shopping Center, then north and west along the shopping center boundary to Fiske Boulevard, then south to Eyster Boulevard, then east to a point six hundred thirty feet (630') west of Murrell Road, then south to the south line of Section 16, with the exception of those platted single family residential lots within said six hundred thirty feet (630') which shall remain in Planning Area 8. 
3.  South-The south line of Section 16. 
4.  West-The City limit line. 
Planning District 8-Fiske Boulevard Area 
Area Objective 
    To maintain and improve this area as a low and medium density residential area and ensure that future development will not substantially alter or depreciate the existing character of the area. 
Type of Land Use 
1.  Development within the districts will be limited primarily to single family detached dwellings and directly related land uses such as parks, schools, utilities, streets, and other such activities whose primary purpose is to serve the residents of the district. 
2.  Limited commercial, professional, and multi-family residential uses will be considered in appropriate locations based on severe compatibility and consistency tests. 
3.  The City shall undertake steps to develop through an interlocal agreement with Brevard County an Urban Reserve Area which encompasses unincorporated areas adjacent to this district. 
Density 
4.  Maximum density allowed shall not exceed five (5) dwelling units per acre, except where current zoning has been approved at higher densities. 
Compatibility 
5.  Scale, materials, building orientation, signing, landscaping, detailing, and other physical features that are compatible with the intent to maintain the residential character of this district shall be incorporated in any new development. 
6.  Adequate vegetation constructed (fences, walls, berms, etc.) buffers and/or open space will be used between different land uses. 
Special features to accomplish appropriate compatibility of new development with existing development shall be required through the land development regulations when the need has been identified through the site plan review process. 
7.  Encourage the undeveloped areas west of Fiske Boulevard to develop at low densities in order to protect the natural character of the land. 
8.  Encourage the development of the land lying south of Levitt Park, east of Fiske Boulevard, and six hundred thirty feet (630') or more west of Murrell Road as low and medium density residential areas utilizing the P.U.D. provisions of the Zoning Code. 
9.  Encourage neighborhood commercial development on the lots fronting on Poinsett Drive between Fiske Boulevard and Howard Street. 
Transportation 
10.  Encourage a north-south collector road from the Clearlake Road Extension into an existing roadway in King's Grant Subdivision. 
11.  The transportation system will be maintained in accordance with the policies contained in the Traffic Circulation Element. 
12.  Provisions for pedestrian and bicycle improvements as addressed in the Traffic Circulation Element will be incorporated into any new development. 
13.  Adequate access for sanitation, police, fire and rescue vehicles will be provided by all new development. 
14.  Extension of Clearlake Road to Barton Boulevard should be considered a priority road improvement project. 
15.  Encourage the development of an east-west corridor between Woodsmere Parkway and Barnes Boulevard. 
Conservation 
16.  The City shall undertake efforts to work with Brevard County in preserving those wetland areas west of Fiske Boulevard. 
Recreation and Open Space 
17.  Consistent with the policies of the Open Space and Recreation Element, a community park or larger sized park should be established in the southernmost portion of the planning district. 
PLANNING DISTRICT 8 
add figure page 6-33 
60.90. - Shepard Park Affordable Housing Overlay District. 
(a)  Purpose. As a result of the serious workforce housing shortage in Brevard County and City of Rockledge, the city is proposing to use an affordable housing overlay concept to provide additional areas for the construction of housing units for the city's workforce. It is hoped that this affordable housing overlay will provide opportunity areas for a variety of housing sponsors (non-profit, private for-profit and employer-assisted housing providers) to develop affordable housing within close proximity to major employment sites. 
Within the overlay area, the underlying incentives remain in place until the project demonstrates that it can satisfy established criteria. With the satisfaction of criteria and project approval, the site may then be developed. 
(b)  Housing levels within overlay areas. New housing units within the affordable housing overlay area are intended to be one hundred (100) percent affordable to the area's workforce. They are to be priced at levels affordable to the moderate, low and very low income households as defined by U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Brevard County Housing and Human Services Department criteria. The proportion of housing to be built at each level is to reflect the distribution of income levels for the particular area of the city. The city is looking for three (3) units being built to meet the needs of thirty (30) percent to fifty (50) percent medium income level; eight (8) units being built to meet the housing needs of fifty (50) percent to eighty (80) percent medium income level; and twenty-five (25) units being built to meet the housing needs of eighty (80) percent to one hundred twenty (120) percent of medium income level. Infill areas throughout Shepard Park should be a mixture of all classifications. In order to assure long-term affordability of the units, the units are to be deed restricted to ensure resale to moderate, low, and very low income households. 
(c)  Area designation. The Shepard Park Subdivision area offers the greatest flexibility by all parties to meet the serious shortages in workforce housing. The overlay district shall include the area shown in the map attached hereto as Attachment 1. [A copy of Attachment 1 can be found in the offices of the city.] 
(d)  Process: This is a voluntary program whereby individual property owners within the designated affordable housing overlay area can request that their site be designated as an affordable housing site. Each site will be evaluated by designated members of city staff to determine its potential to serve as affordable housing. Site analysis will consider the factors described below. The most important factor is the consideration of the suitability of the site to accommodate an affordable workforce housing project in one of the levels stated in subsection (b) above. 
(1)  As a part of the review of the project, staff will work with the project applicants to achieve the distribution of units that are needed to meet the area's wage earner household income needs. It is recognized that housing types and project design may need to differ depending upon the specific site, but applicants will be required to demonstrate that all of the housing to be produced within the project will be affordable to the Rockledge workforce area. 
(2)  Higher densities and a variety of housing types are encouraged to assure that the housing products will be priced at levels that are within the means of the very low, low, moderate, and workforce household income levels. Small-lot single-family homes, cottages, townhomes or housing over retail for homeownership (where commercial zoning is in place) and/or rental are all housing types that may be appropriate within overlay areas. 
(3)  A conceptual plan approved by the planning commission and city council will require no additional meetings before the planning commission or city council, as long as the plan is not significantly altered. 
(e)  Project suitability criteria. The determination of whether parcels within the overlay area are suitable for an affordable incentive bonus will require satisfaction of all the following criteria: 
(1)  The site is located within a designated affordable housing overlay area; 
(2)  The housing types proposed result in sales prices that are affordable to the local area's workforce, based on the distribution of moderate, low and very-low income levels; 
(3)  Neighborhood commercial services are within a half mile of the proposed development; and 
(4)  The project is able to connect to community water and sewer and other public services are available. 
(f)  Incentives: To encourage voluntary participation in the affordable housing overlay process, the city may provide the following incentives: 
(1)  Streamlined permitting process. 
(2)  Waiver or deferral of planning and building permit fees (but not fees for the purpose of financing infrastructure improvements). 
(3)  Priority allocation of concurrency review items. 
(4)  Reduction of setbacks. 
(5)  Increased flexibility in types of housing units. 
(g)  Uses: 
(1)  Principal. No building, structure, land or water shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses: 
a.  Single-family dwellings. 
b.  Townhouses (no more than four (4) attached). 
c.  Foster care home with a maximum of three (3) clients, provided said foster care home meets all of the special conditions, standards and requirements set forth in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
d.  Group care facility with a maximum of three (3) clients, provided said group care facility meets all of the special conditions, standards and requirements set forth in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
e.  Emergency shelter home for children, provided said emergency shelter home for children meets all of the special conditions, standards and requirements set forth in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(2)  Accessory. The following uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
a.  Garages, carports or space for the housing or parking of private automobiles. 
b.  Guest cottages having an electrical meter shared with the principal structure, and limited to a maximum of six hundred (600) square feet. 
c.  Ordinary public utility uses and rights-of-way. 
d.  Swimming pools. 
e.  Detached accessory building, subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(h)  Setback requirements. 
(1)  Front. The minimum front setback required is ten (10) feet, except for the garage, which, when facing the street, must be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Rear. The minimum rear setback required for the principal building is twenty (20) feet from the rear lot line; except that the minimum rear setback for a screened porch attached to the rear of a principal building is fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Side. The minimum side setback required is seven and one-half (71/2) feet from either one of the side lot lines of the property, and seven and one-half (71/2) feet from the other (opposite) side lot line of the property. When attached units are built there shall be a zero setback between townhouse units. 
(4)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a setback of not less than twenty (20) feet from existing street rights-of-way and the same as subsection (a) of this section. 
(5)  Accessory building setback requirements. Detached accessory buildings are subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(6)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a house, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
(i)  Height requirements. 
(1)  Building height. Maximum building height is twenty-five (25) feet. Affordable housing units may have an increase the height, if approved by the planning commission and city council; however, the side setbacks must increase one (1) foot horizontally for every one-foot increase in height. 
(j)  Lot requirements. 
(1)  Area. The minimum lot area required is five thousand (5,000) square feet, except that corner lots shall be seventy-five hundred (7,500) square feet for single-family detached. Attached structures must be a minimum of twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
(2)  Width. Detached structures shall have a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet, except that corner lots shall be sixty (60) feet. Attached structures shall have a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Depth. Detached and attached structures shall have a minimum lot depth of ninety (90) feet. 
(4)  Buildings. Not more than one principal dwelling building shall be constructed or placed on any one lot. 
(5)  Lots may be reconfigured to allow for the design of attached townhouses; however, the net density of the entire area may not be increased nor the number of lots increased. 
(k)  Building requirements. 
(1)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is thirty-five (35) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures, excluding driveways and concrete slabs, located thereon. The maximum allowable lot coverage by driveways and concrete slabs is twenty (20) percent. An accessory building not exceeding twelve (12) feet in height may occupy not more than thirty-five (35) percent of a required rear yard. This provision does not apply to swimming pools. 
(2)  Area. The minimum living area is nine hundred (900) square feet; the maximum living area shall be fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet for affordable housing project units. 
(3)  Density. The maximum density for this overlay area shall be restricted to the number of units in this unrecorded subdivision. 
(l)  Reimbursement of fees. The property owner requesting the designation of his property for the incentives set out in subsection (f) above must execute an agreement, which will be recorded in the public records as a lien on the property for repayment of any incentives granted to him by the city should he sell and/or transfer title to the property as follows: 
(1)  Reimburse the city one hundred (100) percent of all incentives if the property is sold within one (1) year of the grant of incentives. 
(2)  Reimburse the city seventy-five (75) percent of all incentives if the property is sold within two (2) years of the grant of incentives. 
(3)  Reimburse the city fifty (50) percent of all incentives if the property is sold within three (3) years of the grant of incentives. 
(4)  Reimburse the city twenty-five (25) percent of all incentives if the property is sold within four (4) years of the grant of incentives. 
(5)  No reimbursement after four (4) years. 
(Ord. No. 1415-2006, § 1, 8-16-06; Ord. No. 1437-2007, § 1, 1-17-07) 
61.00. - OUTSIDE DISPLAY AREAS 
(A)  Outside display areas are not to be considered outside storage yards. These areas, if approved are for the purpose of displaying merchandise which is for sale or lease of the person having an occupational license, and operating the business from that location. The provisions apply only to those properties having zoning categories outside residential. 
(B)  The planning commission will review and recommend for approval all outside display areas in the City of Rockledge, upon being in receipt of a completed application form and all other associated documents and materials. Approval will be granted by the planning commission in accordance with the following regulations. 
(C)  Submittal requirements for planning commission review and recommendation for approval to city council include the following: 
1.  Must receive completed application and all associated documentation ten (10) working days prior to planning commission meeting date. 
2.  Letter from the parking board approving any reduction of required parking spaces. 
3.  Proposed display area must be shown on an approved site plan, or survey showing all property lines, parking areas and buildings, this site plan must be to scale. 
4.  A letter of permission from the owner requesting to have a display area is necessary or one giving permission to act on their behalf is needed. 
5.  Evidence is needed showing the total square footage of the site; the square footage of developed area; the leasable space; and the required number of parking spaces needed. 
6.  A written letter from the building department that the signage and landscaping requirements meet today standards or the applicant has been issued a building permit to retrofit the property in question to bring the landscaping and signage into compliance. 
7.  Copy of issued building permit to bring property into compliance. 
8.  Copy of current occupational license. 
9.  Copy of receipt showing the one hundred dollars ($100.00) application fee had been paid. 
(D)  Limits and conditions needed for receiving an outside display area permit: 
1.  Only one percent or up to four thousand (4,000) square feet, whichever is smaller of the leased or developed property may be used as a display area. 
2.  All current landscaping and signage regulations for the entire site must meet current Code Standards. 
3.  Parking area should be used, however no required parking for the site as determined by code shall be encumbered unless written authorization is received by the parking board, with the understanding that the parking board may rescind their approval if parking becomes a problem and complaints are received. 
4.  No additional signage may be placed on displayed items, except for the price of sale or rental cost, which shall be restricted to no greater than one (1) square foot. 
5.  The maximum display height shall be set forth at twelve (12) feet, except for individual landscape plants. 
6.  Approved display areas must be delineated by the use of permanent paint or other non-toxic substance on the surface/ground where approved. 
7.  There shall be no interference with pedestrian or vehicle movement into the principle structure of the parking area. 
8.  Display of items is limited to current on-site inventory materials or goods, only. 
9.  Display areas must be setback five (5) feet from the right-of-way and five (5) feet from any side property line, and outside the site triangle. 
10.  Display areas must be an accessory use to a principle use. 
11.  Any display area of one thousand (1,000) square feet or more in accordance with the one percent rule, shall be required to be setback at least fifty (50) feet from any right-of-way and twenty (20) feet from any side property line, unless the display area is shielded from the right-of-way, then the provisions of condition 9 shall be followed. 
12.  Display areas proposed to be used on pedestrian walkways may not be encumbered by more than fifty (50) percent or allow less than a four-foot clear path for walking. 
13.  No tent or any structure shall be built or placed within a display area, without a permit and city council approval. 
14.  All display items shall be removed during times of emergency, when directed by the city. 
15.  No additional lighting shall be used or installed to highlight the display area. 
16.  No temporary sign or portable sign or banner(s) may be located or used on property having materials or equipment in an approved display area. 
17.  Display areas must remain clean at all times. 
18.  Display areas may not cause visual impairments for vehicles or pedestrians when trying to ingress or egress the property. 
19.  Only the property owner may request a display area for any developed or leased area. A lessee may act as the owner's agent upon receiving written authorization. 
(E)  Enforcement: 
1.  Failure to abide by all rule and regulations outlined above will result in the suspension of the right to have an outside display area, for a thirty-day period when noticed for a first offense. All additional offenses will result in a display area suspension for a period of one (1) year following the second notice from the city. Full re-application for a display area may occur after the one-year period. 
2.  Appeals from any suspension for using approved outside display areas, imposed by the building department, may be taken before the planning commission for a decision on the suspension, within thirty (30) days. All appeals must be in writing and submitted to staff ten (10) days prior to the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 6, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1301-2003, § 1, 2-5-03) 
SECTION 61.90. - COMPATIBILITY AND CONSISTENCY 
    "Compatibility and consistency" under all circumstances shall mean a rigidly methodical review of development standards to ensure differing land uses or conditions can coexist in relative proximity to each other in a stable fashion over time and that primary uses and conditions of an existing Planning District are not unduly negatively impacted directly or indirectly by another use or condition. 
    The Staff, Planning Commission and City Council shall use similar techniques to ensure compatibility and consistency between differing uses by increased setbacks; increased landscape buffers; increased wall heights; height reduction; the clustering of buildings away from pre-existing residential; the preservation of natural buffers; and the incorporation and suitability of design standards used by existing surrounding development. 
    "Suitability" means the degree to which the existing characteristics and limitations of existing land use or development are compatible with a newly proposed use or development. 
A.  Setback standards from single-family residential units. It has been determined that the average one-story, single-family dwelling unit has an average adjusted height of sixteen feet (16') and that the average two-story, single-family dwelling unit has an average adjusted height of twenty-five feet (25'). The minimum setback between a single-family project and multi-family or non-residential project is twenty-five feet (25'). Any proposed project adjacent to single-family with heights above the average single-family heights must increase the required setbacks as stated below: 
Additional setbacks standards above average adjusted heights: 
1-10 feet Setbacks are increased by two (2) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase over the established adjusted height of the adjoining existing neighborhood; add 11-20 feet Setbacks are increased by four (4) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase over the established adjusted height of the adjoining existing neighborhood; add 21-30 feet Setbacks are increased by six (6) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase over the established adjusted height of the adjoining existing neighborhood; add 31-60 feet Setbacks are increased by eight (8) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase over the established adjusted height of the adjoining existing neighborhood.  
B.  Density difference mitigation. Density differences between uses will require increases in landscape buffering and landscape enhancements between the existing neighborhood and the proposed project and/or the increased height of required buffering wall and/or the incorporation of increased architectural elements of the differing uses. 
RCE = 1 
R1 = 3 
R2 = 5 
R2A = 8 
R3 = 14 
Commercial density is calculated at one Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) per 937.5 square feet of building space (a thirteen thousand-square-foot building on one acre of land is equal to fourteen (14) residential units). 
Example: a proposed multi-family project building having fourteen (14) dwelling units per acre (d.u.a.) next to property zoned R2 having 5 d.u.a. must mitigate for the difference in densities, or 9 d.u.a. 
Projects are required to mitigate for density differences by using the following options: 
1.  Landscape enhancement features: Increase landscaping along properties having differing uses (must use at least one planting level). 
A.  Adding medium and small size trees. 
• Planting every twenty-five (25) feet: Two (2) points. 
• Planting every twenty (20) feet: Three (3) points. 
• Planting every fifteen (15) feet: Four (4) points. 
• Planting every ten (10) feet: Five (5) points. 
2.  Design features: Each design feature worth one point (choose a minimum of three (3)): 
• Canopies or porticos, integrated with the building's massing and style; 
• Overhangs; 
• Arcades, a minimum of six (6) feet clear in width; 
• Raised cornice parapets over doors; 
• Peaked roof forms; 
• Arches; 
• Ornamental and structural architectural details, other than cornices, which are integrated into the building structure and overall design, pursuant to these regulations; 
• Any other treatments which, in the opinion of the city, meet the intent of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1522-2009, § 1, 7-15-09) 
SECTION 62.00. - ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS/ACCESSORY USES WITHIN ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, former §§ 25-1-25-6 of the Code of Ordinances have been included herein as §§ 62.03-62.08. 

62.01. - Establishment of districts generally. 
1.  Introduction. The City of Rockledge, Florida, is hereby divided into zoning districts, as listed and described below, with such requirements as set forth for the purpose of implementing the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
    The following are established in this part: 
(1)  The legislative intent of each district; 
(2)  General requirements for each district; 
(3)  Basic regulations regarding setback, height, densities and like matter; 
(4)  Special requirements as needed; 
(5)  The corporate area of the city is divided into districts, as follows: 
RCE Residential Country Estate R1 Single-Family Dwelling District R2 Single-Family Dwelling District R2A Multifamily Dwelling (Low-Density) District R3 Multifamily Dwelling (High-Density) District TH Town House Dwelling District MH Mobile Home District TTP Travel Trailer Park District C1 Neighborhood Retail Commercial District C1A Restricted Commercial District C2 General Commercial District P1 Professional District M1 Light Industrial and Warehousing District M2 Planned Industrial District IP Industrial Park District PUD Planned Unit Development District  
62.02. - Zoning map. 
    The zoning map of the City of Rockledge, Florida, which complies with the requirements of Section 163.3177, Florida Statutes, and which is dated August 4, 1999, and has affixed thereon the seal of the City of Rockledge, and the signature of Betsi Beatty Moist, City Clerk, is hereby adopted and declared to be the official zoning map of the City of Rockledge, and the same is by these apt words of reference incorporated herein and made a part of these regulations as fully and completely as if said zoning map were visually and graphically depicted at this place in these regulations. Said zoning map is hereby adopted and established to identify zoning district boundaries pursuant to Section 163.3177, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1188-99, § 1, 8-4-99) 
62.03. - Title. 
    This part shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Rockledge, Florida." 
62.04. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Rockledge to consider the classification of property into zoning districts as subject to the control of the City of Rockledge pursuant to Chapter 163 of the Florida Statutes for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the city. It is intended that these regulations supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the building code, comprehensive plan, subdivision regulations and capital budget of the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
62.05. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purposes of this part, and the zoning districts and regulations herein set forth, are to provide for the orderly growth of the City of Rockledge, to encourage the most appropriate use of land, to protect and conserve the value of property, to prevent the overcrowding of land, [and] to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Further: 
(1)  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this part, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. 
(2)  It is not intended by this part to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between the parties. 
(3)  Where this part imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces, [than those required by other] rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this part shall control. 
(4)  This part shall not be construed as superseding any special act of the legislature relative to the subject matter of this part. 
(5)  If, because of an error or omission in the zoning map, any property in the city is not shown as being in a zoning district, the classification of such property shall be established by the city council. 
62.06. - Authority. 
    By authority of ordinance, the city council of the City of Rockledge (hereinafter referred to as "council") adopted pursuant to the powers and jurisdictions vested through Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, the council does hereby exercise the power to classify land within the corporate limits of the City of Rockledge, Florida, into zoning districts and to review, approve and/or disapprove requests to change zoning classifications, requests for conditional uses, requests for variances and to hear appeals on any decisions. 
62.07. - Jurisdiction. 
    The provisions of this part shall apply to all land, buildings, structures and to the uses thereof, within the City of Rockledge, Florida. No land, building or structure shall be moved, added to or enlarged, altered or maintained, except in conformity with the provisions of this part. 
62.08. - Enactment. 
    This part shall take effect and be enforced immediately after its adoption. 
62.09. - Setback requirements within the community redevelopment district. 
    Within the area of the Rockledge Community Redevelopment District as defined by Resolution 2002-481 and Ordinance 1277-2002, there exists an overlay provision which empowers, upon request by a developer or staff on all new or remodeled properties, the reduction or elimination of setback requirements upon the unanimous approval of the City Manager, Building Official and Chairman of the Rockledge Community Redevelopment Agency. Any structure given modified setbacks shall automatically become conforming structures. 
(Ord. No. 1325-2003, § 1, 10-15-03; Ord. No. 1376-2005, § 5, 5-4-05) 
SECTION 62.10. - RCE-RESIDENTIAL COUNTRY ESTATE DISTRICT 

62.11. - Intent. 
    The purpose of the RCE district is to establish areas where very low residential densities may be maintained and where investment in homes will be protected from the adverse affects sometimes found in agricultural districts. While the RCE (Residential Country Estate) district is primarily residential, certain uses found only in agricultural areas are permitted. 
62.12. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. No building, structure, land or water shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Citrus and other fruit crop cultivation and production; however, no retail sales shall be conducted on the premises. 
(3)  Plant nurseries and greenhouses; provided, that there shall be no retailing of products on the premises. 
(4)  Truck farming and gardens; provided, that there shall be no retail sales conducted on the premises. 
(5)  Real estate and identification signs, subject to standards established in Part VIII of this Code. 
(6)  The raising, keeping or maintenance of horses and cows for domestic purposes; provided, that if the lot, parcel or tract of land of an ownership is one acre in size not more than three (3) of such animals shall be permitted on such lot, parcel or tract of land, and if the lot, parcel or tract of land of an ownership exceeds one acre in size, one additional such animal shall be permitted for each fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of the overall land area in excess of one acre. The raising, keeping or maintenance of horses and cows in excess of the numbers herein authorized shall not be permitted in the RCE Residential Country Estate districts. 
(7)  Community residential home, six (6) or fewer residents meeting the requirements in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(8)  Home occupation, subject to the standards and requirements established in Section 80.03. 
(b)  Accessory. The following uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Garages, carport or space for the housing or parking of private automobiles. 
(2)  Barns, corrals, utility sheds and pens. 
(3)  Guest cottages without kitchen facilities, as "guest cottages" are specifically defined in Part I of this Code. 
(4)  Ordinary public utility uses and rights-of-way. 
(5)  Servants' quarters (attached or detached) for year-round, on-premises employees of the owner of the principal residence, not to exceed one dwelling unit (servants' quarters) for each three (3) acres of land. Such servants' quarters may have kitchen facilities. If the quarters are detached, they shall have a living area of not less than four hundred (400) square feet nor more than eight hundred (800) square feet. Such quarters shall not be rented to nor occupied by persons other than bona fide permanent full-time, on-premises employees of the owner of the principal residence, or by members of the immediate family of such an employee, and such quarters, whether attached or detached, shall not have, nor be equipped with, an electric meter separate and independent from the main electric meter for the principal residence. 
(6)  Boat houses and boat docks. 
(7)  Swimming pools. 
(8)  Tennis courts. 
(c)  Special exception. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted as per Section 31.50. 
(1)  Private schools with conventional academic curriculums, including colleges and universities. 
(2)  Public or privately owned and operated recreation facilities open to the public, such as, but not limited to, athletic fields, stadiums, swimming pools, camping and picnicking areas. 
(3)  Hospitals, sanitariums and nursing homes. 
(4)  Public utility structures. 
(5)  Riding stables, when located on a tract of not less than ten (10) acres; provided, that no structures, pen or corral housing animals shall be closer than two hundred (200) feet from any property line; and provided, that there shall be no more than one animal per acre of lot area. 
(6)  Clubs, such as country and golf clubs, gun clubs, fishing clubs or similar organizations. 
(7)  Community residential home, seven (7) to ten (10) residents. 
(8)  Care unit, ten (10) or fewer residents. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in this district: 
(1)  Fruit and produce stands. 
(2)  Mobile homes. 
(3)  Retail, wholesale and manufacturing establishments. 
(4)  Outdoor advertising signs. 
(5)  The raising, maintaining or keeping of swine, poultry, fowl or other birds. 
(6)  Group care facilities with four (4) or more clients, adult congregate living facilities (ACLF), and treatment and recovery facilities. 
(7)  Child care centers, other than as a special exception under the circumstances and conditions set forth in subsection (c)(2) above. 
(Ord. No. 1017-91, §§ 3, 4, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 1379-2005, § 1, 6-1-05; Ord. No. 1530-2009, § 2A., 9-23-09) 
62.13. - Lot requirements. 
(b)  Width. The minimum lot width required is one hundred thirty (130) feet. 
(c)  Depth. The minimum lot depth required is one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(d)  Buildings. Not more than one principal dwelling building shall be constructed or placed on any one lot.
(a)  Area. The minimum lot area required is one acre.  
62.14. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback required is fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback required is thirty-five (35) feet. 
(c)  Side. The minimum side setback required is twenty (20) feet. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a setback not less than fifty (50) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(e)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of the principal building and shall be set back not less than twenty (20) feet from the side and rear lot lines; except that in the case of a corner lot, the setback shall be not less than fifty (50) feet from any side street line. A detached accessory building shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to the principal building nor closer than six (6) feet to any other accessory building on the same lot. In no event shall an accessory building exceed the height of the principal building on the property. 
(f)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a house, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building when measuring. 
62.15. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum, allowable lot coverage is thirty (30) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures, excluding driveways and concrete slabs, located thereon. The maximum allowable lot coverage by driveways and concrete slabs is twenty (20) percent. An accessory building shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height and may not occupy more than thirty-five (35) percent of a required rear yard. This provision does not apply to swimming pools. 
(b)  Areas. The minimum living area is one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for the principal building. 
(c)  Height. The maximum height of the principal building shall be twenty-five (25) feet, except that the height may be increased to thirty-five (35) feet, provided that both side setbacks are increased one foot for every one foot of height increase over twenty-five (25) feet to a maximum of five (5) feet of additional side setback on each side. 
(d)  Density. The maximum density is one dwelling unit per acre. 
(e)  Guest cottage. The maximum floor area of a guest cottage shall be six hundred (600) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 994-91, § 3, 4-3-91) 
Section 62.16. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Minimum distance of stable from dwelling. There shall be a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet between any stable erected on any lot in the RCE Residential Country Estate district and any lot line. 
(b)  Drainage. Open ditches and swales which are specifically approved and authorized by the city council may be permitted in the RCE Residential Country Estate districts. Raised curbs shall not be required in connection with streets in subdivisions in RCE Residential Country Estate districts, but concrete curbs of at least road level and approved by the city building official shall be installed to retain the stabilization of the street. 
(c)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall not be required in RCE Residential Country Estate districts. 
(d)  Fences. In RCE Residential Country Estate districts fences shall be permitted as provided in Section 81.30, except those provisions of Section 81.30(b)(4) and (5) which require that any portion of a fence more than three (3) feet above ground level shall be constructed of see-through materials for clear and unobstructed visibility shall not applicable in RCE Residential Country Estate districts. Strands of barbed wire may be installed and maintained on the private interior side or perimeter fences constructed of boards or other substantial material. No owner or occupant of property in the RCE Residential Country Estate district shall cause or permit any barbed wire to be used as a perimeter fence or in connection with any perimeter fence on or about such property except as herein specifically authorized. 
(e)  Temporary permits for mobile homes during construction of principal residence. After a building permit has been issued for construction of a principal residence in the RCE Residential Country Estate district, the city council may, upon application, issue a permit for a mobile home to be placed and occupied on the property being improved for the security of such property and improvements. Any such permit shall be for a period of time not exceeding six (6) months, and such permits may be extended by the city council upon application and good cause shown. 
(f)  Signs. Signs shall be allowed in the RCE district only as specifically permitted by the provisions of Section 86.00 of this Code. 
(g)  Landscaping. All applicable provisions of Section 40.30 of this Code are hereby incorporated in this section by reference, and the same constitute special requirements under this section. 
SECTION 62.20. - R1-SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 

62.21. - Intent. 
    The R1 single-family dwelling district is intended to apply to an area which is predominantly developed with single-family dwellings or which, by its location, trend of development or planned development designated in the comprehensive plan, is appropriate to such uses. The lot areas are large and the district is designated to preserve and protect the characteristics of single-family uses. 
62.22. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. No building, structure, land or water shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Community residential home, six (6) or fewer residents meeting the requirement in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(3)  Home occupation, subject to the standards and requirements established in Section 80.03. 
(b)  Accessory. The following uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Garage, carport or space for the housing or parking of private automobiles. 
(2)  Other customary accessory uses of single-family dwellings, such as guest cottages, with no kitchen facilities. 
(3)  Ordinary public utility uses and right-of-way. 
(4)  Swimming pools. 
(5)  Tennis courts. 
(6)  Detached accessory buildings, subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(c)  Special exceptions. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  Noncommercial greenhouses and nurseries. 
(2)  Public parks and playgrounds. 
(3)  Community residential home, seven (7) to ten (10) residents meeting the requirements in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(4)  Care unit, ten (10) to fewer residents. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in this district: 
(1)  Commercial pursuits. 
(2)  Mobile homes. 
(3)  Retail, wholesale and manufacturing establishments. 
(4)  Raising, keeping or maintenance of horses, cows and other farm animals, excluding the keeping of household pets normally domesticated in the United States. 
(5)  Keeping and maintaining bees, rabbits, ducks, chickens and other fowl. 
(6)  Group care facilities with four (4) or more clients, adult congregate living facilities (ACLF), and treatment and recovery facilities. 
(7)  Child care centers, other than as a special exception under the circumstances and conditions set forth in subsection (c)(5) above. 
(e)  Fences. Refer to Section 81.30 of these regulations. 
(f)  Child care centers. In classifying child care centers as "special exceptions" under the conditions set forth in subsection (c)(5) of this section, and prohibiting all other child care centers, it is not the intention of the governing body of the City of Rockledge to prohibit the enlargement or expansion of any child care center duly licensed by the State of Florida and the City of Rockledge and in lawful operation at the time of adoption of the ordinance making such classifications, i.e., August 19, 1987; it being the express intention and declaration of said governing body that any such duly licensed child care center located in the R1 zoning district and in operation on August 19, 1987, shall be permitted to enlarge or expand its facilities and operations provided the same is accomplished in compliance with all applicable building and zoning rules and regulations and state laws applicable to child care centers. 
(Ord. No. 992-91, § 2, 2-6-91; Ord. No. 1017-91, §§ 5, 6, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 1240-2000, § 8, 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1379-2005, § 1, 6-1-05; Ord. No. 1530-2009, § 2B., 9-23-09) 
62.23. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Area. The minimum lot area required is twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
(b)  Width. The minimum lot width required is eighty (80) feet. 
(c)  Depth. The minimum lot depth required is one hundred (100) feet. 
(d)  Buildings. Not more than one principal dwelling building shall be constructed or placed on any one lot. 
62.24. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback required is thirty-five (35) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback required for the principal building is thirty (30) feet from the rear lot line; except that the minimum rear setback for a screened porch attached to the rear of a principal building is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(c)  Side. The minimum side setback required is ten (10) feet. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a setback of not less than thirty-five (35) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(e)  Accessory building setback requirements. Detached accessory buildings, subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(f)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a house, or the wall or roof vertical support of any addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
(Ord. No. 1364-2004, § 2, 12-1-04) 
62.25. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is thirty (30) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures, excluding driveways and concrete slabs, located thereon. The maximum allowable lot coverage by driveways and concrete slabs is twenty (20) percent. An accessory building not exceeding twelve (12) feet high may occupy not more than thirty-five (35) percent of a required rear yard. This provision does not apply to swimming pools. 
(b)  Area. The minimum living area is one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. 
    Note: In the R1, single family dwelling district, minimum requirements for first floor area unit shall be: For a two-story and two-and-one-half-story dwelling, nine hundred (900) square feet; and for a one-story dwelling, one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. The combined total floor area of a dwelling over one story in the R1 district shall be not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. The minimum floor area requirements of this section shall not be applicable to substandard lots of record as defined in Section 38.21 [Section 60.08], and nothing herein contained shall be construed to repeal, alter, modify or impair the provisions of Section 38.21 [Section 60.08]. 
(c)  Height. The maximum building height is twenty-five (25) feet, except that the height may be increased to thirty-five (35) feet, provided both side setbacks are increased by one foot for every one foot of height increase over twenty-five (25) feet, to a maximum of five (5) feet of additional side setback on each side. 
(d)  Density. The maximum density is three (3) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 994-91, § 1, 4-3-91) 
Section 62.26. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Signs. Signs shall be allowed in the R1 district only as specifically permitted by the provisions of Section 86.00 of this Code. 
(b)  Required space for rear porch. Unless the site plan submitted with an application for a building permit for a dwelling discloses and provides for a rear screened porch having at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor area to be constructed at the time of construction of the main dwelling, the site plan shall demonstrate reservation of a sufficient open area of land between the rear wall of the dwelling and the twenty-five-foot rear setback line applicable to rear screened porches as space available for possible future construction or enlargement of a rear screened porch which would upon completion have at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
(c)  Landscaping. All applicable provisions of Section 40.30 of this Code are hereby incorporated in this section by reference, and the same constitute special requirements under this section. 
SECTION 62.30. - R2-SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT 

62.31. - Intent. 
    The provisions of the R2 single-family dwelling district are intended to apply to an area predominantly developed with single-family dwellings or which, by its location, trend of development or planned development designated in the comprehensive plan, is appropriate to such uses. The prevailing lot areas are intended to be smaller than those of the R1 district, and a greater variety of uses are permitted. 
62.32. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. No building, structure, land or water shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Community residential home, six (6) or fewer residents meeting the requirements in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(b)  Accessory. The following uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Garages, carports or space for the housing or parking of private automobiles. 
(2)  Other customary uses of single-family dwellings, such as guest cottages, without kitchen facilities. 
(3)  Ordinary public utility uses and rights-of-way. 
(4)  Swimming pools. 
(5)  Tennis courts. 
(6)  Detached accessory buildings, subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(c)  Special exceptions. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  Schools in buildings specifically designed or modified for such use, but not including trade schools for adults. 
(2)  Public parks, playgrounds, libraries, noncommercial community centers. 
(3)  Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 80.03. 
(4)  Golf courses, including golf and country club. 
(5)  Community residential home, seven (7) to ten (10) residents meeting the requirements in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(6)  Care unit, ten (10) or fewer residents. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in this district: 
(1)  Commercial pursuits. 
(2)  Mobile homes. 
(3)  Retail, wholesale and manufacturing establishments. 
(4)  Raising, keeping or maintenance of horses, cows or other farm animals, excluding the keeping of household pets normally domesticated in the United States. 
(5)  Keeping and maintaining bees, rabbits, ducks, chickens and other fowl. 
(6)  Group care facilities with four (4) or more clients, adult congregate living facilities (ACLF), and treatment and recovery facilities. 
(7)  Child care centers, other than as a special exception under the circumstances and conditions set forth in subsection (c)(2) above. 
(e)  Fences. Refer to Section 81.30 of these regulations. 
(f)  Child care centers. In classifying child care centers as "special exceptions" under the conditions set forth in subsection (c)(2) of this section, and prohibiting all other child care centers, it is not the intention of the governing body of the City of Rockledge to prohibit the enlargement or expansion of any child care center duly licensed by the State of Florida and the City of Rockledge and in lawful operation at the time of adoption of the ordinance making such classifications, i.e., August 19, 1987; it being the express intention and declaration of said governing body that any such duly licensed child care center located in the R2 zoning district and in operation on August 19, 1987, shall be permitted to enlarge or expand its facilities and operations provided the same is accomplished in compliance with all applicable building and zoning rules and regulations and state laws applicable to child care centers. 
(Ord. No. 992-91, § 3, 2-6-91; Ord. No. 1379-2005, § 1, 6-1-05; Ord. No. 1530-2009, § 2C., 9-23-09) 
62.33. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Area. The minimum lot area required is seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet, except that corner lots shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(b)  Width. Minimum lot width of seventy (70) feet, except that corner lots shall be ninety (90) feet. 
(c)  Depth. The minimum lot depth required is ninety (90) feet. 
(d)  Buildings. Not more than one principal dwelling building shall be constructed or placed on any one lot. 
62.34. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback required is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback required for the principal building is twenty (20) feet from the rear lot line, except that the minimum rear setback for a screened porch attached to the rear of a principal building is fifteen (15) feet. 
(c)  Side. The minimum side setback required is ten (10) feet from either one of the side lot lines of the property, and eight (8) feet from the other (opposite) side lot line of the property. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(e)  Accessory building setback requirements. Detached accessory buildings, subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(f)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a house, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
(Ord. No. 1364-2004, § 3, 12-1-04) 
62.35. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is thirty-five (35) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures, excluding driveways and concrete slabs, located thereon. The maximum allowable lot coverage by driveways and concrete slabs is twenty (20) percent. An accessory building not exceeding twelve (12) feet high may occupy not more than thirty-five (35) percent of a required rear yard. This provision does not apply to swimming pools. 
(b)  Area. The minimum living area is one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
    Note: In the R2 one-family (single-family dwelling) district, the minimum requirements for first floor area per dwelling shall be: For a two-story and two-and-one-half-story dwelling, seven hundred (700) square feet; and for a one-story dwelling, one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. The combined total floor area of a dwelling over one story in the R2 district shall be not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, exclusive of open or screen porches, carports or garages. The minimum floor area requirements of this section shall not be applicable to substandard lots of record as defined in Section 38.21 [Section 60.08], and nothing herein contained shall be construed to repeal, alter, modify or impair the provisions of Section 38.21 [Section 60.08]. 
(c)  Height. The maximum building height is twenty-five (25) feet, except that the maximum height of structures on lots having at least twelve thousand (12,000) square feet may be increased to thirty (30) feet, provided that both side setbacks are increased one foot for every one foot of additional height over twenty-five (25) feet to a maximum of five (5) feet of additional side setback on each side. 
(d)  Density. The maximum density is five (5) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 994-91, § 2, 4-3-91) 
Section 62.36. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Signs. Signs shall be allowed in the R2 district only as specifically permitted by the provisions of Section 86 of this Code. 
(b)  Required space for rear porch. Unless the site plan submitted with an application for a building permit for a dwelling discloses and provides for a rear screened porch having at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor area to be constructed at the time of construction of the main dwelling, the site plan shall demonstrate reservation of a sufficient open area of land between the rear wall of the dwelling and the fifteen (15) foot rear setback line applicable to rear screened porches as space available for possible future construction or enlargement of a rear screened porch which would upon completion have at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
(c)  Landscaping. All applicable provisions of Section 40.30 of this Code are hereby incorporated in this section by reference, and the same constitute special requirements under this section. 
SECTION 62.40. - R2A-MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING (LOW-DENSITY) DISTRICT 

62.41. - Intent. 
    The provisions of the R2A multifamily dwelling (low-density) district are intended to apply to an area predominantly developed to garden-type apartments, two-family dwellings (duplex) and single-family dwellings or which, by its location, trend of development or planned development designated in the comprehensive plan, is appropriate to such uses. 
62.42. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. No building, structure, land or water shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Garden apartment. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings (duplex). 
(3)  Single-family dwellings per the requirements of the R2 district. 
(4)  Community residential home, six (6) or fewer residents meeting the requirements meeting the special conditions, standards and requirements set forth in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(5)  Home occupation, subject to the standards and requirements established in Section 80.03. 
(6)  Townhouses, subject to all conditions, rules, regulations, restrictions, limitations and provisions of Section 62.60 of this part, entitled "TH (townhouse dwelling) district," and other provisions of this Code regulating the construction, development, use and maintenance of townhouses. 
(7)  Single family medium density subdivision, provided the same meet all of the special conditions, standards and requirements set forth in Section 80.20 of this Code. 
(b)  Accessory. The following uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Garages, carports or space for housing or parking of private automobiles. 
(2)  Other customary accessory uses of single-family dwellings, such as guest cottages, without kitchen facilities. 
(3)  Ordinary public utility uses and rights-of-way. 
(4)  Swimming pools. 
(5)  Tennis courts. 
(6)  Customary uses of garden-type apartments. 
(7)  Detached accessory buildings, subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(c)  Special exceptions. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  Schools in buildings specifically designed or modified for such use, but not including trade schools for adults. 
(2)  Public parks, playgrounds, libraries, noncommercial community centers. 
(3)  Golf course, including golf and country club. 
(4)  Apartment buildings, condominiums and other types of multiple-family dwellings which contain over eight (8) dwelling units. 
(5)  Community residential home, seven (7) to ten (10) residents meeting the requirements in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(6)  Care unit, ten (10) or fewer residents. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in this district: 
(1)  Commercial pursuits. 
(2)  Mobile homes. 
(3)  Retail, wholesale and manufacturing establishments. 
(4)  Raising, keeping or maintenance of horses, cows or other farm animals, excluding the keeping of household pets normally domesticated in the United States. 
(5)  Keeping and maintaining bees, rabbits, ducks, chickens and other fowl. 
(6)  Child care centers, other than as a special exception under the circumstances and conditions set forth in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(e)  Fences. Refer to Section 81.30. 
(Ord. No. 992-91, § 4, 2-6-91; Ord. No. 1017-91, §§ 7, 8, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 1174-98, § 6, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 1268-2002, §§ 30, 31, 4-3-02; Ord. No. 1379-2005, § 1, 6-1-05; Ord. No. 1530-2009, § 2D., 9-23-09) 
62.43. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings, and two-family dwellings (duplex): 
(1)  Area. An area having not less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet, except that corner lots shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(2)  Width. Minimum lot width of seventy (70) feet, except that corner lots shall be ninety (90) feet. 
(3)  Depth. Minimum lot depth of ninety (90) feet. 
(4)  Buildings. Not more than one single-family dwelling building, or one two-family dwelling building, shall be constructed or placed on any one lot. 
(b)  Multiple-family dwellings containing more than two (2) dwelling units: 
(1)  Number of units. The number of dwelling units permitted to be erected, maintained, operated, used or occupied on any piece, parcel or tract of land shall not exceed the number of units determined by multiplying the total number of acres (less land to be dedicated for public use) and prorata part of a fractional acre comprising such piece, parcel or tract of land by the number eight (8). 
(2)  Area. The minimum square feet of lot area required shall be not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(3)  Width. The minimum lot width required is one hundred (100) feet. 
(4)  Depth. The minimum lot depth required is one hundred (100) feet. 
62.44. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback required is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback required for the principal building is twenty (20) feet from the rear lot line; except that the minimum rear setback for a screened porch attached to the rear of the principal building is fifteen (15) feet. 
(c)  Side for single-and two-family dwellings. The minimum side setback required shall be not less than ten (10) feet from either one of the side lot lines of property and eight (8) feet from the other (opposite) side lot line of the property, for single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings (duplex). 
(d)  Side for multifamily dwellings. The minimum side setback for multiple-family dwellings shall be not less than ten (10) feet from the side lot line. 
(e)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(f)  Accessory building setback requirements. Detached accessory buildings, subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(g)  Open air space. Multiple-family dwelling buildings located on the same lot shall have an open air space of not less than fifteen (15) feet between exterior walls of buildings; such spacing shall not be covered or connected to either building. 
(h)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a dwelling unit, or the roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
(Ord. No. 1364-2004, § 4, 12-1-04) 
62.45. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is fifty (50) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures, excluding driveways and concrete slabs, located thereon. The maximum allowable lot coverage by driveways and concrete slabs is twenty (20) percent. An accessory building not exceeding twelve (12) feet high may occupy not more than thirty-five (35) percent of a required rear yard. This provision does not apply to swimming pools. 
(b)  Floor area. Not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of living area for a single-family dwelling. Not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of living area for each dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling (duplex). The minimum living area for each dwelling unit of a multiple-family dwelling shall be as follows: 
Number of Bedrooms in 
 Each Dwelling Unit Minimum Living Area of Each Dwelling Unit Not more than one bedroom 800 square feet Two (2) bedrooms 900 square feet More than two (2) bedrooms 900 square feet plus an additional 100 square feet for each bedroom exceeding two (2).  
(c)  Height. The maximum building height of structures is not more than twenty-five (25) feet, subject to the provisions of Section 60.04(a). 
(d)  Density. The maximum density shall be not more than eight (8) dwelling units per acre. 
Section 62.46. - Off-street parking. 
    Refer to Section 55.00 of these regulations. 
Section 62.47. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58 of this Code. 
(b)  Signs. Signs shall be allowed in the R2A district only as specifically permitted by the provisions of Section 86.00 of this Code. 
(c)  Required space for rear porch. Unless the site plan submitted with an application for a building permit for a dwelling discloses and provides for a rear screened porch having at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor area to be constructed at the time of construction of the main dwelling, the site plan shall demonstrate reservation of a sufficient open area of land between the rear wall of the dwelling and the fifteen (15) foot rear setback line applicable to rear screened porches as space available for possible future construction or enlargement of a rear screened porch which would upon completion have at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
SECTION 62.50. - R3-MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING (HIGH-DENSITY) DISTRICT 

Section 62.51. - Intent. 
    The provisions of the R3 multi-family dwelling (high-density) district are intended to apply to any area predominantly developed with residential uses containing multiple-family dwellings or which, by its location or trend of development or planned development designed in the comprehensive plan, is appropriate to such uses. In addition, they are intended to provide for a greater variety of uses, accessory or complimentary, to multiple-family units. 
62.52. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. No building, structure, land or water shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings per the requirements of the R2A District. 
(3)  Condominiums. 
(4)  Apartments. 
(5)  Townhouses, but subject to all conditions, rules, regulations, restrictions, limitations and provisions of Section 62.60 of this part, entitled "TH (Townhouse Dwelling) District," and other provisions of this Code regulating the construction, development, use and maintenance of townhouses. 
(6)  Community residential home, six (6) or fewer residents meeting the requirements in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(7)  Home occupation, subject to the standards and requirements established in Section 80.03. 
(8)  Single family medium density subdivision, provided the same meet all of the special conditions, standards and requirements set forth in Section 80.20 of this Code. 
(b)  Accessory. The following uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Garage, carport or space for the housing or parking of private automobiles. 
(2)  Ordinary public utility uses and rights-of-way. 
(3)  Swimming pools. 
(4)  Tennis courts, handball courts. 
(5)  Clubhouse facilities. 
(6)  Customary accessory uses of multifamily dwellings. 
(7)  Detached accessory buildings, subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(c)  Special exception. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  Any conditional use permitted in the R2 district subject to the limitations, requirements and procedures specified for such uses. 
(2)  Boardinghouses and lodginghouses. 
(3)  Guest or tourist homes. 
(4)  Hospitals, but not mental institutions or animal hospitals. 
(5)  Convalescent centers and homes, nursing centers and homes, and homes for the aged. 
(6)  Community residential home, seven (7) to fourteen (14) residents meeting the requirements in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(7)  Care unit, fourteen (14) or fewer residents. 
(8)  Older adult living facilities, provided the same are located in Planning District 5 of the city, and meet all of the special conditions, standards and requirements set forth in Section 83.50 of this Code. 
(d)  [Prohibited.] The following uses are specifically prohibited in this district: 
(1)  Commercial pursuits. 
(2)  Mobile homes. 
(3)  Retail, wholesale and manufacturing establishments. 
(4)  Keeping and maintaining farm animals and fowl. 
(5)  Restaurants. 
(6)  Child care centers, other than as a special exception under the circumstances and conditions set forth in subsection 62.32(c)(2) of this part. 
(e)  Fences. Refer to Section 81.30. 
(Ord. No. 992-91, § 5, 2-6-91; Ord. No. 1017-91, §§ 9, 10, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 1049-93, § 1, 4-21-93; Ord. No. 1268-2002, §§ 32, 33, 4-3-02; Ord. No. 1530-2009, § 2E., 9-23-09) 
62.53. - Lot requirements. 
    For multiple-family dwellings containing more than two (2) dwelling units: 
(a)  Number of units. The number of dwelling units permitted to be erected, maintained, operated, or used or occupied on any piece, parcel or tract of land shall not exceed the number of units determined by multiplying the total number of acres (less land to be dedicated for public use) and prorata part of a fractional acre comprising such piece, parcel or tract of land by the number fourteen (14). 
(b)  Area. The minimum square feet of lot area required for multiple-family dwellings shall be not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(c)  Width. The minimum lot width required is one hundred (100) feet. 
(d)  Depth. The minimum lot depth required is one hundred (100) feet. 
(e)  Site plan approval. Before the construction of any dwelling unit upon any land in an R3 zoning district, the applicant shall first submit and obtain approval of a site plan of the tract, piece or parcel of land to be developed, showing the location of all permanent improvements proposed to be constructed thereon, pursuant to Part III, of this Code. 
62.54. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback required is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback required for the principal building is twenty (20) feet from the rear lot line, except that the minimum rear setback for a screened porch attached to the rear of a principal building is fifteen (15) feet. For structures in excess of twenty-five (25) feet in height, two (2) feet shall be added to the setback requirement for the principal building for each ten (10) feet of height over twenty-five (25) feet. 
(c)  Side for two-family dwellings. The minimum side setback required shall be not less than ten (10) feet for two-family dwellings. 
(d)  Side for multifamily dwellings. The minimum side setback for multiple-family dwellings shall be not less than ten (10) feet from side lot line. For structures in excess of twenty-five (25) feet in height, two (2) feet shall be added for each ten (10) feet of height over twenty-five (25) feet. 
(e)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(f)  Accessory building setback requirements. Detached accessory buildings, subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(g)  Open air space. Multiple-family dwelling buildings located on the same lot shall have an open air space of not less than fifteen (15) feet between exterior walls of buildings, [and] such spacing shall not be covered or connected to either building. 
(h)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a dwelling unit, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
(Ord. No. 1364-2004, § 5, 12-1-04) 
62.55. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is fifty (50) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures, excluding driveways and concrete slabs, located thereon. The maximum allowable lot coverage by driveways and concrete slabs is twenty (20) percent. An accessory building not exceeding twelve (12) feet high may occupy not more than thirty-five (35) percent of a required rear yard. This provision does not apply to swimming pools. 
(b)  Floor area. Not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of living area for a single-family dwelling. Not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of living area for each dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling (duplex). The minimum living area for each dwelling unit of a multiple-family dwelling shall be as follows: 
Number of Bedrooms in 
 Each Dwelling Unit Minimum Living Area of Each Dwelling Unit Not more than one bedroom 800 square feet Two (2) bedrooms 900 square feet More than two (2) bedrooms 900 square feet plus an additional 100 square feet for each bedroom exceeding two (2).  
(c)  Height. The maximum height of structures is not more than forty (40) feet, subject to Section 60.04. (City council may make exceptions to height limitation, as per Section 60.04.) 
(d)  Density. Maximum density is not more than fourteen (14) units per acre. 
Section 62.56. - Off-street parking. 
    Refer to Section 55.00 of this Code. 
Section 62.57. - Landscaping. 
(a)  Buffers to residential areas. A six-foot high, buffer wall in accordance with Section 81.35 of this Code shall be constructed along property lines that abut single-family or duplex dwelling districts. 
(b)  On-site improvements. Trees and shrubs shall be planted to provide two (2) square feet of landscaped area for each square foot of off-street parking area. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 7, 8-20-97) 
62.58. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58 of this Code. 
(b)  Signs. Signs shall be allowed in the R3 district only as specifically permitted by the provisions of Section 86.00 of this Code. 
(c)  Required space for rear porch. Unless the site plan submitted with an application for a building permit for a dwelling discloses and provides for a rear screened porch having at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor area to be constructed at the time of construction of the main dwelling, the site plan shall demonstrate reservation of a sufficient open area of land between the rear wall of the dwelling and the fifteen-foot rear setback line applicable to rear screened porches as space available for possible future construction or enlargement of a rear screened porch which would upon completion have at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
SECTION 62.60. - TH-TOWNHOUSE DWELLING DISTRICT 

62.61. - Intent. 
    The provisions of the TH (townhouse dwelling) district are intended to apply to a higher density single-family residential area or a low- to medium-density multiple-family development. Townhouses can be built as a predominantly townhouse area or as a transitional zone involving single-family detached or multiple-family residential units, depending upon location or trend of the existing uses. 
62.62. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. Within any TH townhouse dwelling district, no building, structure, land or water shall be used except for the following uses: 
(1)  Townhouses. 
(2)  Community residential home, six (6) or fewer residents meeting the requirements in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(3)  Home occupation, subject to the standards and requirements established in Section 80.03. 
(4)  Single-family attached dwelling projects, when converting a condominium project to a platted subdivision. 
(b)  Accessory. The following uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Garage, carport or space for housing or parking of private automobiles, provided such uses are attached to the principal building. 
(2)  Ordinary public utility uses and rights-of-way. 
(3)  Swimming pools. 
(4)  Tennis courts. 
(5)  Detached accessory buildings provided access is through the principal building, and subject to all other conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(c)  Special exceptions. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  Public parks, playgrounds, noncommercial community centers and recreational facilities. 
(2)  Golf course, including golf and country club. 
(3)  Community residential home, seven (7) to fourteen (14) residents meeting the requirement in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(4)  Care unit, fourteen or fewer residents. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in this district: 
(1)  Commercial pursuits. 
(2)  Mobile homes. 
(3)  Retail, wholesale and manufacturing establishments. 
(4)  Keeping and maintaining farm animals and fowl. 
(5)  Child care centers, other than as a special exception under the circumstances and conditions set forth in subsection (c)(5) of this section. 
(e)  Fences. Refer to Section 81.30. 
(Ord. No. 992-91, § 6, 2-6-91; Ord. No. 1017-91, §§ 11, 12, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 1379-2005, § 1, 6-1-05; Ord. No. 1493-2008, § 1, 7-2-08; Ord. No. 1530-2009, § 2F., 9-23-09) 
62.63. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Area. The minimum lot area required is two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet. 
(b)  Width. The minimum lot width required is twenty-four (24) feet. 
(c)  Depth. The minimum lot depth required is ninety (90) feet. 
(d)  Buildings. Not more than one townhouse dwelling shall be constructed or placed on any one lot. 
62.64. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback required is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback required for the principal building is twenty-five (25) feet from the rear lot line, except that the minimum rear setback for a screened porch attached to the rear of a principal building is twenty (20) feet. If the rear lot line of the TH zoned property abuts a common area of undeveloped land owned by a homeowners association in which the owner of the TH zoned property is a member, and which said common area is at least twenty-five (25) feet in depth by right angle measurement turned off the rear lot line of the TH zoned property for the entire length of said rear lot line, and said common area is open space with no future development plan or program for the same under the provisions of the homeowners association documents, then the minimum rear setback for either the principal building or a screened porch attached to the rear of the principal building is twelve and one-half (121/2) feet. 
(c)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from both streets. 
(d)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of the principal building, and located not less than seven and one-half (71/2) feet from the rear lot line. 
(e)  Accessory building setback requirements. Detached accessory buildings, subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(f)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a dwelling unit, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
(Ord. No. 1002-91, § 1, 6-19-91; Ord. No. 1364-2004, § 6, 12-1-04) 
62.65. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is fifty (50) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures, excluding driveways and concrete slabs, located thereon. The maximum allowable lot coverage by driveways and concrete slabs is twenty (20) percent. An accessory building not exceeding twelve (12) feet high may occupy not more than thirty-five (35) percent of a required rear yard. This provision does not apply to swimming pools. 
(b)  Area. Minimum living floor area per unit shall not be less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of living area. 
(c)  Height. Maximum height of structures shall not be more than twenty-five (25) feet, subject to Section 60.04. 
(d)  Density. Maximum density shall not be more than ten (10) dwelling units per acre. 
(e)  Contiguous units. No more than six (6) dwelling units shall be contiguous. 
(f)  Distance separating buildings. There shall be a minimum distance of open space between and separating each building containing townhouses as follows: 
(1)  Except as provided in subparagraph (2) below, each building containing townhouses shall be separated from any other building, including another building containing townhouses, by a distance of not less than twenty-six (26) lineal feet of open space area. 
(2)  The sole exception to the restriction imposed by subparagraph (1) above is that a building containing only two (2) townhouses may be erected, constructed, placed, kept or maintained within twenty-fix (26) feet, but not less than ten (10) feet from only one other building containing only two (2) townhouses. Illustration: If three (3) buildings, each containing only two (2) townhouses, are to be built side by side, the building on one end (either end) must be not closer than ten (10) feet to the center building, and the building on the other end must be not closer than twenty-six (26) feet to said center building. 
(g)  Setback from perimeter property line. All structures shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the site's perimeter property line. 
62.66. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Plat. Before any building permit shall be issued for construction of a townhouse, a subdivision plat of the land upon which the townhouse is to be located shall be duly recorded in the public records of Brevard County, Florida. Compliance with this provision requiring recording of a plat is a condition precedent to the construction of any townhouse regardless of the number of townhouses involved in the application for building permit. Prior to the recording of any townhouse subdivision plat the same must be approved by the city council, and no such plat shall be approved by the city council unless all procedures, rules, regulations and requirements of the Rockledge Subdivision Regulations and Florida Statutes applicable to the preparation and filing of subdivision plats have been complied with in full. 
(b)  Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided on site per the regulations as set forth in Section 55 of this Code. 
(c)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58 of this Code. 
(d)  Signs. Signs shall be allowed in the TH district only as specifically permitted by the provisions of Section 86.00 of this Code. 
62.67. - Single-family attached "SFA" projects. 
(a)  Intent. The provisions of the SFA (single-family attached dwelling) are only intended to apply to the conversion of a condominium project to a platted subdivision. 
(b)  Principal and accessory uses shall be the same as stated in the townhouse dwelling district. 
(c)  Special exception shall be the same as stated in the townhouse dwelling district. 
(d)  Prohibited uses shall be the same as the townhouse dwelling district. 
(e)  Lot requirements. 
(1)  Area. The minimum lot area required is nine hundred (900) square feet. 
(2)  Width. The minimum lot width required is eighteen (18) feet. 
(3)  Depth. The minimum lot depth required is fifty (50) feet. 
(4)  Buildings. Not more than one (1) townhouse dwelling shall be constructed or placed on any one (1) lot. 
(f)  Building requirements. 
(1)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is one hundred (100) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal building and accessory buildings or structures, excluding driveways and concrete slabs, located thereon. The entire site plan would be required to meet impervious coverage not to exceed fifty (50) percent. 
(2)  Area. Minimum living floor area per unit shall not be less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of living area. 
(3)  Height. Maximum height of structures shall not be more than forty (40) feet, subject to Section 60.04. 
(4)  Density. Maximum density shall not be more than fourteen (14) dwelling units per acre. 
(5)  Contiguous units. No more than ten (10) dwelling units shall be contiguous. 
(6)  Distance separating building. There shall be a minimum distance of open space between and separating each building containing townhouses: 
(a)  Except as provided in subparagraph (b) below, each building containing townhouses shall be separated from any other building, including another building containing townhouses, by a distance of not less than sixteen (16) lineal feet of open space area. 
(b)  The sole exception to the restriction imposed by subparagraph (a) above is that a building containing only two (2) townhouses may be erected, constructed, placed, kept or maintained within twenty-six (26) feet, but not less than ten (10) feet from only one other building containing only two (2) townhouses. Illustration: If three (3) buildings, each containing only two (2) townhouses, are to be built side by side, the building on one end (either end) must be not closer than ten (10) feet to the center building, and the building on the other end must be not closer than twenty-six (26) feet to said center building. 
(7)  Setback from perimeter property line. All structures shall be set back not less than twenty (20) feet from the site's perimeter property line. 
(g)  Special requirements. 
(1)  Plat. Before any building permit shall be issued for construction of a SFA, a subdivision plat of the land upon which the single-family attached structure is to be located shall be duly recorded in the public records of Brevard County, Florida. Compliance with this provision requiring recording of a plat is a condition precedent to the construction of any SFA regardless of the number of SFA involved in the application for building permit. Prior to the recording of any SFA subdivision plat the same must be approved by the City Council, and no such plat shall be approved by the City Council unless all procedures, rules, regulations and requirements of the Rockledge Subdivision Regulations and Florida Statutes applicable to the preparation and filing of subdivision plats have been complied with in full. All plats must include ingress/egress tracts or easements from the platted lots to a dedicated road right-of-way. All proposed platted lots shall abut the ingress/egress easement or tract, and provide an unencumbered space between the parking area and ingress/egress easement or tract of eighteen (18) feet or more. Maintenance of an ingress/egress easement or tract shall be the responsibility of the Homeowners Association. Minimum width of the easement or tract shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided on site per the regulations as set forth in Section 55 of this Code. 
(3)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58 of this Code. 
(4)  Signs. Signs shall be allowed in the TH district only as specifically permitted by the provisions of Section 86.00 of this Code. 
(5)  Fire wall. Fire wall separation shall follow the guidelines established in the Florida Building Code, which may be amended from time to time. No platting may occur until fire wall separation requirements have been made and approved by the Rockledge Building Official. 
(h)  Existing condominium developments. Existing condominium developments may change its present use to "SFA" if it complies with provisions of Sections 62.62(a), and 62.67(a) through 62.67(g). 
(Ord. No. 1493-2008, § 2, 7-2-08) 
SECTION 62.70. - MH-MOBILE HOME DISTRICT 

62.71. - Intent. 
    The provisions of the MH mobile home district are intended to apply to an area which is predominantly developed for residential use with mobile home dwellings or which, by its location or trend of development designated on the city zoning map and in the comprehensive plan, is appropriate to such uses. This district shall be developed in such a way as to make efficient, economical and aesthetically pleasing use of land, so restricted that the same will be continually maintained by the owner. 
Part 1. Mobile Home Subdivision 
62.72. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. No building, structure, land or water shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Mobile homes used as a single-family dwelling unit. 
(2)  Home occupation, subject to the standards and requirements established in Section 80.03. 
(b)  Accessory. The following uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Garage, carport or space for the housing or parking of private automobiles. 
(2)  Cabanas, porches or awning, patios and utility buildings. 
(3)  Swimming pool and customary accessory buildings; provided, that the combined and collective square footage of the mobile home and accessory use or uses shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the square footage of the gross lot area. 
(c)  Special exceptions. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  Schools in buildings specifically designed for such use, but not building trade schools for adults. 
(2)  Public parks, playgrounds, libraries, noncommercial community centers. 
(3)  Golf course, including golf and country club. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the MH (mobile home) districts: 
(1)  Travel trailer, campers, motor homes or recreational vehicles for use as dwelling units. 
(2)  Travel trailer parks, travel trailer camps, and travel trailer courts. 
(3)  Commercial pursuits. 
(4)  Dwelling units commonly referred to as one-site [on-site] construction. 
(5)  [Reserved.] 
(6)  Raising, keeping or maintaining farm animals, excluding the keeping of household pets normally domesticated in the United States. 
(7)  Keeping and maintaining bees, rabbits, ducks, chickens and other fowl. 
(8)  Residential social service facilities (RSSF). 
(9)  Child care centers, other than as a special exception under the circumstances and conditions set forth in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(e)  Fences. Refer to Section 81.30. 
(Ord. No. 1017-91, §§ 13, 14, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 1379-2005, § 1, 6-1-05) 
62.73. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Area. The minimum lot area required is six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet. 
(b)  Width. The minimum lot width required is sixty (60) feet. 
(c)  Depth. The minimum lot depth required is one hundred (100) feet. 
(d)  Buildings. Not more than one mobile home or manufactured home shall be constructed or placed on any one lot. 
62.74. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback required is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback required is twenty (20) feet. 
(c)  Side. The minimum side setback required is seven and one-half (71/2) feet. 
(d)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a mobile home, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring setbacks. 
(e)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a front yard setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the front lot line, and a side street setback of not less than twelve and one-half (121/2) feet from the side lot line on the secondary street, except that if the corner lot adjoins a key lot, then the side street setback shall remain at twenty-five (25) feet. 
(f)  Accessory building setback requirements. Detached accessory building, subject to all conditions, limitations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.00.1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1364-2004, § 7, 12-1-04) 
62.75. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is thirty-five (35) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures, excluding driveways and concrete slabs, located thereon. The maximum allowable lot coverage by driveways and concrete slabs is twenty (20) percent. An accessory building not exceeding twelve (12) feet high may occupy not more than thirty-five (35) percent of a required rear yard. This provision does not apply to swimming pools. 
(b)  Area, size. The minimum living area is one thousand (1,000) square feet. The minimum width of a mobile home shall be twenty-four (24) feet. In areas zoned MH prior to July 20, 1983, the minimum living area shall be six hundred (600) square feet. The minimum size of a mobile home shall be twelve (12) feet by fifty (50) feet. 
    All mobile homes installed in the City of Rockledge after January 16, 1985, shall bear the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Seal of Approval. 
(c)  Height. Maximum height of structures is not more than twenty (20) feet. 
(d)  Skirting. Each mobile home shall be skirted with concrete block, lath and stucco or sheet metal in such a manner as to screen all under carriage and stabilization devices. 
(e)  Off-street parking. Two (2) paved spaces shall be required for each mobile home lot. Each home site shall have both paved spaced located on the site. 
62.76. - Special requirements. 
    Mobile home tie-down requirements and minimum installation standards: 
(1)  Each owner or other person having possession or control of a mobile home in an MH (mobile home) district shall secure such mobile home to the ground by the use of anchors and tie-downs so as to resist wind overturning and sliding. However, nothing herein shall be construed as requiring that anchors and tie-downs be installed to secure mobile homes which are permanently attached to a permanent structure. A permanent structure shall have a foundation and such other structural elements as are required pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated from time to time by the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles which assure the rigidity and stability of the mobile home. 
(a)  A mobile home manufactured in accordance with the code standards, as defined by Florida Statutes and labeled "hurricane and windstorm resistive" shall be anchored to [at] each anchor point provided on the mobile home. A mobile home not meeting these standards must be anchored with anchor points spaced as required by the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles, starting at each end of the mobile home. 
(b)  In addition, each mobile home shall be tied down by one of the following means: 
1.  A mobile home having built-in, over-the-roof ties shall be secured by the tie-down points; provided, that such built-in ties and points meet the standards promulgated by the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles. 
2.  A mobile home not having built-in, over-the-roof ties and tie-down points meeting state department of highway safety and motor vehicles standards shall be secured in accordance with standards promulgated by such department. 
(2)  This subsection shall only apply to mobile homes that are being used as dwelling places and that are located on a particular location for a period of time exceeding fourteen (14) days. 
(3)  The requirements of this section are tantamount with the tie-down and installation requirements set forth in Section 320.8325 of the Florida Statutes, 1974. In the event such Section 320.8325 of the Florida Statutes is hereafter amended or in the event the tie-down and installation requirements imposed by state law are hereafter changed or amended, then the provisions of the state statutes pertaining to such requirements shall govern and take precedence over the provisions of this section only to the extent to any inconsistency between the provisions of this section and the provisions of applicable state statutes. 
(4)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by law. 
(5)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58 of this Code. 
(6)  Signs shall be allowed in the MH district only as specifically permitted by the provisions of Section 86.00 of this Code. 
Part 2. Mobile Home Parks, Mobile Home Cooperatives, Mobile Home Condominiums 
62.77. - Site plan approval. 
(a)  Applicability. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, any property hereinafter rezoned, upon petition of the owner, to the MH district may be developed only as a mobile home subdivision pursuant to the requirements of Part 1 of this section. 
    Property hereafter rezoned MH and which, under the aforesaid circumstances, is restricted to use as a mobile home subdivision may thereafter only be developed as either a mobile home park, mobile home cooperative or mobile home condominium if the owner of the property first applies to the city council for such a development and the same is approved by the city council after receiving recommendations of the planning commission, and by following the same procedures, policies and public hearings that are applicable to an application for rezoning. 
(b)  Mandatory site plan. A mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium, each of which is hereinafter referred to as a "development," may be developed and maintained in the MH zoning district in accord with the requirements of this Part 2 if the owner of the subject lands at the time of applying for MH zoning provides a binding site plan with the City of Rockledge electing to develop said lands as a mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or a mobile home condominium in accord with the requirements of this Part 2. Undeveloped property that is zoned MH at the time of adoption of this Part 2, or property that is hereinafter administratively rezoned MH, may be developed as either a mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium under this Part 2 only if the developer, prior to commencement of development files with the Rockledge Building Department a written election to develop the property as either a mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium, and a binding site plan demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this Part 2; otherwise such property may only be developed as a mobile home subdivision under Part 1 of this section. 
(c)  Compliance with the plan. Upon the approval of the site plan, and issuance of a building permit, the mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium shall be built in accordance with the site plan and the plans and specifications. If, after such approval, the owner/applicant, or his successors, cares to make any changes to said site plan, such changes shall first be submitted to the building official. If the building official deems that there is a change or deviation from that which is shown on the approved site plan, the owner/applicant, or his successors, shall be required to obtain approval of such change or deviation by the Rockledge City Council before deviation from the approved site plan. 
62.78. - Uses (mobile home parks, mobile home cooperatives, mobile home condominium). 
(a)  Principal. No building, structure, land or water shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Mobile homes used as a single-family dwelling unit within a duly licensed mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium. 
(2)  Community center and recreational facilities for residents within the mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium development. 
(3)  Home occupation, subject to standards and requirements established in Section 80.03. 
(b)  Accessory. The following uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Attached garage, carport or space for the housing or parking of private automobiles. 
(2)  Attached porches, or awnings, patios and utility buildings. 
(c)  Special exceptions. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereof, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1  Schools in buildings specifically designed for such use, but not including trade schools for adults. 
(2)  Golf courses, including golf and country club. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the MH (Part 2) (mobile home) districts: 
(1)  Travel trailers, campers, motor homes or recreational vehicles for use as dwelling units. 
(2)  Travel trailer camps, travel trailer courts and travel trailer parks. 
(3)  Commercial establishments. 
(4)  Dwelling units commonly referred to as on-site construction. 
(5)  Retail, wholesale and manufacturing establishments. 
(6)  Raising, keeping or maintaining farm animals, excluding the keeping of household pets normally domesticated in the United Sates. 
(7)  Keeping and maintaining bees, rabbits, ducks, chickens and other fowl. 
(8)  Swimming pools and customary accessory buildings other than those associated with recreational facilities available to all owners or tenants of the park cooperative or condominium. 
(9)  Accessory buildings. 
(10)  Parking of travel trailers, campers, motor homes (R.V.'s), boats and trailers upon roadways or mobile home sites. Subject to Section 55.00. 
(11)  Child care centers, other than as a special exception under the circumstances and conditions set forth in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(e)  Fences. Refer to Section 81.30. 
(Ord. No. 1017-91, §§ 15, 16, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 1379-2005, § 1, 6-1-05) 
62.79. - Design requirements for mobile homes (mobile home parks, mobile home cooperatives, mobile home condominiums). 
(a)  Site requirements: 
(1)  Area. The minimum mobile home site area required is four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet. 
(2)  Width. The minimum mobile home site width required is fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Setback requirements: 
(1)  Front. The minimum front setback requirement is twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Rear. The minimum rear setback requirement is ten (10) feet on perimeter sites and eight (8) feet on interior sites. 
(3)  Side. The minimum side setback requirement is seven and one-half (71/2) feet. 
(4)  Corner sites. Corner mobile home sites shall have a setback of not less than twenty (20) feet from the front mobile home site line; side street setback shall be fifteen (15) feet from the mobile home site line on the secondary street. 
(c)  Building requirements: 
(1)  Mobile home site coverage. The maximum allowable mobile home site coverage is forty (40) percent of the lot area that may be governed by the principal building or structures located thereon. 
(2)  Area; size. The minimum living area is one thousand (1,000) square feet. The minimum size of a mobile home shall be twenty-four (24) feet in width. 
(3)  Height. Maximum height of structures is not more than twenty (20) feet with the exception that any recreational building may have a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(4)  Skirting. Each mobile home shall be skirted with concrete block, brick, lath and stucco, veneering, or such other material which will screen all under carriage and stabilization devices beginning at the ground level and running upward to the exterior wall, with appropriate venting. 
(d)  Design requirements for mobile home parks, mobile home cooperatives, and mobile home condominiums. All mobile home parks, mobile home cooperatives, and mobile home condominiums established within the city shall conform with the following requirements: 
(1)  Suitability of land. Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, or that is for topographic or other reasons [is] unsuitable for use as a mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, mobile home condominium shall not be used for same unless these hazards can be and are corrected. 
(2)  Size of park. Each parcel used for a mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium shall contain a minimum of ten (10) acres of land. 
(3)  Density. Mobile home parks, mobile home cooperatives, and mobile home condominiums shall not exceed a maximum density of six (6) units per gross acre. 
(4)  Development boundary setbacks. No mobile home site (lot) structure or building will be located within twenty-five (25) feet of a front property line of the development, nor within ten (10) feet of a side or rear property line of the development, or portion thereof. 
(5)  Screening. Where any mobile home park, cooperative or condominium abuts any residential zone or use, a ten (10) foot wide landscaped buffer which includes turf and a minimum three (3) foot thick hedge, of no less than Florida Number One nursery stock, being a minimum of six (6) feet high when mature within eighteen (18) months after planting, shall be required to be established and maintained along the perimeter of the mobile home park, cooperative or condominium development. 
(e)  Roadway requirements: 
(1)  All roadways within the mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium shall be private roads with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Entrance roads into a mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium shall have a minimum width of thirty-six (36) feet of pavement if the street is a two-way street, or eighteen (18) feet of pavement if the street is a one-way street, said width requirements being applicable only to the first one hundred fifty (150) feet of roadway from the intersection of the road with any public roadway. 
b.  Roadways shall be provided for all mobile home spaces. All roadways shall have a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet of pavement section. 
c.  Roads within mobile home parks, mobile home cooperatives, or mobile home condominiums shall be paved and kept in good repair. 
d.  Speed bumps, if used, shall not exceed three (3) inches in height. 
e.  No parking shall be allowed adjacent to any entrance road. 
f.  All entrance roads shall have a four (4) foot wide sidewalk on both side of the paved portion of the road for a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the intersection of the road with any public roadway. 
(f)  Recreation areas. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the land area within a mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium shall be devoted to recreation use. This recreation area minimum shall be reduced to ten (10) percent of the land area if a community building and swimming pool are provided for the use of the tenants or owners of the mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium. The recreational building must consist of a minimum of ten (10) square feet of floor space for every manufactured home within the mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, mobile home condominium. The swimming pool must conform to Section 10D-5 of the Florida Administrative Code. 
(g)  Residential buildings. The construction of site-built residential buildings within a mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium is prohibited. 
(h)  Underground utilities. Within the development, all utilities including telephone, television cable and electrical systems shall be installed underground. Primary facilities providing services to the site of the development may be exempted from this requirement. Large transformers shall be placed on the ground and contained within pad mounts, enclosures or vaults. The developer must provide landscaping with shrubs and plants or walls resembling a structure which is compatible with the design of the building with the development. 
(i)  Off-street parking: 
(1)  Each mobile home site shall have two (2) paved off-street parking spaces located on the site. 
(2)  The recreation building shall have one paved off-street parking space for every two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Each space shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet in area. 
(4)  Handicapped parking spaces shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet. The provisions of Section 55.00 of this Code shall govern handicapped parking space requirements. 
(j)  Additional regulations: 
(1)  Water, sanitary sewage and refuse disposal shall comply with applicable Florida State Board of Health Regulations. 
(2)  No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone except within enclosed containers. 
(3)  No motor vehicle which is inoperable or any unoccupied motor home which is usable or unusable shall be stored or used for storage or any items therein on any lot or parcel of ground in this zone unless it is within a completely enclosed building. 
(4)  No recreational vehicles, boats, boat trailers or trucks exceeding three-quarter (3/4) ton capacity shall be permitted within the development over night unless parked or stored in an area set aside within the development for said vehicles. Said area shall be buffered from any street or mobile home within the development by either a six foot (6) fence or wall, or minimum three foot (3) thick hedge being a minimum of six (6) feet high when matured. 
62.80. - Inspections authorized. 
    The health officer, building official, fire chief and police chief are each hereby authorized to make periodic inspections of mobile home developments within the city for the purpose of determining the condition of mobile home parks, mobile home cooperatives, and mobile home condominiums located within the city, and whether there is satisfactory compliance with the regulations of this Part 2 pertaining to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
62.81. - Building permit required; application. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, extend of alter any mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a building permit from the city building department. Application for a building permit shall be made to the building official and shall include the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(b)  The location and legal description of the development. 
(c)  A plan of the development which shall indicate the location and dimension of existing or proposed street right-of-ways, the location and size of each mobile home site, location and size of development boundary setbacks, location of development buffers, location of accessory structures and recreation area. 
(d)  Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements, facilities and utilities to be constructed within the mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, or mobile home condominium. 
(e)  Such other information as may be requested by the health officer to enable him to determine if the development will comply with applicable health regulations. 
(f)  Location and size of water and sewer lines. 
(g)  Location of fire hydrants (as approved by the city fire chief). 
(h)  Each mobile home site shall have one one-half-inch minimum hose bib located at the side of the mobile home. 
(i)  Location of lighting standards. Overhead lights shall be used at the development entrances. Low level lights may be used inside the park. All lights shall be directed onto the roadways. 
62.82. - Regulations applicable only to mobile home parks. 
(a)  Occupational license required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a mobile home park within the city unless such person shall first obtain a municipal license to do so. Mobile home parks shall apply for licenses before any mobile home is parked upon a site within a proposed new park or an expanded existing park. Except as provided herein, mobile home park licenses shall be subject to all the provisions of Volume 1, Chapter 10 [(Licenses)] of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Application for license. Application for mobile home park license shall be filed with and the license issued by the city clerk. The application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location, number of sites and legal description of the mobile home park. 
(c)  License fee; transfer. The annual municipal license fee for each mobile home park shall be one dollar ($1.00) per space per year. Transfer shall be in accordance with Chapter 11 of the Code of Ordinances (Licenses). 
(d)  Scope of license. Each license shall limit operation of the mobile home park to the property described in the application, to which reference shall be made in the license. 
(e)  License revocation. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, any one of the officials charged with the enforcement of this Part 2 finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any applicable provision of this part, such official shall furnish the licensee with a list of violations that such inspection shall reveal, and give the licensee written notice of a specific reasonable time in which to remedy such violations. Failure of the licensee to remedy such violations within such specific time shall result in the revocation of the license. Such license shall be reissued only if such violations have been remedied to comply with the requirements of this part. The users of the mobile home park shall have thirty (30) days from the date of such revocation in which to vacate such mobile home park. The licensee shall be granted a hearing on such revocation before the city council; provided, that a request is made by such licensee within thirty (30) days after such revocation. 
(f)  Posting of license. The license shall be conspicuously posted in the office or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times. 
(g)  General supervision of park, responsibility for compliance. The licensee, or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker, shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee, for the violation of any provisions of this Part 2 to which the licensee is subject. 
(h)  Register of occupants: 
(1)  It shall be the duty of each park owner to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of each mobile home occupant. 
b.  The name and address of the owner of each mobile home. 
c.  The make, model, year and vehicle registration number of each mobile home. 
d.  The state, territory or county in which vehicles are registered. 
(2)  The register shall be available to inspection at all times by public officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record of each registrant shall not be destroyed for a period of three (3) years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. 
(i)  Notice to city of registrants, inspection of installation. It shall be the duty of the mobile home park owners or managers to notify the city building department and obtain a building permit prior to the placement of each mobile home on its site. Inspections of placement, electric and plumbing connections will be made by the building official. An inspection fee shall be paid by the park owner or manager at the time of obtaining a building permit. Records shall be kept by the city building department showing approval of utilities connections, awnings and utilities buildings on site at time of inspection. No additions shall be added to the site after the placement inspection without necessary permits and inspections. 
(Ord. No. 1102-95, § 2, 6-21-95) 
62.83. - Required facilities, structures and services for mobile home parks, mobile home cooperatives, and mobile home condominiums. 
(a)  Water supply. Each mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, [and] mobile home condominium shall be connected to a municipal water supply system. At least one above ground water service connection shall be provided for each mobile home site. 
(b)  Plumbing. The plumbing in any mobile home park, mobile home cooperative, and mobile home condominium shall comply with the city plumbing and sewer codes. 
(c)  Street lighting. All entrances, exits and lanes between rows of mobile homes shall be well lighted. Street lighting may be overhead or low level, but must be reflected onto the street. 
(d)  Electricity. Each mobile home lot shall be supplied with the following: One hundred (100) (minimum) amp service which shall comply with the currently adopted edition of NEC wiring method. 
(e)  Grounding. Each mobile home shall be grounded to an underground system, i.e. water pipe, ground rod. 
(f)  Garbage and rubbish disposal. Dumpster sites are required. 
(g)  Tie down or anchorage. Mobile homes shall be tied down or anchored in accordance with the requirements of Florida Statutes, Section 320.8325, and Appendix H, Standard Building Code, and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
SECTION 62.90. - RVP-RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK DISTRICT 

62.91. - Intent. 
    The letters RV or RVP appearing in these regulations mean "recreational vehicle" or "recreational vehicles park" respectively, when the context so requires or permits. The RVP (recreational vehicle park) district is intended as an area in which recreational vehicle may be operated for the convenience of persons desiring "temporary" accommodations for camping, tenting and recreational vehicles. The use character of the RVP district shall be deemed commercial in nature, as distinguished from residential, and any recreational vehicle, tent, camper, recreational vehicle or other habitable unit occupied by a guest or patron of a recreational vehicle park shall not be deemed to be a "resident," nor a "residence," "dwelling," or "place of residence" within the meaning of other provisions of the Rockledge Zoning Codes which prohibit or restrict land usage in relation to residences. 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
62.91.1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Building official means the city's duly appointed building and zoning enforcement officer or his authorized representative. 
    Entrance road means the principal road or roads by which residents and the general public obtain ingress and egress to and from recreational vehicle park premises. 
    Health officer means the legally designated health authority of the city or his authorized agent. 
    Sanitary station means a facility used for removing and disposing of wastes from recreational vehicle holding tanks. 
    Service building means a building housing facilities such as recreational, maintenance, laundry and office structures necessary to the successful development and management of a recreational vehicle park. 
    Tent means a collapsible structure of canvas or other material, stretched and sustained by poles and usually made fast by ropes attached to pegs or stakes hammered into the ground. 
    Recreational vehicle-type unit means a unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. Recreational vehicle-type units, when traveling on public roadways of this state, must comply with the length and width provisions of Florida Statutes Section 316.515, as that section may hereafter be amended. As defined below, the basic entities are as follows: 
(a)  Travel trailer, including a "fifth-wheeled travel trailer," is a vehicular, portable unit mounted on wheels, of such size and weight as not to require special highway moving permits when drawn by a motorized vehicle. It is primarily designed and constructed for recreational, camping, or travel. It has a body width of no more than eight and one-half (81/2) feet and an overall body length of no more than forty (40) feet when factory-equipped for the road. 
(b)  Truck camper is a truck equipped with a portable unit designed to be loaded onto, or affixed to, the bed or chassis of the truck and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping and travel use. 
(c)  Motor home is a vehicular unit which does not exceed forty (40) feet in length and the height and width limitation provided in Florida Statutes Section 316.515, self-propelled, and primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping and travel use. 
(d)  Camping trailer is a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial sidewalks which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the campsite to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. 
(e)  Private motor coach is a vehicular unit which does not exceed the length, width, and height limitations provided in Florida Statutes Section 316.515(9), is built on a self-propelled bus type chassis having no fewer than three (3) load-bearing axles, and is primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. 
(f)  Van conversion is a vehicular unit which does not exceed the length and width limitations provided in Florida Statutes Section 316.515, is built on a self-propelled motor chassis, and is designated for recreational, camping, or travel use. 
(g)  Park trailer is a transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding twelve (12) feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provided seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. The total area of the unit in a setup mode, when measured from the exterior surface of the exterior stud walls at the level of maximum dimensions, not including any bay windows, does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet when constructed to ANSI A-119.5 standards, and five hundred (500) square feet when constructed to United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Standards. The length of the park trailer means the distance from the exterior of the front of the body (nearest to the drawbar and coupling mechanism) to the exterior of the body (at the opposite end of the body), including any protrusions. 
    Recreational vehicle park means a development in which sites are rented for the placement of recreational vehicles type units, or tents, or both for temporary use as living quarters. 
    Recreational vehicle site means a parcel of land within a recreational vehicle park designed and improved for the accommodation of not more than one recreational vehicle or one tent. 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
62.91.2. - Inspections authorized. 
    The building official is hereby authorized to make periodic inspections of the recreational vehicle park and recreational vehicle sites for the purpose of determining satisfactory compliance with the regulations of this section pertaining to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of this city. 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, former §§ 11-61 and 11-62 of the Code of Ordinances have been included herein as §§ 62.91.2 and 62.91.3. 
62.91.3. - Location to comply with zoning. 
    No recreational vehicle park shall be located within the city except in an area zoned for recreational vehicle parks (RVP) by the Zoning Ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 62.91.2. 
62.92. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. Within any RVP recreational vehicle park district, no building, structure, land or water shall be used except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Recreational vehicle park. Spaces in recreational vehicle parks may be used by recreational vehicles, or equivalent facilities constructed in or on automotive vehicles, tents or other short-term housing devices. Nonrecreational service and administrative buildings are permitted. 
(b)  Accessory. The following uses are permitted as accessories to the recreational vehicle park as a convenience solely for the guests of the park: 
(1)  Bottled gas sales. 
(2)  Grocery store. 
(3)  Petroleum products (gas, oil, etc.) sales and service. 
(4)  Laundry facilities. 
(5)  Playgrounds and picnic areas. 
(6)  Recreational hall and game courts. 
(7)  Swimming pools. 
(8)  Marina and boat rental (including bait, fishing and sports accessories sales). 
(9)  Manager's residence. 
(10)  Beauty and barber shop. 
(11)  Snack bar facilities seating no more than twenty (20) people. 
(12)  Minor RV accessory parts. 
(c)  Special exceptions. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  A marina and boat rental (including bait, fishing and sports accessories sales) planned to service both recreational vehicle park visitors and the general public. A separate access road on the periphery of the recreational vehicle park is required for use by the general public. 
(2)  Mobile home or single-family residence for the use of duly employed managers or assistant managers; however, in no event shall the total number of residences under subsection (b)(9) and this subsection exceed two (2). 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the RVP recreational vehicle park district: 
(1)  Any residential dwelling unit, with the exception of mobile home or single-family residence, per subsections (b)(9) and (c)(2). 
(2)  Home occupations (per Section 80.03). 
(3)  Adult business establishments. 
(4)  Child care centers. 
(5)  Major, structural or mechanical repairs or maintenance of RV's. 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
62.93. - Building requirements. 
    The maximum building height is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
62.94. - Submission of a site plan. 
    No change in zoning classification to a recreational vehicle park zone (RVP) shall be granted nor shall any use and occupancy permit [be] issued unless such application for zoning change or application for use and occupancy permit is predicated upon, among other factors, the submission and approval of a site plan of development, which site plan shall contain the following information: 
(A)  Name and address of applicant. 
(B)  Location and legal description of the proposed or existing recreational vehicle park. 
(C)  Locations and dimensions of all existing and proposed streets, alleyways, rights-of-way, public easements and buffer zones. 
(D)  Location and dimensions of all proposed recreational vehicle sites. 
(E)  Locations, plans and specifications of all proposed service buildings and recreation area or areas. 
(F)  Locations and sizes of water and sewer lines, and restroom facilities. 
(G)  Designations of streets to be paved. 
(H)  Locations of lighting stands. 
(I)  All setback dimensions. 
(J)  Locations and dimensions of the recreational vehicle park buffer area. 
(K)  Such further information as may be required by the health officer to determine if the proposed recreational vehicle park is in compliance with the applicable health regulations. 
(L)  If the applicant desires to alter or expand an existing recreational vehicle park, an additional site plan shall be submitted indicating the locations and dimensions of the altered, additional and existing recreational vehicle sites, streets, walkways and service buildings. 
(M)  Drainage plan. 
(N)  Any other exhibits as may be required by the building official, zoning department and the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
62.94.1. - Site plan review. 
[(a)]  The site plan shall be reviewed by the city planning commission, health officer and any other departments or officials as deemed necessary by the city manager prior to a final decision by the city council. 
[(b)]  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall submit a site plan to the city for its review and approval, according to the site plan review process established in this Code, entitled "Recreational Vehicle Parks." 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
62.95. - Design standards for parks. 
(A)  Minimum size. Each parcel of land to be used for a recreational vehicle park shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres. 
(B)  Density. There shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) recreational vehicle sites per gross acre of land within the recreational vehicle park. This shall also apply to any tent camping area. 
(C)  Streets and parking. Access to park shall be: 
(1)  [Entrance roads.] Direct vehicular access to the recreational vehicle park shall be only from an abutting approved street. Access to the park shall be so located as to: 
(a)  Provide minimum congestion on the external street; 
(b)  Provide a clear and unobstructed view of oncoming traffic from both directions for a distance of not less than three hundred fifty (350) feet; 
(c)  Provide for good vehicular circulation in the park. 
The administrative facility of the recreational vehicle park shall be private and shall be so located as to assure the complete removal of recreational vehicle units from the public right-of-way during the check-in process. 
(2)  Width of streets. Streets in a recreational vehicle park shall be private and shall be at least of the following widths: 
(a)  A one-way street shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width. 
(b)  A two-way street shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width. 
(3)  Street surfacing. Access roads entering a recreational vehicle park shall match the surface of the public road providing access to the park. If the public road is paved, the access road of a recreational vehicle park shall be paved for a distance of one hundred (100) feet into the park from all entrances and exits, and shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width. Recreational vehicle park roads which are not paved shall be hard surfaced, well-drained and all weather stabilized (e.g., shell, marl, etc.). 
(4)  Road curves; cul-de-sacs. All road curves shall have a minimum turning radius of fifty (50) feet. 
All cul-de-sacs shall have a maximum length of five hundred (500) feet and terminate in a turning circle having a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet. 
(5)  Parking. Each recreational vehicle site shall have off-street parking pads for both recreational vehicle and towing vehicles. The pads shall be composed of marl, shell, paving or other stabilized material. The remainder of each recreational vehicle site shall be well-drained, grassed and landscaped. 
(D)  On-site buffer strips. 
(1)  There shall be a suitable landscaped perimeter buffer strip not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth between recreational vehicle sites and all public streets abutting the recreational vehicle park, and a landscaped buffer strip of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth between recreational vehicle sites and all other boundaries of the park. Within all buffer strips (except waterfront) there shall be a plant or structural screen which shall be semi-opaque and at least six (6) feet high and shall extend the length of the buffer strip except for street openings. Newly planted screens shall meet the height and opaqueness requirements within twelve (12) months of planting. The landscaped buffer strip shall be separate from recreational areas, streets, recreational vehicle sites and utility sites, but may be utilized for drainage purposes and two (2) identification signs. 
(2)  No camper sites, tents, camper storage area, service building, recreation facility or structures comprising part of the internal operation of a recreational vehicle park shall be located within a distance of fifty (50) feet from the external boundary of any district or area zoned for residential purposes by the City of Rockledge, City of Cocoa, Brevard County, or other zoning authority, it being the purpose of this provision to require a buffer strip at least fifty (50) feet wide between the external boundary of any residential district of any zoning authority, and any camper site or operational facility of a recreational vehicle park. 
(E)  Recreational areas. A minimum of ten (10) percent of the total land area of a recreational vehicle park shall be devoted to one or more common use areas for recreational activity. Such recreational areas shall be exclusive of recreational vehicle sites, buffer strips, street right-of-way and storage areas; however, the periphery of such recreational areas may contain utility sites, and other nonrecreational service buildings, the area of which will be subtracted from the computed "recreational area." Recreational areas shall be easily accessible to all park users and management. The required space for recreational usage may be met through more than one recreational site, provided the site plan of the recreational vehicle park, including recreational area, is first approved pursuant to the provisions of this Code. Provision for all common open space and the construction of recreational facilities which are shown on the site plan shall proceed at an equivalent, or greater, rate as the construction of individual recreational vehicle sites. 
(F)  Tent camping. Areas may be set aside for tent camping in accordance with all provisions of this section, except: 
(1)  There shall be a stabilized pad on the site for parking of the transportation vehicle. 
(2)  Tent camping may be permitted on a recreational vehicle site. 
(G)  Design requirements for sites. 
(1)  Minimum size. Back-in parking sites shall have a minimum area of fifteen hundred (1500) square feet. Drive-through parking sites shall have a minimum area of twelve hundred (1200) square feet. 
(2)  Access. Each recreational vehicle site shall abut on at least one street within the boundaries of the recreational vehicle park and access to the site shall be only from such an internal street. 
(3)  Setback requirements. No part of a recreational vehicle placed on a recreational vehicle site shall be closer than five (5) feet to any site line and ten (10) feet to any street. 
(4)  Appurtenances. Temporary appurtenances, such as cabanas and awnings, may be erected on a recreational vehicle site as long as such appurtenances do not violate the setback requirements as set forth in this section and as long as such appurtenances are capable of being dismantled and stored within four (4) hours. Vinyl window inserts may be used on the inside of screen rooms, using vinyl windows will not constitute a Florida Room, which requires additional electrical outlet restrictions. 
(H)  Operation generally. 
(1)  Responsibilities of management. The owner of a recreational vehicle park or the park management shall at all times maintain the park and its facilities in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The park management shall inform all park occupants of the provisions of this section and other related ordinances and statutes, and of their responsibilities thereunder. 
(2)  Length of occupancy. No owner or operator of any recreational vehicle park in the City of Rockledge shall allow or permit any guest sites in such recreational vehicle park to be rented to nor occupied by any person or recreational vehicle for any period of time that would permit or allow such person or recreational vehicle to remain at such recreational vehicle park for more than one hundred eighty (180) days in any twelve (12) consecutive month period. 
(3)  Register of occupants. The owner or operator of any recreational vehicle park in the City of Rockledge shall file with the Rockledge Building Department quarter-annually a report showing the dates of arrival and departure and the guest sites occupied by each guest at the recreational vehicle park during the preceding calendar quarter. Such reports shall be filed not later than April 15th, July 15th, October 15th and January 15th for the immediately preceding calendar quarter 
(4)  Evacuation. It shall be the responsibility of the park management to notify all park occupants of the need to evacuate the recreational vehicle park in case of fire, wind, water or other manmade disasters or acts of God. 
(I)  Service buildings to comply with other codes. All service buildings shall comply with the building codes and regulations as adopted by the city concerning buildings, electrical installations, plumbing and sanitation systems. 
(J)  Water supply. An adequate supply of water shall be provided in accordance with the state sanitary code and the city ordinances. A minimum of one potable water supply outlet shall be provided for every two (2) recreational vehicle sites. Each recreational area and bathhouse restroom facility shall have at least one approved drinking fountain in close proximity. 
(K)  Sewage disposal generally. All sewage disposal facilities shall be provided in accordance with the state sanitary code and the city ordinances. 
(L)  Sanitary dumping stations. At least one sanitary dumping station shall be provided in every recreational vehicle park. Such station shall be readily accessible and well lighted. The following schedule shall be used in determining additional dumping stations based on the number of sites which are not connected individually to sewer lines: For every fifty (50) sites or fractional part thereof, beyond the first fifty (50) sites, one sanitary dumping station shall be provided. 
(M)  Bathhouse-restroom facilities. 
(1)  At least one central bathhouse-restroom building shall be provided for every recreational vehicle park. Facilities shall be provided according to the total number of spaces within the park. 
(2)  A bathhouse-restroom facility shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of all camping units which are either not supplied with sewer connections or not capable of utilizing such connections (e.g., tents, camper trailers). 
(3)  Any dispersed bathhouse-restroom facility provided to meet the distance requirement of three hundred (300) feet shall have at least two (2) of each of the following fixtures for men and women: Toilets, urinals, lavatories and showers. 
(4)  Recreational areas shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of a bathhouse-restroom facility. 
(5)  The following schedule indicates the minimum number of bath and toilet facilities required based upon the total number of spaces within the recreational vehicle park: 
Number of 
Spaces Toilets Urinals Lavatories Showers Laundry Sinks M W M M W M W 1-15 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 16-30 1 2 1 2 2 1 1 2 31-45 2 2 1 3 3 1 1 2 46-60 2 3 2 3 3 2 2 2 61-80 3 4 2 4 4 2 2 2 81-100 3 4 2 4 4 3 3 2  
(6)  For recreational vehicle parks having more than one hundred (100) recreational vehicle spaces there shall be provided: 
One additional toilet and lavatory for each sex per additional thirty (30) recreational vehicle spaces. 
One additional shower for each sex per each additional forty (40) recreational vehicle spaces. 
One additional men's urinal per each additional one hundred (100) recreational vehicle spaces. 
(N)  Lighting. All entrances, exits, streets and service buildings shall be well lighted during the hours of darkness. Street lighting may be overhead or low level but must be shaded and reflected into the street and should be of low intensity. All recreational facilities which are to be utilized during the hours of darkness shall be adequately lighted to insure the safety of all users of such facilities. 
(O)  Electricity. Each recreational vehicle site shall be equipped with at least a 110/115 volt, 20 amp three-wire grounded weather-proof receptacle mounted on a three (3) foot high post. Separate PVC Type A conduit for each circuit shall be run underground to each site from a central circuit breaker panel. The conduit shall be buried at least eighteen (18) inches deep. The individual breakers in the panel shall be 20 amp. The conductors and ground shall be Type TW and sized so the load imposed on each conductor is 20 amps or less. Maximum run shall be one hundred (100) feet for #10 wire, two hundred (200) feet for #8 wire, and three hundred (300) feet for #6 wire. Rigid metal conduit shall be used where any service wire comes out of the ground to receptacle. (EMT not permitted.) 
(P)  Service and utility lines. All service and utility lines in a recreational vehicle park shall be installed underground and at a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches. 
(Q)  Refuse handling. Each recreational vehicle site shall be provided with at least one flytight, watertight, rodentproof container of a capacity not less than four (4) gallons and not more than thirty (30) gallons. However, this is not required when sites are within two hundred (200) feet of a large covered trash receptacle (e.g., Dempster Dumpster). All refuse shall be collected at least twice weekly and where public or private collection service is not available, the owner or operator of the recreational vehicle park shall dispose of the refuse by transporting it to a disposal site approved by the city. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers. 
(R)  Insect and rodent control. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements and regulations of the city and the sanitary code of the state. Adequate drainage systems will be provided and maintained in such a manner as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes and other obnoxious insects in the park. 
(S)  Fire protection and prevention. The recreational vehicle park shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the fire department. Fires shall be made only in stoves, fireplaces and other equipment as permitted by the fire department. 
(T)  Fuel supply and storage. All installations and tanks furnishing or storing any type of gaseous fuels to be used by the occupants of the recreational vehicle park shall comply with the rules and regulations of the city. 
(U)  Storage of recreational vehicles. Outdoor storage of recreational vehicle is permitted provided that such storage takes place within an area especially set aside for such use. 
(V)  Signs. Those signs necessary for directional or safety purposes are permitted. Two (2) identification signs are permitted within the buffer area, and shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from the public road right-of-way and shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in size. The lighting of all signs shall be shaded and directed away from roads and adjoining property. 
(W)  Animal control. It shall be the responsibility of the park manager to insure that no owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit said animal to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any recreational vehicle park. 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
62.95.1. - Setbacks and buffers. 
    Setbacks and buffers shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
62.96. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58 of this Code. 
(b)  Signs. Signs shall be allowed in the RVP district only as specifically permitted by the provisions of Section 86.00 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
62.97. - Permit required. 
A.  Use and occupancy permit required; application; fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a recreational vehicle park within the city without first obtaining a use and occupancy permit, in the name of such person, to operate the specific park. Such permit shall be issued annually by the city clerk. All applications for permits shall be made to the city clerk who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this section and regulations stated herein and other applicable legal requirements. Application for original approval shall be made in writing, accompanied by a filing fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and owner of the property involved. 
(2)  The location and legal description of the recreational vehicle park area. 
(3)  A site plan of the recreational vehicle area showing all lots, spaces, structures, roads, walkways, sanitary stations and other information as outlined in this section. 
B.  Renewal of permits. Application for renewals of permits shall be made in writing by the holders of the permits, shall be accompanied by a filing fee of fifty cents ($0.50) per lot or twenty dollars ($20.00), whichever shall be greater, and shall contain any change in the information submitted since the original permit was issued or the latest renewal granted. 
C.  Permit revocation. Whenever the building official, upon inspection of a recreational vehicle park, finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any applicable provision of this Code, he shall furnish the permittee with a list of violations that said inspection shall reveal, and give the permittee written notice of a specific reasonable time in which to remedy said violations. Failure of the permittee to remedy said violations within said specific time shall result in the revocation of the permit. Said permit shall be reissued only if said violations shall have been remedied to comply with the requirements of this section. The users of the recreational vehicle park shall have two (2) days from the date of said revocation in which to vacate said recreational vehicle park. The permittee shall be granted a hearing on such revocation before the city council provided a request is made by said applicant within thirty (30) days after said revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
62.98. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of an offense against the City of Rockledge and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to the punishment hereinabove authorized, the provisions of this section may be enforced through the powers and authority of the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board, as authorized by Florida Statutes and Rockledge city ordinances, or by suit for prohibitory or mandatory injunctive relief, or by any other lawful remedy existing at law or in equity for the enforcement for the municipal ordinances. The penalty provisions of this section shall be in addition to the recreational vehicle park permit revocation provisions provided for elsewhere in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1082-94, § 1, 6-15-94) 
SECTION 62.100. - C1-NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

62.101. - Intent. 
    The C1 neighborhood retail commercial district is intended to apply to an area predominantly developed to selected commercial uses which serve primarily residential areas adjacent and tributary thereto or which, by its location, trend of development or planned development designated in the comprehensive plan, is appropriate to such uses. Areas designated as C1 districts are intended to abut certain principal streets, existing or planned, the frontage of which makes such areas adaptable to the selected commercial uses designated herein. 
62.102. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. All business uses, and all retail material and products shall be confined within substantial buildings completely enclosed with walls and roof. No buildings, structures, land or water shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Banks, trust companies and other financial institutions. 
(2)  Bakery, the products of which are sold on the premises. 
(3)  Laundromats, laundry and dry cleaning pick-up stations. 
(4)  Service and repair shops; appliance repair; beauty salons, barber shops, shoe repairing, hat cleaning, radio and television repair, watch and clock repair and duplicating services. 
(5)  Restaurants, tea rooms, cafeterias, delicatessens and other eating establishments with the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption, but not including dancing and entertainments. 
(6)  Florists, interior decorating, antique shops. 
(7)  Studios; photography, art, music, dancing. 
(8)  Retail stores; apparel, book, confectionery, department, drug and sundries, hardware, paint, haberdashery, costume jewelry, leather goods, millinery, modiste, notions, photographic supplies, pet, sporting goods, radio and television, phonographic records, stationery, shoe, toy, tailor, variety, art goods and artists' supplies, business machines, music stores, furniture and appliance stores. 
(9)  Convenience stores, without gas pumps. 
(10)  Professional office buildings. 
(11)  Any other retail store or service establishment that is consistent with those included above; and further, that will be in harmony with the spirit of this part and the comprehensive plan. 
(12)  Private clubs. 
(b)  Accessory. The following accessory uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Enclosed storage spaces. Storage areas that are entirely enclosed within a continuous fence or wall constructed of solid material that is nontransparent, opaque and cannot be seen through. Said enclosure must be a uniform height of six (6) feet, and any gate in the enclosure shall also be constructed of nontransparent material six (6) feet in height and be kept closed at all times except when ingress and egress is being made to or from the storage space. No materials, equipment, supplies or other form of tangible personal property shall at any time be placed, stored or kept within the storage space so as to exceed the height of the fence or wall constituting the enclosure, or so as to be visible to persons and members of the public who may walk, or travel in motor vehicles, adjacent to the enclosure. 
(2)  Ordinary public utility uses and rights-of-way. 
(3)  Public and private parking areas, and loading and unloading areas, with no storage facilities other than enclosure and storage spaces per subsection (b)(1). 
(4)  Facilities with drive-through service windows shall provide adequate on-site stacking of vehicles using current industry standards. 
(c)  Special exceptions. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  Hotels, motels or bungalow courts containing a minimum of eight (8) rental units. 
(2)  Public buildings. 
(3)  Public open spaces, including parks and playgrounds. 
(4)  Mortuaries and funeral homes. 
(5)  Public swimming pool. 
(6)  Convenience stores with gas pumps. 
(7)  Child care centers; provided, that no part of any playground area of said center is located, maintained or permitted forward of the front of the principal building or structure of said center. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the C1 district: 
(1)  Residential dwellings. 
(2)  Commercial nursery or greenhouse. 
(3)  Business using outdoor displays, canopies or sheds. 
(4)  Cemeteries. 
(5)  Trailer camps, courts or parks. 
(6)  Wholesale establishments. 
(7)  Laundries; automobiles, commercial, cleaning or dyeing plants. 
(8)  Storage yards or any outside storage of goods, or any facility specifically designed or used for storage purposes, except as an accessory use subject to the provisions of this section. 
(9)  New and used automobile, trailer or farm equipment sales and service facilities. 
(10)  Drive-in services; restaurants, dairy bars, laundries, etc., except as an accessory use subject to the provisions of this section. 
(11)  Planned shopping centers. 
(12)  Sales from stands, wagons, trucks, etc., on vacant property or parked on or adjacent to streets, highways, or roads. 
(13)  Shops; carpenter, sheet metal, paint, machine, sign painting, silver plating, soldering, upholstery, umbrella, bicycle or motorcycle rental, extermination, secondhand or rummage, feed, tire recapping, live bait, picture framing, taxidermy. 
(14)  Manufacturing, fabricating or processing activities, or other similar enterprises or businesses which are deemed to be equally obnoxious or detrimental to the neighborhood retail commercial district or the public health, safety or welfare. 
(15)  Transportation terminals. 
(16)  Restaurants with live entertainment. 
(17)  Automobile paint and body shops. 
(18)  Cabinet shops. 
(19)  Public use of an industrial nature. 
(20)  Bars, packages stores, lounges and other retail establishments selling alcoholic beverages not forming part of a restaurant. 
(21)  Large printing/publishing establishments. 
(Ord. No. 1297-2002, § 1, 11-20-02; Ord. No. 1380-2005, §§ 1, 3, 6-15-05) 
62.103. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Area. The minimum lot area required is seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(b)  Width. The minimum lot width required is seventy-five (75) feet. 
(c)  Depth. The minimum lot depth required is one hundred (100) feet. 
62.104. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback required is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback is ten (10) feet, except in the circumstances described in Section 62.106(b) of this Code in which event the minimum rear setback required is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(c)  Side. The minimum side setback required is five (5) feet, except in the circumstances described in Section 62.106(b) of this Code in which event the minimum side setback required is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(d)  Notes: 
(1)  When the frontage in one block is partly in a residential district, then the front setback requirements of the residential district shall apply to the C1 district. 
(2)  When the side or rear of a lot in a C1 neighborhood retail commercial district abuts upon the side or rear of a lot in a residential district there shall be a side or rear setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(e)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(f)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a building, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 8, 8-20-97) 
62.105. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is eight (80) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures, including driveways and parking lots. 
(b)  Floor area. The minimum floor area is not less than three hundred (300) square feet. 
(c)  Height. The maximum building height is forty-five (45) feet. 
62.106. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Buffer walls, in accordance with Section 81.35 of this Code. 
(b)  Landscaping. All applicable provisions of Section 40.30 of this Code are hereby incorporated in this section by reference, and the same constitute special requirements under this section. 
(c)  Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided on site per the regulations as set forth in Section 55.00 of this Code. 
(d)  Signs. Signs shall be constructed in conformity with Section 86.00 of this Code. 
(e)  Submission of a site plan. A site plan shall be submitted, per the requirements of Part III of this Code. 
(f)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 9, 8-20-97) 
SECTION 62.110. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1573-2011, § 1, adopted February 2, 2011, repealed section 62.110, subsections 62.111-62.117, which pertained to C1A-Restricted Commercial District and derived from Ord. No. 984-90, 11-21-90; Ord. No. 1144-97, § 11, 8-20-97. 

Secs. 62.111-62.117. - Reserved. 
SECTION 62.120. - C2-GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. 

62.121. - Intent. 
    The provisions of the C2 general commercial district are intended to apply to an area developed to business establishments which serve all portions of the city and the metropolitan area, or which by its location, trend of development or planned development designated in the comprehensive plan, is appropriate to such use. High land values, limitation of space and public convenience and welfare justify a greater intensity of use than in other commercial districts. 
62.122. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. All business uses, and all retail material and products shall be confined within substantial buildings completely enclosed with walls and roof. No building, structures, land or water shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Banks, trust companies and other financial institutions. 
(2)  Professional and business offices, office buildings. 
(3)  Service and repair shops; beauty salons, barber shops, shoe repairing, hat cleaning, radio and television repair, watch and clock repair, duplicating services. 
(4)  Service station, gasoline. 
(5)  Automobile repair and service, but not including automotive paint and body work. 
(6)  Restaurants, cafeterias, delicatessens and other eating establishments. 
(7)  Florist, interior decorating, antique shops. 
(8)  Studios; photograph, art, music, dancing. 
(9)  Bakery, the products of which are sold on the premises. 
(10)  Indoor theater. 
(11)  Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up stations. 
(12)  Retail stores; apparel, book, confectionery, department, drug and sundries, furniture, appliance, hardware, paint, haberdashery, costume jewelry, leather goods, millinery, modiste, notions, phonograph and phonograph records and supplies, package liquor, sporting goods, radio and television, office supplies and stationery, shoe, toy, tailor, variety, art goods and artist supplies, business machines, music stores. "Retail stores," as used in this paragraph, means stores engaged primarily in the retail sale of new goods, wares and merchandise as distinguished from the sale of used goods, wares or merchandise. 
(13)  Planned shopping center, as defined in Part I of this Code. 
(14)  Hotels, motels, apartments, and condominiums meeting and complying with all requirements, regulations, restrictions, limitations and conditions applicable to the erection, placement, or installation of multiple-family dwellings in R3 (multifamily dwelling) districts of the City of Rockledge, including, but not in way of limitation, the lot, setback, density, building, off-street parking, landscaping and other special requirements applicable to multiple-family dwellings in R3 (multifamily dwelling) districts of the City of Rockledge according to the provisions of the Rockledge City Code pertaining to R3 multifamily dwelling districts, except that the density limitation for hotels and motels in the C2 (General Commercial) district shall not exceed thirty (30) rental units per acre. Each primary rental unit of a hotel or motel shall have not less than three hundred (300) square feet of livable floor area. 
(15)  Package liquor stores, bars cocktail lounges and other drinking establishments where alcoholic beverage is served. 
(16)  Adult business establishments, subject to the limitations, regulations and restrictions set forth in Part VIII of this Code. 
(17)  Child care centers; provided, that no part of any playground area of said center is located, maintained or permitted forward of the front of the principal building or structure of said center. 
(18)  Any other retail store or service establishment that is consistent with those included above; and further, that will be in harmony with the spirit of this part and the comprehensive plan. 
(19)  Temporary automobile sales subject to the conditions and requirements of Section 84.10 of this Code. 
(20)  Assisted living facility or nursing (convalescent) homes. 
(21)  Dancing and live entertainment within an enclosed building. 
(22)  Single-family medium density subdivision, provided the same meets all of the special conditions, standards, and requirements set forth in Section 80.20 of these regulations. 
(23)  Private clubs. 
(b)  Accessory. The following accessory uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Enclosed storage spaces, subject to Section 81.36 of this Code. 
(2)  Public and private parking and loading spaces. 
(3)  Facilities with drive-through service windows shall provide adequate on-site stacking of vehicles using current industry standards. 
(4)  Ordinary public utility uses and rights-of-way. 
(c)  Special exception. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  Public buildings and public open spaces, excluding cemeteries. 
(2)  Indoor amusement enterprises; bowling alleys, billiards and pool. 
(3)  Telephone exchange and service shops. 
(4)  Radio and television service shops. 
(5)  Bus terminals. 
(6)  Commercial nurseries, greenhouses and nursery storage yards. 
(7)  Lumber and building materials sales; provided all stock, lumber, goods and materials offered for sale at the site are stored, kept and maintained within a six (6) foot high opaque and nontransparent fenced or walled enclosure, and that no stock, lumber, goods or materials stored or kept within said enclosure exceed the height of the fence or wall, or are visible to persons traveling on public rights-of-way; and provided further, that there is a minimum lot size of two (2) acres for any such business establishment. 
(8)  Golf courses, golf and country club. 
(9)  Public swimming pool. 
(10)  Business establishments engaged in the retail sale of used or secondhand goods, wares or merchandise, herein referred to generally as "merchandise," provided all such merchandise is at all times kept inside and within a substantial building enclosed with walls and roof and that such merchandise will never at any time be displayed, stored, placed or kept outside such building; that no merchandise will be donated, deposited or collected for resale at or about said premises except during the posted business hours of the establishment; that donations and collections will only be received at a location other than the primary point of ingress and egress of the business establishment during posted business hours; that all deposits and collections will be received at a single doorway at the non-primary entrance of said facility, and immediately stored inside the structure in a designated storage area; that no refurbishment or restoration shall occur on the premises and that the nature and character of such business and establishment, premises, and operation shall be compatible, harmonious and substantially of an equal quality to and with neighboring and surrounding business establishments and premises; and that a sign two foot by two feet (2' × 2') in size bearing the following be posted: 
DONATION ITEMS ACCEPTED ONLY AT THE REAR OR NON-PRIMARY ENTRANCE OF THIS FACILITY DURING POSTING BUSINESS HOURS ONLY; IT SHALL BE A VIOLATION OF CITY OF ROCKLEDGE REGULATIONS TO PLACE ANY ITEM OUTSIDE THIS STRUCTURE IN ANY LOCATION IN THESE PREMISES. 
This sign shall be conspicuously placed within three (3) feet from all customer entrance ways to the establishment on the outside face of the building or on the inside of the front window against the glass and visible from the outside. The days and hours of operation shall be prominently displayed under this sign. This special exception does not include flea markets, pawn shops, swap shops, or junk dealers. Any violation of this section may result in revocation of the special exception. 
(11)  Community residential home, seven (7) to fourteen (14) residents meet the requirements in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(12)  Care unit, fourteen (14) or fewer residents. 
(13)  Pawn shops as an accessory use to an existing retail store which must be the principal use of the property. The pawn shop shall be at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet from any park, stadium, school, church, or another pawn shop. A site plan showing the principal business use and the accessory pawn shop shall be submitted with the request for a special exception. This special exception may only be granted to facilities located along and adjacent to arterial corridors. 
(14)  Automobile dealerships. The primary use must be for new car sales but used car sales will be permitted as a secondary use. There must be a minimum lot size of five (5) acres and the dealership must be located on a federal highway. 
(15)  Limited enclosed mini-warehouses (dead space storage only) may be allowed under the following conditions: the site shall have a preexisting structure/building of not less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of which no more than twenty-five (25) percent may be used for ministorage space; the ministorage facility shall only be open during normal business hours consistent with the hours of operation for the principal business; no additional points of ingress and egress, other than those required by code, shall be established to the outside of the building; no additional signage shall be allowed except that provided by current law; the ministorage area shall be equipped with sprinklers in accordance with requirements of the NFPA 13; storage materials shall be limited to normal non-hazardous household commodities; and the ministorage area must be separated from the principal use by a two hour rated fire resistant construction method and must meet all other provisions of the applicable building and fire codes adopted by the city. 
(16)  Arcade amusement center. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the C2 general commercial district: 
(1)  Single-family residential dwellings, except for areas utilizing the provisions of Section 80.20 "medium density subdivision". 
(2)  Warehousing or assembling facilities. 
(3)  Business using canopies or sheds. 
(4)  Fortune-tellers and clairvoyants. 
(5)  Uses of an industrial nature. 
(6)  Trailer camps, courts or parks. 
(7)  Wholesale establishments, except offices. 
(8)  Storage yards or any outside storage of goods, or any facility specifically designed or used for storage purposes, except as an accessory use subject to the provisions of this section. 
(9)  New recreational vehicle sales and service and/or used recreation vehicles sales and service with a provision of outdoor display. 
(10)  Drive-in services; restaurants, dairy bars, laundries, etc., except as an accessory use subject to the provisions of this section. 
(11)  Sales from stands, wagons, trucks, etc., on vacant property or parked on or adjacent to streets, highways, or roads. 
(12)  Shops; carpenter, sheet metal, paint, machine, sign painting, silver plating, soldering, upholstery, moped or motorcycle rental or repair, exterminating, feed, tire recapping, live bait, picture framing, taxidermy. 
(13)  Manufacturing, fabricating or businesses which are deemed to be equally obnoxious or detrimental to the character of the shopping center or to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(14)  Automobile paint and body shops. 
(15)  Cabinet shop. 
(16)  Large printing/publishing establishments. 
(17)  Flea markets, swap shops, junk dealerships, stores, shops, or establishments dealing in rummage, secondhand, or used goods other than those qualifying as a special exception under subsection (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 991-91, § 1, 2-6-91; Ord. No. 1076-94, §§ 1, 2, 6-15-94; Ord. No. 1077-94, § 1, 6-15-94; Ord. No. 1081-94, §§ 1, 2, 6-15-94; Ord. No. 1098-95, § 8, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 1144-97, § 12, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1176-98, § 1, 12-16-98; Ord. No. 1211-2000, §§ 5, 6, 4-5-00; Ord. No. 1297-2002, § 2, 11-20-02; Ord. No. 1341-2004, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-04; Ord. No. 1367-2005, § 1, 2-2-05; Ord. No. 1378-2005, §§ 1, 2, 6-1-05; Ord. No. 1380-2005, §§ 2, 4, 6-15-05; Ord. No. 1444-2007, § 2, 4-4-07; Ord. No. 1530-2009, § 2G., 9-23-09) 
62.123. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Area. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the minimum lot area required is seven thousand (7,000) [square] feet. 
(b)  Width. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the minimum lot width required is fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  Lot requirements for multifamily residential structures. The lot requirements for multifamily residential structures described in Section 62.122(a)(14) of this part shall be the same as for the R3 district as set forth in Section 62.53 of this part, including the provisions for designation of lower maximum density in applications for rezoning to the C2 general commercial district. 
(d)  Lot requirements for lumber and building materials sales and enclosed storage. The minimum lot size for a lumber and building materials sales and enclosed storage business establishment is two (2) acres. 
62.124. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback required is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback required is ten (10) feet, except in the circumstances described in Section 62.126(c) of this Code in which event the minimum rear setback required is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(c)  Side. The minimum side setback required is five (5) feet, except in the circumstances described in section 62.126(c) of this Code in which event the minimum side setback required is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(d)  Notes: 
(1)  When the frontage in one block is located partly in a residential district, then the requirements of the residential district shall apply. 
(2)  When the side or rear of a lot in a commercial district abuts upon the side or rear of a lot in a residential district, there shall be a side or rear setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(e)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(f)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a building, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
(g)  Requirements for multifamily residential structures in C2 general commercial districts. The setback requirements for multifamily residential structures described in Section 62.122(a)(14) of this part shall be the same as for the R3 district as set forth in Section 62.54 of this part. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 13, 8-20-97) 
62.125. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is eighty (80) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures, including driveways and parking lots. 
(b)  Height. The maximum building height is seventy-five (75) feet. 
(c)  Hotel and motel units. Each primary rental unit of a hotel or motel shall have not less than three hundred fifty (350) square feet of livable floor area. 
62.126. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Establishments offering dancing or live entertainment. For the purpose of construing and interpreting this paragraph, if at any time the city council shall determine, based upon procedural due process, that the live entertainment for which a conditional use permit has been issued constitutes a public or private nuisance or is not in the best interests of the public or is contrary to the general welfare or has an adverse effect upon the public health, safety, comfort, the value of property in the immediate or surrounding vicinity, good order, appearance, convenience and morals of the citizens and inhabitants of the city, then the city council may, upon such determination, revoke, cancel or suspend such license and any person or party applying for and receiving a conditional use permit for live entertainment is hereby placed on notice that such permit may be canceled, revoked or suspended at any time pursuant to the provisions of this section. Every conditional use permit hereafter granted for live entertainment shall contain a recitation upon the fact thereof that the same is subject to revocation, cancellation or suspension for the reasons stated in this paragraph. 
(b)  Buffer walls , in accordance with Section 81.35 of this Code. 
(c)  Landscaping. All applicable provisions of Section 40.30 of this Code are hereby incorporated in this section by reference, and the same constitute special requirements under this section. 
(d)  Signs. Signs shall be constructed in conformity to Section 86.00, of this Code. 
(e)  Site plan. A site plan shall be submitted pursuant to Part III. 
(f)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 14, 8-20-97) 
SECTION 62.130. - P1-PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT 

62.131. - Intent. 
    The provisions of the P1 professional district are intended to apply to urban areas with convenient access to a major thoroughfare and to other business areas, wherein activities are restricted to financial, professional and business office operations. The district is intended to accommodate office parks and is partially intended as a buffer or transitional use between residential development and more intense development. 
62.132. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. No building, structure, land or water shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Offices for professional services, nonprofessional and any other type of office where the service of the office does not involve the transfer of a commercial product at the office site, such as, but not limited to, attorney, doctor, accountant, engineer, real estate, etc. 
(2)  Hospital. 
(3)  Medical clinic and medical laboratories. 
(4)  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(5)  Existing single-family and multifamily residential dwellings as of the effective date of this part. 
(b)  Accessory. The following uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Pharmacies for the sale of drugs and pharmaceutical products. 
(2)  Apothecary. 
(3)  Florist. 
(4)  Card/candy gift shop. 
(5)  Enclosed storage spaces. 
(6)  Ordinary public utility uses and rights-of-way. 
(7)  Public parking areas. 
(8)  Cafeteria, restaurant or food service facility for the sale and service of food products, including beer and wine, in a "hospital," as defined by Florida Statutes. 
(c)  Special exception. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  Emergency helistops ancillary to a licensed hospital, as the term "hospital" is defined by Florida Statutes, and meeting all criteria, regulations and requirements set forth in Part VIII of this Code. 
(2)  Community residential home, six (6) or fewer residents meeting the requirements in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(3)  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(4)  Care unit, fourteen (14) or fewer residents. 
(5)  Medically related commercial retail businesses. 
(6)  Public buildings. 
(7)  Swimming pools. 
(8)  Veterinarian clinic; all activities to be within an air conditioned building. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in this district: 
(1)  New single-family and multifamily residential dwellings constructed after the effective date of this part. 
(2)  Retail, wholesale businesses. 
(3)  Mobile homes. 
(4)  Warehousing. 
(5)  Open storage. 
(6)  Adult business establishments. 
(Ord. No. 1379-2005, § 1, 6-1-05; Ord. No. 1530-2009, § 2H., 9-23-09) 
62.133. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Area. The minimum lot area required is seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
(b)  Width. The minimum lot width required is fifty (50) feet. 
62.134. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback required is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback required is ten (10) feet. 
(c)  Side. The minimum side setback required is five (5) feet. 
(d)  Notes: 
(1)  When the frontage in one block is located partly in a residential district then the requirements of the residential district shall apply. 
(2)  When the side or rear of a lot in a P1 district abuts upon the side or rear of a lot in a residential district, there shall be a side or rear setback of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(e)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(f)  Measurements. The exterior wall of a building, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
62.135. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is eighty (80) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures, including driveways and parking lots. 
(b)  Height. The maximum building height is thirty-five (35) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1344-2004, § 1, 5-5-04; Ord. No. 1371-2005, § 1, 4-20-05) 
62.136. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Buffer walls , subject to Section 81.35 of this Code. 
(b)  Signs. Signs shall be constructed in conformance with the requirements of Section 86.00, of this Code. 
(c)  Site plan. A site plan shall be submitted pursuant to Part III. 
(d)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58 of this Code. 
(e)  Landscaping. All applicable provisions of Section 40.30 of this Code are hereby incorporated in this section by reference, and the same constitute special requirements under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 15, 8-20-97) 
SECTION 62.140. - M1-GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

62.141. - Intent. 
    The provisions of M1 general industrial district are intended to apply to an area developed to a variety of storage, warehousing and light industrial operations, or which by its location, trend of development or planned development designated in the comprehensive plan, is appropriate to such uses. The provisions are intended to permit the normal operation of such general industrial uses under such conditions of operation that will not be harmful to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of the City of Rockledge. 
62.142. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. The following principal uses are permitted providing they are in compliance with the performance standards set forth in Part V, and providing they take place within an enclosed building with walls and roof. Within any M1 general industrial district, no building, structure, land or water shall be used except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Bakeries. 
(2)  Bottling works. 
(3)  Building material storage and sale, contractors; storage yards. 
(4)  Bus, cab, truck repair, storage and terminals. 
(5)  Carting, express, hauling and storage yards. 
(6)  Cold storage and frozen food lockers; ice plant. 
(7)  Dyeing, dry cleaning and laundry. 
(8)  Electronics manufacturing firm. 
(9)  Machinery sales and storage. 
(10)  Assembly and manufacture; precision instruments or equipment, novelties and souvenirs, cabinets, brooms and brushes, confectionery, tobacco products, ceramic products electrically fired, dairy products, ice cream, jewelry, wearing apparel. 
(11)  Wholesale establishments, including storage and distribution warehouses. 
(12)  Manufacturing of asphalt, brick, tile, cement, lime, plaster, paint and varnish, concrete or products thereof. 
(13)  Trade shops; tinsmith, cabinet making, rug and carpet cleaning, upholstering, mattress renovation, electrical, roofing and plumbing, sign painting, auto repairing, bicycle or motorcycle rental or repair, feed and seed, picture framing and taxidermy. 
(14)  Service station, auto repair and storage garages, including tire sale and recapping. 
(15)  Commercial nursery or greenhouse. 
(16)  New and used automobile, recreation vehicle, trailer and farm equipment sales and service facilities. 
(17)  Transportation terminals, including bus and train passenger and freight, trucking. 
(18)  Lumber and building materials sales and storage. 
(19)  Machine shop; welding shop, tool or garage shop. 
(20)  Radio and television broadcasting towers and antennas as set forth in Section 82.00 of these regulations. 
(21)  Manufacture of products from aluminum, brass, bronze, copper, steel or other metal or from bone, cloth, hair, leather, paper, rubber, shell, plastic, wood or other materials. 
(22)  Food processing and packaging; fruit processing and packaging. 
(23)  Restaurants and other eating establishments. 
(24)  Amusement establishments; bowling alleys, miniature golf, driving range, archery range, roller skating. 
(25)  Business colleges, vocational and trade schools operated as a commercial enterprise. 
(26)  Printing, bookbinding, lithograph and publishing establishments, blueprinting, photostating. 
(27)  Mortuaries and funeral homes, including ambulance service. 
(28)  Souvenir shops, retail fruit sales. 
(29)  Automobile paint and body shops. 
(30)  Any principal use permitted in the C2 district. 
(31)  Adult business establishments, subject to the limitations, regulations and restrictions set forth in Chapter 2.1 [(Adult Businesses)] of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances and Part VIII of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations. 
(32)  Any other industrial activity that conforms to the limitations, requirements and procedures set forth in Part V; and further, that is in harmony with the character of the district and the surrounding area and with the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Accessory. The following uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Ordinary public utility uses and rights-of-way. 
(2)  Lunchrooms, walk-up lunch stands. 
(3)  Any use customarily accessory to any of the principal uses. 
(4)  Public and private parking and loading areas. 
(5)  Enclosed storage spaces in accordance with Section 81.36 of this Code. 
(c)  Special exception. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  Veterinary hospitals and kennels. 
(2)  Discount houses. 
(3)  Drive-in theater. 
(4)  Amusement enterprises; pool and billiards, amusement park, shooting gallery, dance hall. 
(5)  Petroleum storage. 
(6)  Storage and sale of fish and poultry; wholesale meat and produce. 
(7)  Public buildings and facilities, including those of an industrial nature. 
(8)  Public and private utility plants, including water and sewage treatment plants. 
(9)  Any special exception permitted in the C2 district; subject to the limitations, requirements and procedures specified for such use, unless the same is prohibited or otherwise specifically permitted in this district. 
(10)  Public and private mental health facilities. 
(11)  Public or semipublic or private licensed institutions for the maintenance, care or treatment of sick, injured, aged or convalescent persons. 
(12)  Child care centers; provided, that no part of any playground area of said center is located, maintained or permitted forward of the front of the principal building or structure of said center. 
(13)  Borrow pits meeting the special requirements, criteria and conditions set forth in Section 80.10 of this Code. 
(14)  Open storage yards that are constructed to the standards of Section 81.36 of this Code. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the M1 district: 
(1)  Residential dwellings. 
(2)  Foundry, drop forging. 
(3)  Junk and wrecked automobile storage yards. 
(4)  Fertilizer manufacturing and/or storage. 
(5)  Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, repair and servicing of any commodity or product that is deemed to be objectionable by the standards established in Part V. 
(6)  Reclamation, dumping and/or storage of industrial, manufacturing, radioactive, explosive or chemical waste materials. 
(7)  Chemical manufacturing or processing. 
(Ord. No. 1098-95, § 9, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 1144-97, § 16, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1240-2000, §§ 9, 10, 10-18-00) 
62.143. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Area. The minimum lot area required is seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
(b)  Width. The minimum lot width required is fifty (50) feet. 
62.144. - Building setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback required is twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback required is ten (10) feet. 
(c)  Side. The minimum side setback required is five (5) feet. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(e)  Notes: 
(1)  One-half of the front yard setback shall be retained as a landscaped green area and remain unpaved. The remaining one-half may be used as normal entrance drives or as parking for visitors only. A maximum of five (5) percent of the required parking spaces may be designated as visitors' parking within the front yard setback area. 
(2)  When the frontage in one block is partly in a residential district, then the front setback requirements of the residential district shall apply to the M1 district. 
(3)  Rear yards may be reduced to zero when the rear property line coincides with a railroad siding; however, no trackage shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of a residential district. 
(4)  On a street side yard, no paving or vehicular use areas shall be permitted except for driveways. 
(f)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a building, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
62.145. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is eighty (80) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures including driveways and parking lots. 
(b)  Height. The maximum building height is forty (40) feet. 
62.146. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Buffer walls , in accordance with Section 81.35 of this Code. 
(b)  Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided on site per the regulations as set forth in Section 55.00 of these regulations. 
(c)  Site plans. Site plans shall be provided per the regulations as set forth in Part III. 
(d)  Signs. Signs in this district shall be in conformance with Section 86.00, of this Code. 
(e)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58, of this Code. 
(f)  Landscaping. All applicable provisions of Section 40.30 of this Code are hereby incorporated in this section by reference, and the same constitute special requirements under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 17, 8-20-97) 
SECTION 62.150. - M2-LIGHT INDUSTRIAL AND WAREHOUSING DISTRICT 

62.151. - Intent. 
    The provisions of the M2 light industrial and warehousing district are intended to apply to an area developed as a planned industrial district or which, by its location or planned development designated in the comprehensive plan, is appropriate to such uses. Provisions of this district are intended to protect the character of an area planned to provide an attractive and economical environment for the operation of selected types of industries, ensuring that such character shall be appropriate to the surrounding uses and that conditions and safeguards shall be established to assure, insofar as possible, that development will protect and enhance the value of surrounding property, in addition to achieving other public purposes. 
62.152. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. The following principal uses are permitted providing they are in compliance with the performance standards set forth in Part V, and providing they take place within an enclosed building with walls and roof. Within any M2 light industrial and warehousing district, no building, structure, land or water shall be used except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Bakeries. 
(2)  Laboratories. 
(3)  Professional offices. 
(4)  Radio and television broadcasting stations. 
(5)  Enclosed warehousing and storage of all types, including fertilizer and petroleum storage. 
(6)  Electronic manufacturing. 
(7)  Transportation terminals. 
(8)  Manufacturing and assembly with operations and storage totally confined inside a building. 
(9)  Any use permitted in the M1 district. 
(10)  Adult business establishments, subject to the limitations, regulations and restrictions set forth in Chapter 2.1 [(Adult Businesses)] of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances. 
(11)  Any other industrial activity that conforms to the limitations, requirements and procedures set forth in Part V; and further, that is in harmony with the character of the district and surrounding area and with the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Accessory. The following accessory uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(1)  Lunchrooms, walk-up stands. 
(2)  Ordinary and private parking and loading areas. 
(3)  Public and private parking and loading areas. 
(4)  Any use customarily accessory to any of the principal uses. 
(5)  Enclosed storage spaces, subject to Section 81.36 of this Code. 
(c)  Special exception. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  Assembly and manufacturing of all types so long as they conform to the limitations, requirements and procedures set forth in Part V. 
(2)  Open storage yards that are constructed to the standards of Section 81.36 of this Code. 
(3)  Any special exception permitted in the M1 district, subject to the limitations, requirements and procedures specified for such use, unless the same is prohibited or otherwise specifically permitted in this district. 
(4)  Radio and television broadcasting stations as set forth in Section 82.00 of these regulations. 
(5)  Child care centers; provided, that no part of any playground area of said center is located, maintained or permitted forward of the front of the principal building or structure of said center. 
(6)  Borrow pits meeting the special requirements, criteria and conditions set forth in Section 80.10 of this Code. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the M2 district: 
(1)  Residential dwellings. 
(2)  Public and semipublic and private licensed institutions for the maintenance, care or treatment of sick, infirmed, aged or convalescent persons. 
(3)  Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, repair, servicing and storage or warehousing of any commodity or product that is deemed to be objectionable by the standard established in Part V. 
(4)  Reclamation, dumping and/or storage of industrial, manufacturing, radioactive, explosive or chemical waste materials. 
(5)  Chemical manufacturing or processing. 
(6)  Outside storage, except as an accessory use or special exception within an enclosed storage space, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1098-95, § 10, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 1144-97, §§ 18, 19, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1186-99, § 11, 7-21-99) 
62.153. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Area. The minimum lot area required is seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
(b)  Width. The minimum lot width required is fifty (50) feet. 
62.154. - Building setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback required is twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback required is ten (10) feet. 
(c)  Side. The minimum side setback required is five (5) feet. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lot shall have a setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(e)  Notes: 
(1)  One-half (1/2) of the front yard setback shall be retained as a landscaped green area and remain unpaved. The remaining one-half (1/2) may be used as normal entrance drives or as parking for visitors only. A maximum of five (5) percent of the required parking spaces may be designated as visitors' parking within the front yard setback area. 
(2)  When the frontage in one block is partly in a residential district, then the front setback requirements of the residential district shall apply to the M2 district. 
(3)  Rear yards may be reduced to zero (0) when the rear property line coincides with a railroad siding; however, no trackage shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of a residential district. 
(4)  On a street side yard, no paving or vehicular use areas shall be permitted, except for driveways. 
(f)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a building, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
62.155. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is eighty (80) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures including driveways and parking lots. 
(b)  Height. The maximum building height is forty (40) feet. 
62.156. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Buffer walls, in accordance with Section 81.35 of this Code. 
(b)  Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided per the regulations as set forth in Section 55.00 of this Code. 
(c)  Site plan. Site plans shall be provided per the regulations as set forth in Part III. 
(d)  Location. Planned industrial districts shall be permitted only if they have reasonable access to major transportation routes that does not interfere with the ingress and egress of traffic from adjacent residential or commercial areas, or if it can be demonstrated in site plans or other supporting material that such access will be provided. 
(e)  Signs. Signs shall be constructed in conformity with Section 86.00 of this Code. 
(f)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58, of this Code. 
(g)  Landscaping. All applicable provisions of Section 40.30 of this Code are hereby incorporated in this section by reference, and the same constitute special requirements under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 20, 8-20-97) 
SECTION 62.160. - IP-INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT 

62.161. - Intent. 
    This IP industrial park district is composed of lands so situated as to be well adapted in industrial park development. The regulations for this district are intended to encourage quality development compatible with surrounding districts, with suitable open spaces, landscaping and parking areas. Consequently, the uses permitted in this zoning district are limited to those administrative, wholesaling and manufacturing activities that can be carried on in a relatively unobtrusive manner, and to certain accessory facilities that are necessary to serve the employees of the district. 
62.162. - Uses. 
(a)  Principal. The following principal uses are permitted providing they are in compliance with the performance standards set forth in Part V, and providing they take place within a completely enclosed building with walls and roof. Within any IP industrial park district, no building, structure, land or water shall be used except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  The manufacturing, compounding, processing, packing or assembly of the following uses: 
(a)  Food, beverage and tobacco products, except the rendering or refining of fats and oils, poultry and animal slaughtering or dressing, and fish canning. 
(b)  Cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and toiletries. 
(c)  Electrical and household appliances. 
(d)  Electrical and electronic equipment and supplies. 
(e)  Metal products and metal finishing. 
(f)  Furniture and office equipment. 
(g)  Musical instruments, toys, novelties, jewelry, rubber or metal stamps. 
(h)  Professional, scientific, photographic and optical instruments. 
(i)  Pottery, using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only with gas or electricity. 
(j)  Products from the following previously prepared materials: Paper, glass, cellophane, leather, feathers, fur, precious or semiprecious metals, hair, horn, shell, tin, steel, wood, plastics, rubber, bone, cork, fibers, yard, wool, tobacco. 
(2)  Carting, express, hauling and crating service. 
(3)  Commercial nurseries and greenhouses. 
(4)  Commercial laundries. 
(5)  Lumber and building materials sales and storage. 
(6)  Motion picture production studios. 
(7)  Machine shops. 
(8)  Offices, laboratories and research facilities. 
(9)  Printing, engraving and related reproduction processes as well as the publishing and distribution of books, newspapers and other printed material. 
(10)  Public utilities rights-of-way and publicly owned structures and garages, exclusive of places of public assemblance such as schools and churches. 
(11)  Railroad facilities, exclusive of marshalling yards, maintenance and fueling facilities. 
(12)  Schools for industrial or business training. 
(13)  Warehousing wholesaling facilities. 
(14)  Cement manufacturing, storage, processing or batching plants, provided the same are located within the following described area of the City of Rockledge, i.e.: The area bounded on the north by the extension westerly of the south line of the right-of-way of the street known as Park Avenue as presently located in the City of Rockledge; and bounded on the west by a line running parallel to the main line of the Florida East Coast Railway as presently located; and bounded on the south by the south lines of Sections 14 and 15 of Township 25 South, Range 36 East; and bounded on the east by the west line of the right-of-way of the main line of the Florida East Railway as presently located. 
(15)  Boat repair, storage and sales. 
(b)  Accessory. Customary accessory uses including operations required to maintain or support any use permitted in this zone on the same lot as the permitted use, such as maintenance shops, power plants and machine shops and warehouses, provided these take place within enclosed buildings. 
(c)  Special exceptions. When, after review of an application with plans pertinent thereto and hearing thereon, the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use or uses are in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance and with the comprehensive plan and with the public interest, the following conditional uses may be granted: 
(1)  Airports, hangars and airplane repair. 
(2)  Assembly and manufacturing of all types so long as they conform to the limitations, requirements and procedures set forth in Part III and the provisions of this section and are [not] listed as a prohibited use in paragraph (d) hereof. 
(3)  Open storage yards that are constructed to the standards of Section 81.36 of this Code. 
(4)  Power substations. 
(5)  Radio and television broadcasting towers and antennas. 
(6)  Restaurants. 
(7)  Retail sale of products manufacturing at an industrial facility in the district that is clearly a secondary use to the manufacturing. 
(8)  Blast furnace or similar heat- or glare-generating operations. 
(9)  Corrosive acid manufacturing, including, but not limited to, hydrochloric, nitric, sulfuric or similar acid. 
(10)  Recreation facilities. 
(11)  Child care centers; provided, that no part of any playground area of said center is located, maintained or permitted forward of the front of the principal building or structure of said center, and that no child care center shall be allowed as a special exception when any part of the property line of the property upon which the center is to be located is less than one thousand (1,000) feet from any part of the property line of any property upon which another child care center is located, said one thousand (1,000) feet being measured in a straight line. 
(12)  Borrow pits meeting the special requirements, criteria and conditions set forth in Section 80.10 of this Code. 
(d)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in this district: 
(1)  Asphalt manufacturing, mixing or batching plant or refining of any similar petroleum or petrochemical refining or manufacturing process. 
(2)  Fertilizer manufacturing including, but not limited to, chemical or phosphate fertilizers. 
(3)  Paper manufacturing or processing. 
(4)  Rendering and refining of fats and oils, poultry and animal slaughtering or dressing. 
(5)  Residential dwelling. 
(6)  Retail commercial establishments, except as specifically permitted herein. 
(7)  Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, repair, servicing and storage or warehousing of any commodity or product that is deemed to be objectionable by the standards established in Part III. 
(8)  Junk, salvage or wrecking yard or structure wherein used motor vehicles, appliances or similar used equipment or material are stored, dismantled or stored for display, sale or packing. 
(9)  Reclamation, dumping and/or storage of industrial, manufacturing, radioactive, explosive or chemical waste materials. 
(10)  Mobile homes, except as permitted by Section 80.09 of this Code. 
(11)  Adult business establishments. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 21, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1363-2004, § 1, 12-1-04) 
62.163. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Area. The minimum area required for an individual lot is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(b)  Width. The minimum lot width required is one hundred (100) feet. 
(c)  Depth. The minimum lot depth required is one hundred seventy-five (175) feet. 
(d)  Size. The minimum size for an industrially zoned area shall be five (5) acres. 
62.164. - Building setback requirements. 
(a)  Front. The minimum front setback is fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear setback is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(c)  Side. The minimum side setback is twenty (20) feet. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a setback of not less than thirty-five (35) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(e)  Notes: 
(1)  The front one-half (1/2) of the front yard setback of the required minimum, on properties adjacent to roadways classified as an urban collector or higher shall be retained as a landscaped green area and remain unpaved. The remaining one-half (1/2) may be used as normal entrance drives or as parking for visitors only. A maximum of five (5) percent of the required parking spaces may be designated as visitors' parking within the front yard setback area. Those properties having front yard setbacks adjacent to roadways not classified as urban collectors or higher, may use the back one-half (1/2) of the front yard setback for parking purposes. 
(2)  When the frontage in one block is partly in a residential district, then the front setback requirements of the residential district shall apply to the IP district. 
(3)  Rear yards may be reduced to zero (0) when the rear property line coincides with a railroad siding; however, no trackage shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of a residential district. 
(f)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a building, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, §§ 22, 23, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1153-97, §§ 8, 9, 12-17-97) 
62.165. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is eighty (80) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures including driveways and parking lots. 
(b)  Height. The maximum building height is thirty-five (35) feet. 
62.166. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Buffer yards. A buffer yard of not less than sixty (60) feet in width shall be provided along each IP district boundary which abuts any district other than commercial or industrial. Such buffer yard shall be in lieu of front, side or rear yards. The thirty (30) feet of such yard nearest the district boundary shall not be used for any parking, processing activity, building or structure other than fences, walls or berms, and shall be landscaped and maintained with shrubs and trees. Such landscape material shall attain a minimum height of six (6) feet and be at least fifty (50) percent opaque when viewed from any point along the adjoining boundary. Such requirements are to be attained within eighteen (18) months after planting. The remaining thirty (30) feet of said buffer yard shall not be used for any processing activities, buildings or structures other than fences, walls, berms or off-street parking lots for passenger cars. 
(b)  Off-street parking. Parking shall be at the side or rear of the principal structure of those properties which are adjacent to an urban collector or higher classified roadways. Those properties which are not adjacent to an urban collector or higher classified roadways will be encouraged to place parking to the side and rear of the principal structure, however all projects shall provide adequate space for employees. Visitors' parking may be permitted in the front yard, as allowed by this Code. All parking lots shall be paved. The off-street parking area shall be a minimum of one space per each two hundred (200) square feet of office floor space, and one space per each five hundred (500) square feet of manufacture or warehouse floor space. Each space shall be at least ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet. The adequacy of parking provisions will be determined when the site plan is submitted for review and approval. 
(c)  Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements of Section 86.00 of this Code. 
(d)  Loading facilities and truck parking. 
(1)  Loading docks and vehicular entrances into the building are prohibited on street frontage. They shall be located in the rear half of all principal structures, be paved and have adequate drainage. 
(2)  Parking for trucks and other company-owned vehicles shall be located at the rear of all principal structures. 
(3)  No shipping or receiving shall be permitted within seventy-five (75) feet of residentially zoned property. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of this subsection if, due to insufficient lot area, the location of available railroad siding facilities, the owner's plans for future expansion, or other conditions applicable to a particular site, the loading docks and parking areas described in said subsections (1) and (2) cannot be located exclusively at the rear of the principal structure, the same may be located at the side or in the back half of the front setback area of the principal structure provided the parking area is totally screened, shielded and protected from the view of persons traversing the public road, street or right-of-way on which the site fronts or abuts by a buffer wall or an attractively landscaped berm, bunker, mound or ridge of earth, or other adequate screening device which is aesthetically pleasing and approved by the building official and city council at the time of review of the site plan required under the provisions of this section. Such screening device shall be constructed and maintained by the owner, tenant or occupant of the premises in at least as effective and attractive condition as the same is represented on the site plan. 
(e)  Outside storage areas. All storage areas shall be located at the rear of all structures. Such an enclosure shall be a minimum of six (6) feet and a maximum of twelve (12) feet in height and in no case shall materials be stacked or stored so as to exceed the height of the wall. Storage areas must be located at least fifty (50) feet from any street right-of-way lines. No motor vehicle which is inoperable, or trailer which is usable or unusable, shall be stored or used for storage on any lot or parcel of ground. See Section 81.36 of this Code. 
(f)  Exterior accessories, equipment and structures. Exterior accessories, equipment and structures, including but not limited to, cooling towers, air compressors, air mixers, etc., shall be placed directly behind and no higher than the primary structure on the property. All exterior accessories, equipment and structures shall be completely enclosed within an opaque screening, and obstructed from view from any public street. 
(g)  Landscaping. All applicable provisions of Section 40.30 of this Code are hereby incorporated in this section by reference, and the same constitute special requirements under this section. 
(h)  Lighting and utilities. Shaded light sources shall be used to illuminate signs, facades, buildings, parking and loading areas, and shall be so arranged as to eliminate glare from roadways and streets, and shall be directed away from properties lying outside the district. 
(1)  Shaded light sources are lighting elements shielded with an opaque shade to direct the light. 
(2)  No neon lights, intermittent or flashing lights, or such lighted signs shall be allowed. 
(3)  Utility lines should be placed underground where possible or at the rear property lines. Where enclosures or vaults are used, the developer must provide landscaping with shrubs and plants to screen pad-mounted transformers. 
(4)  Street lighting shall be provided. When the street right-of-way exceeds sixty-six (66) feet, lighting shall be either on both sides or within the median. 
(i)  Construction materials of building exteriors. The exterior of buildings and structures or parts thereof which are classified under Chapter 4 of the Standard Building Code as used in a Group A, B, F, H, I, M, or S, shall be constructed using the standards stated below: 
(1)  Metal buildings are permitted in the IP (industrial park) zoning district provided that no exterior wall of any such building shall consist of a metal covering or skin, except as hereinafter specifically provided. The exterior of any structure in this district shall be constructed of the following materials: 
(a)  Any portion of a structure facing a public road right-of-way shall be constructed of, or facaded by, a permanent non-metal material such as lap siding, brick or stone veneered masonry, or finished masonry. In no case shall this portion of the structure be less than sixty (60) percent permanent non-metal material and no less than eight (8) feet in elevation from the finished floor elevation. The roof line shall be architecturally designed and constructed with a mansard roof or other acceptable industry equivalent, including metal, to enhance the appearance of the structure. 
(b)  Side walls shall be so constructed that no exterior metal skin (covering) shall be within eight (8) feet of the finished floor elevation. 
(c)  Rear walls may be constructed using an exterior metal skin (covering). 
(j)  Street and access design: 
(1)  All streets within an IP industrial park district shall be paved with rights-of-way as follows: 
R/W 
(feet) Pavement 
(feet) Major Collector 106 48 (4 lane) with 20-foot median Minor Collector  66 32  
(2)  Major collector. This road collects industrial traffic from minor collector streets and conducts it to a major arterial roadway. 
(3)  Minor collector. The primary purpose of this street is to provide access to individual industrial sites. Consequently, it is not conducive to through traffic. Traffic volumes are low because the street seldom serves more than fifteen (15) industrial sites. 
(4)  Streets may utilize either curbs and gutters or open swales for drainage. 
(5)  All improvements shall include comprehensive drainage facilities for positive drainage based on the ten-year design standards. Drainage plans and specifications shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. Open swales, ditches or other waterways shall require complete engineering design data pertinent to its design and its effect within the particular drainage area to establish its adequacy. 
(6)  Each industrial or other permitted use shall have not more than two (2) access points to any one street and there must be at least one hundred (100) feet between access points. 
(7)  Cul-de-sac streets are not normally desirable in an industrially developed area; however, any cul-de-sac shall have a minimum of a sixty-foot radius and a maximum length of five hundred (500) feet. The minimum radius of the pavement in the cul-de-sac area shall be forty-four (44) feet. 
(k)  Performance standards. All permitted uses within this zone shall be subject to the performance standards outlined in Part V. 
(l)  Special considerations. Special consideration shall be given in the layout of streets, lots, blocks, buildings and easements to the preservation of large and specimen individual trees. Special consideration shall also be given to preserving natural drainage and natural topography and landscape. 
(m)  Site plan requirement. Site plans shall be provided for the regulations set forth in Part III. 
(n)  Nonconforming buildings or uses. Any existing use of land or building in an IP industrial park district that fails to meet the requirements of the IP district shall be considered to be nonconforming and shall be controlled by Section 60.05. 
(o)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1005-91, §§ 1, 2, 7-17-91; Ord. No. 1078-94, § 1, 6-15-94; Ord. No. 1144-97, §§ 24-26, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1153-97, §§ 10, 11, 12-17-97; Ord. No. 1416-2006, § 1, 8-16-06) 
SECTION 62.170. - PUD-PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

62.171. - Intent. 
    The intent and purpose of the planned unit development or PUD district [is] as follows: 
(a)  To provide for planned residential communities, containing a variety of residential structures and diversity of building arrangements with complementary and compatible commercial or industrial uses or both; planned commercial centers with complementary and compatible residential or industrial uses or both; or planned industrial parks with complementary and compatible residential or commercial uses or both; developed in accordance with an approved final development plan. 
(b)  To allow diversification of uses, structures and open spaces in a manner compatible with existing and permitted land uses on abutting properties. 
(c)  To reduce improvement costs through a more efficient use of land and smaller networks of utilities and streets than is possible through application of other zoning districts. 
(d)  To ensure that development will occur according to limitations of use, design, density, coverage and phasing stipulated on an approved final development plan. 
(e)  To preserve the natural amenities and environmental assets of the land by encouraging the preservation and improvement of scenic and functional open areas. 
(f)  To encourage an increase in the amount and usability of open space areas by permitting a more economical and concentrated use of building areas than would be possible through conventional subdivision practices. 
(g)  To provide maximum opportunity for application of innovative concepts of site planning in the creation of aesthetically pleasing living, shopping and work environments on properties of adequate size, shape and location, and to encourage the separation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
62.172. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this section, certain words and terms used herein shall be defined as follows. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words used in the plural number shall include the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory, not directive. The word "person" includes any individual, group of persons, firms, corporations, association, organization and any legal public entity: 
    Common open space. A parcel or parcels of land, or a combination of land and water within the site designated as a planned unit development, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the planned unit development. All common open space shall be improved to the extent necessary to complement the residential uses and may contain compatible and complementary structures for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents of the planned unit development. 
    Developer. Any person, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation, who owns land which is developed into a planned unit development and who is actually involved in the construction and creation of a planned development. 
    Development plan. The total site plan of a planned unit development drawn in conformity with the requirements of this section. Such development plan shall specify and clearly illustrate the location, relationship, design, nature and character of all preliminary and secondary uses, public and private easements, structures, parking areas, public and private roads, arterial roads and common open space. 
    Development schedule. A comprehensive statement showing the type and extent of development to be completed with the various practicable time limits and the order in which development is to be undertaken. A development schedule shall contain an exact description of the specific buildings, facilities, common open space and other improvements to be developed at the end of each time period. 
    Final development plan application. The application for approval of the final development plan and for approval of the required exhibits as specified in this section. 
    Planned unit development or PUD. An area of land developed as a single entity, or in approved stages in conformity with a final development plan by a developer or group of developers acting jointly, which is totally planned to provide for a variety of residential and compatible uses and common open spaces. 
    Preliminary development plan application. The application for approval of the use of a site as a planned unit development and for approval of the required exhibits as specified in this section. 
    Site. The actual physical area to be developed as a planned unit development, including the natural and created characteristics of such area. 
    Stage. A "stage" or "phase" is a specified portion of the planned unit development that may be developed as an independent entity that is delineated in the preliminary development plan and the final development plan, and specified within the development schedule. 
62.173. - Uses. 
(A)  Permitted. The principal uses permitted in the planned unit development or PUD district may include and shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  Primary residential uses. Single-family detached and multifamily residential dwelling units (including apartments) in semidetached, attached and multistoried structures. 
(2)  Secondary nonresidential uses. Nonresidential uses of a religious, public or semipublic, cultural, recreational or commercial character and personal service centers, offices and professional centers providing services to residents of the planned unit development. Such nonresidential uses shall be compatible with and secondary to the primary residential use. No building devoted primarily to a commercial use shall be built or established prior to the primary residential buildings or uses it is designed or intended to serve. 
(3)  Hotels, motels and restaurants. Hotels, motels and restaurants may be permitted upon a consideration of the following criteria: 
(a)  The site of the planned unit development shall contain a minimum of twenty (20) acres. 
(b)  The total acreage used for such hotel, motel and restaurant, including necessary parking, support buildings, grounds and appurtenances, shall not be considered common open space and shall be included within the maximum total acreage percentage permitted under this section for commercial uses. 
(c)  The proposed streets and traffic flow and the streets, thoroughfares and traffic plan in the area adjacent to the site plan shall be adequate to support the anticipated traffic to be generated by the proposed hotel, motel and restaurant. 
(d)  Such proposed hotel, motel and restaurant use is compatible with the proposed primary residential uses, secondary nonresidential uses and common open space within the planned unit development, as well as with the existing land use classification in the surrounding vicinity. 
(e)  The area of such use shall be calculated as part of the total commercial acreage permitted, and the density shall not exceed thirty (30) rental units per gross acre as per specific area delineated on the development plan. 
(4)  Community residential home, six (6) or fewer residents meeting the requirements in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(B)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the PUD district: 
(1)  Adult business establishments. 
(Ord. No. 991-91, § 2, 2-6-91; Ord. No. 1530-2009, § 2I., 9-23-09) 
62.174. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Area. The minimum lot area required is ten (10) acres. 
(b)  Minimum size with commercial uses. There shall be at least twenty (20) acres and at least two hundred (200) dwelling units of primary residential use. 
(c)  Lot size. No minimum lot size shall be required within a PUD district, unless otherwise provided. 
(d)  Minimum lot size for detached single-family structures. An area not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet and having a width of not less than forty (40) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 32, 8-14-96) 
62.175. - Setback requirements. 
(A)  Setback generally: 
(1)  A minimum twenty-five (25) foot setback shall be maintained between any building and the perimeter of the PUD, except when included in a Development of Regional Impact (DRI) and the adjacent property has a PUD zoning classification. 
(2)  A minimum of twenty (20) feet shall be required from the nearest part of any building wall to the edge of any right-of-way or private street. Driveway lengths are required to be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way or private street to the garage door. 
(3)  Single-family detached structures: 
(a)  Not less than five (5) feet to the side lot line. 
(b)  Not less than fifteen (15) feet to the rear lot line. 
(c)  Corner lots shall have a setback of not less than twenty (20) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(4)  Accessory uses and structures are allowed on all platted lots and may have a zero rear setback if adjacent to a designated open area, retention area or at least twenty-five (25) feet from the perimeter of the planned unit development. No accessory uses or structures shall be located in the side setback area. 
(B)  Minimum distances between structures. The minimum distance between structures shall be: 
(1)  Between structures of one story units-five (5) feet to the side property line (provided the following conditions are followed): 
(a)  No fences, structures, air conditioner compressors, hedges, bushes, or any other encumbrances will be allowed in the side setback area. 
(b)  Principal structure walls along the side setback shall be Type 5 one hour rated exterior walls, rated for exposure from both sides. 
(c)  No portion of the roof overhang may protrude more than one foot into the side setback area. 
(d)  No more than twenty (20) percent of the sidewalls may have non-protected openings. 
(e)  Roofing materials must be Type A. 
(f)  NR 13 In-house Fire Suppression Systems must be offered to all potential purchasers. 
(2)  Between structures of two (2) story units-Seven and one-half (71/2) feet to the side property line. 
(3)  Between structures of three (3) story units-Ten (10) feet to the side property line. 
(4)  Between structures over four (4) story units-Twelve and one-half (121/2) feet to the side property line. 
(5)  Between structures over four (4) stories-Two and one-half (21/2) feet for each additional story from the side property line. 
(6)  Between structures of varying heights-Add the separation requirements from each side property line of adjoining units." 
(C)  Minimum common recreation and open space. The minimum common recreation and open space shall consist of twenty-five (25) percent of the gross site acreage. "Common recreation and open space" shall be defined as the total amount of improved usable area, including outdoor space, permanently set aside and designated on the site plan as recreational or open space for use by residents of the PUD. Such usable space may be in the form of active or passive recreational area, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, golf courses, beach frontage, nature trails and lakes. Common open space shall be improved to the extent necessary to complement the residential uses and may contain compatible and complementary structures for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents of the PUD. 
(D)  Determining usable open space requirements. Easements, parking areas, road rights-of-way or minimum yards and spacings between dwelling units may not be included in determining usable open space. Water areas may be used to partially fulfill open space requirements. If golf courses and/or water areas are used to partially fulfill open space requirements, calculations for such may not exceed three-fourths (3/4) of the required open space. All water areas included as part of the open space requirements shall be permanent water bodies and shall be improved with docks or piers, five-to-one (5:1) minimum sloped edge extending at least twenty (20) feet into the water body, and planted with grass and maintained around all sides so as not to harbor mosquitoes, insects and rodents. 
(Ord. No. 1174-98, § 7, 11-4-98) 
62.176. - Building requirements. 
(A)  Maximum commercial use area. The maximum commercial area permitted within a PUD shall be five (5) percent of the total gross acreage of the site. If the PUD contains more than five hundred (500) dwelling units, the maximum commercial area may be increased to seven (7) percent of the total gross acreage. Such areas shall be situated and buffered so as not to create any detrimental effect on residential uses. 
(B)  Minimum living area per unit. The minimum living area per dwelling unit (exclusive of carports, garages, screen porches, open porches or patios) shall be: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings: One thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet. 
(2)  Each unit of a duplex: One thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(3)  Multifamily dwellings: The minimum living area for each dwelling unit of a multifamily dwelling shall be as follows: 
Number of Bedrooms in 
 Each Dwelling Unit Minimum Living Area of Each Dwelling Unit Not more than one bedroom 800 square feet Two (2) bedrooms 900 square feet More than two (2) bedrooms 900 square feet plus an additional 100 square feet for each bedroom exceeding two (2)  
(4)  Hotel and motel units (where permitted): Three hundred (300) square feet. 
(C)  Maximum length of structures. The maximum length of structures shall be two hundred (200) feet unless an excess is specifically approved by the city council after receiving recommendations from the planning commission and zoning official. 
(D)  Access. Each dwelling unit or other permitted use shall have access to a public street either directly or indirectly via an approach, private road, pedestrian way, court or other area dedicated to public or private use or common easement guaranteeing access. Permitted uses are not required to front on a public dedicated road. The city shall be allowed access on privately owned roads, easements and common open space to ensure the police and fire protection of the area to meet emergency needs, to conduct city services and to generally ensure the health and safety of the residents of the PUD. 
(E)  Maximum density. The average density permitted in each PUD shall be established by the city council, upon recommendation of the planning commission and zoning official. The criteria for establishing an average density includes existing zoning, adequacy of existing and proposed public facilities and services, site characteristics and the recommended density of the comprehensive plan involving the area in question. In no case shall maximum density be permitted to exceed an average of twelve (12) dwelling units per acre, nor be inordinately allocated to any particular portion of the total site area. 
(F)  Building height. The maximum height of any building shall be forty (40) feet. 
(G)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a house or dwelling unit, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
(Ord. No. 991-91, § 3, 2-6-91) 
62.177. - Special requirements. 
(A)  Unified ownership or control. The title to all land within a proposed site for a planned unit development shall be owned or controlled by the developer submitting the applications provided for under this section. The term "controlled by" shall be interpreted to mean that such developer shall have the written consent of all owners of the property within the proposed site not wholly owned by the developer. Such consent shall contain a statement that such developer is authorized to represent such owners in the submission of an application under the provisions of this section and that such owners shall agree to be bound by the decision of the city council the event such application is approved. 
(B)  Common open space: 
(1)  All common open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the final development plan. The developer shall choose one or a combination of the following three (3) methods of administering common open space, which method or combination of methods must in each given case meet the approval of the city council as being satisfactory and appropriate for the particular plan involved, via: 
(a)  Public dedication to the city of the common open space. This method is subject to formal acceptance by the city in its sole discretion. 
(b)  Establishment of an association or nonprofit corporation of all individuals or corporations owning property within the planned unit development to ensure the maintenance of all common open space. 
(c)  Retention of ownership, control and maintenance of all common open space by the developer. 
(2)  All privately owned common open space shall continue to conform to its intended use and remain as expressed in the final development plan through the inclusion in all deeds of appropriate restrictions to ensure that the common open space is permanently preserved according to the final development plan. Such deed restrictions shall run with the land and be for the benefit of present as well as future property owners and shall contain a prohibition against partition. 
(3)  All common open space, as well as public and recreational facilities, shall be specifically included in the development plan and be constructed and fully improved by the developer at an equivalent or greater rate than the construction of residential structures. 
(4)  If the developer elects to administer common open space through an association or nonprofit corporation, such organization shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  The developer must establish the association or nonprofit corporation prior to the sale of any lots or units within the PUD. 
(b)  Membership in the association or nonprofit corporation shall be mandatory for all residential property owners within the PUD and such association or corporation shall not discriminate in its members of shareholders. 
(c)  The association or nonprofit corporation shall manage all common open space and recreational and cultural facilities that are not dedicated to the public, shall provide for the maintenance, administration and operation of such land, and any other land within the PUD not publicly or privately owned, and shall secure adequate liability insurance on the land. 
(d)  If the developer elects an association or nonprofit corporation as a method of administering common open space, the title to all residential property owners shall include an undivided fee simple estate in all common open space. 
(C)  Off-street parking: 
(1)  Primary residential uses. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided. Each space must contain at least two hundred (200) square feet of area and be convenient to residential use. Parking areas shall not be separated from structures to be served by any public right-of-way. 
(2)  Secondary nonresidential uses. Within commercial areas, one space shall be provided for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. Each space must contain at least two hundred (200) square feet of area. 
(a)  Hotels and motels. One and one-half (11/2) spaces for each unit. 
(b)  Other uses. To be determined by the city council after receiving recommendations from the planning commission and zoning official. 
(3)  Landscaping. Within all common parking areas, a minimum of fifty (50) square feet of landscaped area shall be provided per parking space and such landscaped areas shall be distributed throughout the parking area. 
(D)  Underground utilities. Within the PUD, all utilities including telephone, television cable and electrical systems shall be installed underground. Primary facilities providing service to the site of the PUD may be exempted from this requirement. Large transformers shall be placed on the ground and contained within pad mounts, enclosures or vaults. The developer must provide landscaping with shrubs and plants to screen all utility facilities permitted above ground. The city council may require that substations be screened by trees and shrubs or walls resembling a structure which is compatible with the design of the buildings within the PUD. 
(E)  Development standards. The minimum construction requirements for streets or roads, sidewalks, sewer facilities, utilities and drainage shall be in compliance with the requirements of the city subdivision regulations. 
(F)  Preservation of trees. In planned unit developments where woods or scattered trees occur, all trees of four (4) inch diameter or larger will be preserved unless they exist within: 
(1)  Proposed public or private easement or drainage facility. 
(2)  Proposed structure dimensions. 
(3)  Five (5) feet of a proposed structure. 
(4)  Proposed driveway. 
(5)  Proposed golf course or active recreational areas. 
(G)  Procedure for receiving approval of a preliminary development plan and tentative zoning. The following procedures, applications and exhibits shall be required when applying for tentative zoning and approval of a preliminary development plan: 
(1)  Tentative development plan. Before submission of a preliminary application for approval as a PUD district, the developer and his registered engineer, architect and site planner are advised to meet with the city manager, the building official, zoning official and subdivision inspector and such other city personnel as may be necessary to determine the feasibility and suitability of the application. This step is required so that the developer may obtain information and guidance from city personnel before entering into any binding commitments or incurring substantial expenses of the site and plan preparation. 
(2)  Preliminary development plan application. 
(a)  Preliminary application. A preliminary application shall be submitted to the zoning official and planning commission and city council by the developer requesting approval of the site as a planned unit development district. Such preliminary application shall contain the name of the developer, surveyor and engineer who prepared the development plan and topographic data map, and the name of the proposed PUD. At this time the Rockledge Development Fact Sheet will be completed with the assistance of the city staff. 
(b)  Exhibits. The following exhibits shall be attached to the preliminary application: 
1.  Vicinity map indicating the relationship between the PUD and its surrounding area including adjacent streets and thoroughfares. 
2.  Development plan that shall contain, but not limited to, the following information: 
a.  Proposed name or title of project, the name of the engineer, architect and developer. 
b.  North arrow, scale (one inch equals two hundred (200) feet or larger), date and legal description of the proposed site. 
c.  Boundaries of tract shown with bearings, distances, closures and bulkhead lines. All existing easements, section lines, and all existing streets and physical features in and adjoining the project, and the existing zoning. 
d.  Names and locations of adjoining developments and subdivisions. 
e.  Proposed parks, school sites or other public or private open space. 
f.  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems including off-street parking and loading areas, driveways and access points. 
g.  Site data including tabulation of the total number of gross acres in the project, the acreage to be devoted to each of the several types of primary residential and secondary nonresidential uses, and the total number of dwelling units. 
h.  Proposed common open space, including the proposed improvements and any complementary structures and the tabulation of the percentage of the total area devoted to common open space. Areas qualifying for common open space shall be specifically designed on the site plan. 
i.  General statement indicating proposed means of drainage for the site to ensure conformity with natural drainage within the vicinity area or with the drainage plan established within the vicinity area. 
j.  Delineation of specific areas designated as a proposed stage. 
k.  General location within site of each primary residential and secondary nonresidential use, and the proposed amount of land to be devoted to individual ownership. 
l.  Schematic drawing of the elevation and architectural construction of the proposed primary and secondary nonresidential structures. 
m.  The proposed method of dedication and administration of the proposed common open space. 
3.  Topographic data map drawn to a scale of two hundred (200) feet equals one inch or larger by a registered surveyor and/or engineer showing: 
a.  The location of existing property lines for private property and public property, streets, buildings, watercourses, transmission lines, sewers, bridges, culverts and drain pipes, water mains and any public utility easements. 
b.  Wooded area, streams, lakes, marshes and any physical conditions affecting the site. 
c.  Existing contours based on U.S. Coast and Geodetic data with a contour interval of two (2) feet, and proposed finished elevations. 
(3)  Submission: 
(a)  The PUD zoning application and preliminary development plan shall be submitted to the city at least thirty (30) days prior to the meeting of the planning commission at which such application is to be considered by such commission. 
(b)  A fee as established by the city council shall accompany the PUD application for the purposes of administration. 
(c)  The application shall include five (5) black or blueline prints of the proposed PUD and a minimum of two (2) copies of the required exhibits. 
(4)  Application review. The preliminary development plan shall be reviewed formally by the city's planning commission and such divisions and departments of city government as may be necessary to determine the feasibility and suitability of the plan prior to the submission of the PUD zoning application to the zoning official. The zoning official shall then review such preliminary development plan to determine its conformity with the official plans and policies of the city and requirements of this section. Upon completion of the review of the preliminary development plan and all exhibits appertaining thereto, the planning commission and zoning official shall each recommend to the city council, the approval, approval subject to conditions, or disapproval of the preliminary plan application. 
(5)  Review criteria. The recommendation of both the zoning official and the planning commission on the preliminary development plan application shall include the findings of fact that serve as a basis for the recommendation of each. In making their recommendations, the planning commission and zoning official shall consider the following facts: 
(a)  Degree of departure of proposed PUD from surrounding residential area in terms of character and density. 
(b)  Compatibility with the PUD and relationship with surrounding neighborhoods. 
(c)  Prevention of erosion and degrading of surrounding area. 
(d)  Provision for future public education and recreation facilities, transportation, water supply, sewage disposal, surface drainage, flood control and soil conservation as shown in the preliminary development plan. 
(e)  The nature, intent and compatibility of common open space, including the proposed method for the maintenance and conservation of such common open space. 
(f)  The feasibility and compatibility of the specified stages contained in the preliminary development plan to exist as an independent development. 
(g)  The availability and adequacy of primary streets and thoroughfares to support traffic to be generated within the proposed PUD. 
(h)  The availability and adequacy of water and sewer service to support the proposed PUD. 
(i)  The benefits within the proposed development and to the general public to justify the requested departure from standard land use requirements inherent in a PUD classification. 
(j)  The conformity and compatibility of the PUD with any adopted development plan of the city. 
(k)  The conformity and compatibility of the proposed common open space, primary residential and secondary nonresidential uses within the proposed PUD. 
(6)  Review by city council. Upon receiving the recommendations of the zoning official and planning commission, the city council shall, at a regularly scheduled public meeting, [with] notice as provided in subparagraph (G)(7) below, review such recommendations and preliminary development plan and conduct a public hearing with respect thereto, and either approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove the preliminary development plan application. Approval of the preliminary development plan indicates approval of the PUD zoning, subject to acceptance of the final development plan. The decision of the city council shall be based upon a consideration of the facts specified as review criteria for the planning commission and zoning official in subparagraph (G)(5) of this section, and such other matters as the city council may deem appropriate. 
(7)  Notice of public hearing. Notice of public hearing referred to in the preceding subparagraph (G)(6) shall be "due public notice" as defined in this Code. 
(8)  Recordation of preliminary application. In the event the preliminary development plan application is approved by the city council, a copy of such application and required exhibits shall be certified and approved by the city manager. 
(a)  In the event that any PUD application is in excess of one thousand (1,000) acres, the city may approve planned unit development zoning based upon the requirements in subparagraph (G)(2) on a revised or general basis. Specifically, the exact requirements of subsections (G)(2)(b)2.b, c, and k, and subsection (G)(2)(b)3 may be revised in terms of map scale and detail required. 
(b)  Following this, the developer shall have six (6) months to present a preliminary development plan for any minimum stage of ten (10) acres. At the request of the developer, and for good cause shown, the city council may extend such period required for filing of such plan for a time certain, not to exceed six (6) months. 
(c)  Such plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission and zoning official and the procedures of subsections (G)(1) and (2) would specifically then apply to any stage of the total development. Provided, however, that approval of a preliminary development plan of any minimal stage of the total development shall be a condition precedent to the filing of an application for the approval of a final development plan under paragraph (H). 
(H)  Procedure for securing approval of a final development plan. The developer shall have one year from the approval of the preliminary development plan for a PUD zone in which to file a final development plan application. 
    At the request of the developer, and for good cause shown, the city council may extend such period required for the filing of such application for a time certain, not to exceed one year. 
    The final development plan application may request approval for the entire PUD plan or any stage (minimum ten (10) acres). If approval is not requested for the entire PUD, the developer shall have one year from approval of the final development plan application to file another final development plan application for approval of any or all of the remaining stages specified in the preliminary development plan. At the request of the developer, and for good cause shown, the city may extend for a time certain, not to exceed one year, the period for the filing of such application. 
(1)  Required exhibits. The following exhibits shall be attached to the final development plan application: 
(a)  Engineering plans. Plans showing: 
1.  Existing ground surfaces and proposed elevation in the PUD. 
2.  If deemed necessary by the city, subsurface conditions on the tract, including the location and results of tests made to ascertain the conditions of subsurface soil, rock and groundwater, and the existing depth of groundwater. 
3.  Typical cross-sections of proposed grading, streets and sidewalks, canals and waterways. 
4.  Proposed type of pavement in accordance with city specifications. 
5.  Final engineering drawing of water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems and sidewalk, streets, bulkheads, street name signs and adequate lighting. 
6.  Such engineering plans shall be in conformity with the requirements and specifications of the city subdivision regulations. 
(b)  Final development plan. Final development plan containing, in addition to those items specified in subsection (G)(2)(b)2, the following information: 
1.  Dedication by owner and completion of certificate of surveyor. 
2.  The location, dimensions and character of construction of all proposed streets, driveways, points of ingress and egress, loading areas, number of parking spaces and areas, primary residential areas and structures, secondary nonresidential areas and structures, recreational areas and structures and common open space. 
3.  Proposed lot lines (if any), lot and block numbers and dimensions of all primary nonresidential uses and secondary nonresidential uses and common open space. 
4.  The proposed architectural and landscaped design of all structure and common open space that clearly reflects the compatibility of the variety of primary and secondary uses proposed. 
5.  Location and width of canals and waterways. 
6.  Reservations, easements, alleys and any areas to be dedicated to the public uses and sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and any limitations. 
7.  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the site the location, bearing and length of every street, line, lot line, boundary line and block line, whether curved or straight. 
8.  The radius, central angle, point of tangent, tangent distance and arcs and chords of all curved property lines. 
9.  A legal description of the PUD boundaries with bearings, distances and tie point. 
10.  Accurate location and description of all monuments and markers. 
11.  All dimensions should be the nearest one two-hundredths ( 1/200 ) of a foot, and angles to the nearest second. The final development plan shall be properly signed and executed by the developer as required for recording. 
12.  The final development plan shall meet the platting requirements of Florida Statutes. In case of a large plan that may require two (2) or more sheets, the sheets are to be numbered and the numbers of the sheets are to be indicated on the first sheet below the title. 
(c)  Development schedule. The development schedule shall contain the following information: 
1.  The order of construction of the proposed stages delineated in the development plan. 
2.  The proposed date for the beginning of construction on such stages. 
3.  The proposed date for the completion of construction on such stages. 
4.  The proposed schedule for the construction and improvement of common open space within such stages, including any complementary buildings. 
(d)  Deed restrictions. Deed restriction proposals to preserve the character of the common open space as set forth in paragraph (B) shall include a prohibition against partition by any residential property owner. 
(e)  Association or nonprofit corporation. If the developer elects this method of administering common open space, the proposed bylaws of the association or the certificate of incorporation and the corporate bylaws of the nonprofit corporation shall be submitted for approval by the city. 
(f)  Instruments dedicating public lands. Instruments dedicating all rights-of-way, easements, and other public land shown on the final development plan from all persons having any interest in such land. 
(g)  Bill of sale. A bill of sale conveying to the city all water lines and sewer utility lines, mains, lift stations and other personal property required to be installed by this section. 
(h)  Instruments-Off-site easements and dedications. Instruments indicating that all necessary off-site easements or dedications have been acquired. In lieu of originals, certified true copies will be accepted if the recording information from the public records of the county is included thereon. 
(i)  Title opinion. A title opinion from an attorney showing the status of the title of the site encompassed by the final development plan and all liens, encumbrances and defects, if any. 
(j)  Tax receipts. Paid receipts from the city and state and county indicating taxes have been paid in full up to and including the current period. 
(2)  Procedure: 
(a)  A fee as established by the city council shall accompany the final development plan application for the purpose of administration. 
(b)  The planning commission, upon consultation with the city manager, city building official, city subdivision inspector, and such other city personnel as it may deem necessary or appropriate, shall recommend in writing the approval, approval subject to conditions, or disapproval of the final development plan with the preliminary development plan, the sufficiency and accurateness of the required exhibits, and the requirements and purposes of this section and ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(c)  If the city determines that the final development plan is not substantially in conformance with the approved preliminary development plan, the planning commission and zoning official shall review the final development plan and determine the acceptability of such plan in view of the preliminary concept as approved and recorded. The planning commission and zoning official shall recommend the approval, approval subject to change, or denial of the final development plan. 
(d)  The city council shall review the recommendations of the planning commission and zoning official at a regularly scheduled public meeting noticed as provided in subparagraph (G)(7) hereof, and shall approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny the final development plan application. 
(3)  Recording of final development plan: 
(a)  After approval by the city council of the final development plan application, the clerk of the board of county commissioners shall see that all requirements of Florida Statutes have been complied with before the final development plan is recorded in the public records of the county. No final development plan of a planned unit development within the city shall be recorded unless it shall have the approval of the city council inscribed thereon. 
(b)  The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell or negotiation to sell land by reference to or exhibition of, or other use of a final development plan of a planned unit development, or portion thereof, that has not been given final approval by the city council is prohibited. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents shall not exempt the transaction from such prohibition. 
(I)  Physical review. The city shall have the right to evaluate the physical layout, architectural characteristics and amenities of the PUD and to suggest changes or modifications designed to create compatibility and conformity in the variety of uses within the development to ensure, protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the property owners of the planned unit development and the residents of the city. 
(J)  Building permit. No building permit shall be issued by the city until the final development plan has been approved and duly recorded as provided in this section. 
(K)  Bonding. Prior to the commencement of construction within the site of a PUD, the developer shall file with the city the following contracts and bond: 
(1)  A performance, labor and material payment bond for the completion of the construction of all public improvements specified in the final development plan within one year from the date of commencement of construction. 
(2)  A performance, labor and material payment bond for the completion of the construction of all common open space areas designated in the final development plan. 
(3)  A maintenance warranty bond in the amount of fifty (50) percent of the total cost of the construction of all public improvements to be in force for a period of two (2) years following acceptance by the city of the final construction of such public improvements. 
(4)  All such bonds shall be from a company licensed as a surety in the state listed by the U.S. Treasury Department and rated "A," "AA" in Best's Insurance Guide. Upon acceptance of all improvements described in subsections (K)(1) and (2) above, such performance and payment bonds shall be released. 
(5)  All of the provisions relating to bonding contained in the subdivision regulations of the city shall be fully applicable to the bonds required under this section. (Ordinance Nos. 491-78 and 570-80 have been incorporated into the subdivision regulations.) 
(L)  Termination of planned unit development zone: 
(1)  Any owner of all or a portion of land that has been designated a planned unit development under the provisions of this section can apply to the city for termination of that portion of a stage within an approved final development plan within which his property is located if construction has not been commenced pursuant to such final development plan. The procedure for such termination shall be that applicable to a land use classification change under the zoning regulations of the city. 
(2)  Failure of the developer to file a final development plan applicable within the time periods specified in paragraph (H) hereof shall automatically revoke approval of the preliminary development plan filed under paragraph (G) and the site shall revert to the zoning classification for which the property was zoned prior to the approval of such preliminary development plan. A notice of such revocation, containing a legal description of the site, shall be recorded in the city. 
(M)  Dumpster visual barrier. See Section 57.58, of this Code. 
62.178. - Zero lot line provisions within PUD. 
(A)  Intent. The principal purposes of the zero lot line concept are: 
(1)  The more efficient use of land as compared with the typical single family development, making available needed housing at a more affordable cost. 
(2)  The design of dwellings that integrate and relate internal/external living areas resulting in more pleasant and enjoyable living facilities. 
(3)  By placing the dwelling against one of the property lines, permitting the outdoor space to be grouped and utilized to its maximum benefit. 
(B)  Development requirements. All applications for a zero lot line development shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Uses permitted. 
(a)  Detached one-family dwelling on individually platted lots, including every customary accessory use permitted within this District. 
(b)  Fencing, trellises, and other similar uses can be used as connecting elements between one-family dwellings on adjacent lots, subject to site plan review. 
(c)  Garages, carports, and utility storage structures shall be permitted accessory uses; however, said structures shall not be used as connecting elements. 
(2)  Minimum lot size. 
(a)  The minimum average net lot size shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. This shall not include any credit for streets, recreation areas, common open space or water bodies. 
(b)  The minimum lot width required is fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  The minimum lot depth required is one hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Setback requirements. 
(a)  Interior side yard. The dwelling unit shall be placed on one interior side property line with a zero (0) setback, and the dwelling unit setback on the other interior side property line shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet, excluding the connecting elements such as fences, walls, and trellises. Patios, pools, garden features, and similar elements shall be permitted within the fifteen (15) foot setback area; provided, however, no structure with the exception of fences shall be placed within required maintenance and drainage easements. 
(b)  Front setback. The minimum front setback shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
[(c)  Reserved.] 
(d)  Corner lots. The dwelling setback for corner lots shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from both street rights-of-way. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage. 
(a)  The total lot coverage permitted for all buildings on the site shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the lot area. 
(b)  Floor area. The minimum living area shall be no smaller than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
(5)  Building height. The maximum building height shall not exceed two (2) stories. 
(6)  Opening prohibited on zero lot line side. The wall of the dwelling located on the lot line shall have no windows, doors, air conditioning units, or any other type of openings; provided, however, that atriums or courts shall be permitted on the zero lot line side when the court or atrium is enclosed by three (3) walls of the dwelling unit and a solid wall of at least eight (8) feet in height is provided on the zero lot line. Said wall shall be constructed of the same material as exterior walls of the unit. 
(7)  Maintenance and drainage easements. A perpetual five foot (5') wall maintenance easement shall be provided on the lot adjacent to the zero lot line property line, which, with the exception of fences, shall be kept clear of structures. This easement shall be shown on the plat and incorporated into each deed transferring title to the property. The wall shall be maintained in its original color and treatment unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the two affected lot owners. Roof overhangs may penetrate the easement on the adjacent lot a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches, but the roof shall be so designed that water runoff from the dwelling placed on the lot line is limited to the easement area. 
(8)  Parking. A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided on each platted lot. 
(9)  [Other requirements.] All other provisions shall be subject to the requirements of the PUD District. 
TABLE OF ZONING REGULATIONS 
Front Setback 
(feet) Rear Setback 
(feet) Side Setback 
(feet) Section for More Information Add More Setback Density per Acre Maximum Building Lot Coverage 
(percent) Lot Area 
Required Minimum 
Living Area 
(square feet)   Maximum 
Height 
(feet) Minimum Lot Width 
(feet) Minimum 
Lot Depth 
(feet) RCE 50 35 20 62.10 Yes  1 30 1 acre 1,500 25 130 150 R-1 35 30 10 62.20 Yes  3 30 12,000 square feet 1,500 25  80 100 R-2 25 20 10/8 62.30 Yes  5 35 7,500-10,000 
 square feet 1,200 25  70  90 R-2A 25 20 10/8 62.40 Yes  8 50 7,500-10,000 
 square feet 800-1,200 25  70  90 R-3 25 20+ 10+ 62.50 Yes 14 50 10,000 square feet 800-1,200 40 100 100 TH 25 25 5+ 62.60 Yes 10 50 2,400 square feet 1,000 25  24  90 MH 25 20 71/2 62.70 Yes  6+ 35 6,000 square feet 1,000 20  60 100 TTP - - - 62.90 Yes 15 - - 1,500 25 - - C-1 25 10+ 5+ 62.100 Yes - 80 7,500 square feet - 45  75 100 C-1A 25 10+ 5+ 62.110 Yes - 80 4 acres - 75 300 125 C-2 25 10+ 5+ 62.120 Yes - 80 7,000 square feet - 75  50 - P-1 25 10 5 62.130 Yes - 80 7,000 square feet - 35  50 - M-1 20 10 5 62.140 Yes - 80 7,000 square feet - 40  50 - M-2 20 10 5 62.150 Yes - 80 7,000 square feet - 40  50 - IP 50 25 20 62.160 Yes - 80 20,000 square feet - 35 100 175 PUD 25 - - 62.170 Yes 12 25% open 
space 5,000-6,000 
 square feet 1,200-1,300 40  50+ 100  
These are the general guidelines. Refer to specific sections before applying for permit. 
SECTION 62.180. - REDEVELOPMENT MIXED USE DISTRICT 

[62.181]. - Administration. 
(a)  Interpretation: Interpretation of the standards in this section shall be the responsibility of the city manager. Appeals from his/her interpretations shall be taken to the community redevelopment agency. 
(b)  Review process: Applications are subject to review by the development review committee. The committee shall have authority to review and/or approve all aspects of site planning and exterior architecture, including aesthetic appropriateness, environmental implications, traffic impacts, and any other site-specific matters not delineated herein as prescribed in Section 26.00, Part II, Land Development Regulations. 
(c)  Minimum submittal requirements for RMU projects: At a minimum, the following shall be required for full review by the development review committee for projects to be located within the redevelopment area: 
(1)  A current site survey, no more than one year old. 
(2)  A site plan, drawn to either one inch equals twenty (20) feet or one inch equals fifty (50) feet, which shall contain: 
(a)  Building locations and orientations and landscape areas; 
(b)  Parking locations and number of spaces; 
(c)  Paved surfaces, materials, and locations; 
(d)  Site location diagram, map and legal description; 
(e)  Signage; and 
(f)  Tree survey of all trees larger than eight (8) inches dbh. 
(3)  Building elevations, illustrating all sides of structures that face public streets or spaces and specific architectural design elements for which bonuses may be sought. 
(4)  Description of density or height bonuses being applied for and justification. 
(5)  Other supporting documentation as may be requested or required under Sections 31.14.3 through 31.50 of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations regarding site plan review. 
(d)  Site development agreement or binding development agreement: The city and developer or property owner may enter into a binding development agreement relating to the development of a particular parcel or tract of land, and such an agreement may address such issues as impact fee credits; a specialized or negotiated concept of design or site plan development authorized or sanctioned by the code; infrastructure service credits or public-private participation in funding, design or construction; or other incentives based upon strict compliance with the requirements of the land development regulations. The agreement will be mutually acceptable to the city, developer, and/or property owner. Considerations for the city in deciding whether to participate in such an agreement will include compliance with the objectives and design criteria specified in this section; demonstration of a cost benefit to city and developer; consideration of development amenities provided by the developer. Such a binding development agreement shall be adopted and be in conformance with the requirements of the Florida Municipal Home Rule Powers Act or Sections 163.3220 through 163.4243, Florida Statutes, as to effect, duration, public hearing requirements and other issues. 
(e)  Comprehensive plan compliance required: All development of property subject to the RMU zoning designation and these regulations shall be subject to the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Rockledge, Florida, and all approvals and land development permits shall be in compliance with the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 1377-2005, § 1, 5-4-05) 
[62.182.] - Definitions. 
    Accessory structure: A building or structure subordinate to the principal building and used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or principal building and located on the same lot or set of attached lots therewith. 
    Alley: A public or privately owned secondary way that affords access to the site or rear of abutting property. Alleys shall be a minimum of eleven (11) feet in width. All alleys shall be one-way. 
    Appurtenances: Architectural features not used for human occupancy consisting of spires, belfries, cupolas or dormers; silos; parapet walls, and cornices without windows; chimneys, ventilators, skylights, and antennas. 
    Awning: An architectural projection roofed with flexible material supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building. 
    Balcony: A porch connected to a building on upper stories supported by either a cantilever or brackets. 
    Block: An increment of land composed of an aggregate of lots, tracts and alleys circumscribed by thoroughfares. (Generally, for neo-traditional subdivisions, a block shall be approximately three hundred sixty (360) feet by three hundred sixty (360) feet). 
    Build-to line: A line parallel to the property line, along which a building shall be built. Exact location of build-to lines shall be established by the DRC or site plan review at the time of application. 
    Building frontage: The vertical side of a building that faces the primary space or street and is built to the build-to line. 
    Building volume: The space displaced by the exterior walls and roof of a building; a product of the building width, depth, and height. It is the intent of this zoning category to regulate building volume in order to shape public spaces that are human-scaled, well ordered, and which maximize the shared real estate amenity. 
    Building width: The distance from one side of a building frontage to the other. In conditions where buildings are attached, building width is the distinction between buildings which shall be expressed via a change in architectural expression, such as a vertical element running from ground to roof, a change in fenestration or style, color or texture, or a break in facade plane or roof line. (These changes may be subtle or significant, but it is the intent to avoid homogenous blocks of excessively long buildings.) 
    Colonnade or arcade: A covered, open-air walkway at standard sidewalk level attached to or integral with the building frontage; structure overhead is supported architecturally by columns or arches along the sidewalk. 
    Dwelling area: The total internal useable space on all floors of a structure, not including porches, balconies, terraces, stoops, patios, or garages. 
    Front porch: A roofed area, attached at the ground floor level or first floor level, and to the front of a building, open except for railings, and support columns. 
    Garden wall: A freestanding wall along the property line dividing private areas from streets, alleys and adjacent lots. 
    Height for purposes of the RMU district: The vertical distance from the lowest point on the tallest side of the structure to the top of the roofline; cornice, eave or parapet. 
    Liner building: A building built in front of a parking garage, cinema, supermarket, etc., to conceal large expanses of blank wall area and to face the street space with a facade that has doors and windows opening onto the sidewalk. Parking garages and their liners may be built at different times. 
    Marquee: A permanently roofed architectural projection the sides of which are vertical and are intended for the display of signs; which provides protection against the weather for the pedestrian; and which is supported entirely from an exterior wall of a building. 
    Stoop: A small platform and/or entrance stairway at a house door, commonly covered by a secondary roof or awning. 
    Storefront: Building frontage for the ground floor usually associated with retail uses. 
    Structured (garage) parking: Vertically stacked parking. 
(Ord. No. 1377-2005, § 1, 5-4-05) 
[62.183.] - Boundaries. 

Boundaries
[62.184.] - Redevelopment mixed use district regulations. 
(a  Principal uses and structures. The following uses and structures are permitted for any use or group of uses that are developed, either separately or as a unit with certain site improvements shared in common within the redevelopment mixed use (RMU) zoning district. The RMU district is intended to promote a downtown, urban, town center environment, giving a focal point for the city in locations deemed consistent with the comprehensive plan. The city's comprehensive plan shall govern percentages of uses. 
(1)  Residential uses: 
a.  Residential uses, in the form of attached or detached units, may be developed within a single structure or within a multi-use building. Unless otherwise stated or more units are earned through use of design features, the maximum density is fourteen (14) dwelling units per acre (DUPA). Maximum allowable density is twenty-five (25) DUPA with density bonuses. 
• Units may be single family, multi-family, patio homes, garden apartments, or town houses, lofts, or other styles of attached or detached dwelling units. 
• Lots in areas that are to be platted shall depend on the type of residential dwellings. 
• Residential uses may be contained within a single area of the development parcel, or may be included in a building with non-residential uses. 
• All attached residential units constructed within a singular use structure shall have a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area except for efficiencies, which shall have a minimum of six hundred fifty (650) square feet of floor area. 
• Loft or live-work units shall be a minimum of eight hundred fifty (850) square feet. 
• Any detached units shall be a minimum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
• Attached units in a mixed-use building may be nine hundred (900) square feet and must be located on floors above retail or office uses. Balconies may be located on the front of attached dwellings located in the upper floors of a mixed-use building and shall contain decorative lighting and plant materials. In addition, balconies may be located elsewhere on the building. 
• The style of architecture and site development characteristics shall incorporate design features found herein. Each development shall include a minimum of four (4) of the twelve (12) standards design features to promote diversity and aesthetics. 
• If a proposed development incorporates eight (8) or more design elements into the proposed development, a minimum of five (5) and maximum of an additional eight (8) units per acre may be approved by the city council at the time of site plan approval. If all twelve (12) features are incorporated, the council, at the recommendation of the planning commission, may award up to four (4) more units. However, in no case shall the maximum allowable density exceed twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre. 
• Multi-family structures shall provide parking at a rate of two (2) spaces per unit, of which one space shall be in an enclosed garage. 
b.  Non-residential uses: The following uses may be developed as a singular non-residential use building or mix of non-residential and residential uses up to a maximum footprint floor area ratio (FAR) of .6. If eight (8) of the twelve (12) basic design features are integrated to the structure and site, the footprint FAR may be increased to one by approval of the city council. For all mixed-use buildings, commercial uses shall occupy at a minimum the first floor and lower floors of the building. Where parking structures are used, the city may require that the portion of the building adjacent to the primary street be dedicated for retail or commercial uses so as to preserve the visual integrity of the district. Permitted non-residential uses in RMU development shall be strictly limited to: 
• Retail stores, sales and display rooms, including places where goods are produced and sold on premise (no distribution or manufacturing). 
• Personal service establishments and administrative offices. 
• Eating and drinking establishments. The separation requirements in the City Code and Land Development Regulations are not applicable in either the Barton Boulevard or the Florida Avenue districts. 
• Public or private educational facilities. 
• Public buildings, including libraries, cultural facilities, performing arts, government uses. 
• Professional offices for medical doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, design or other professionals. 
• Bed and breakfast lodging facilities and hotel establishments. 
• Parks and public recreational facilities. 
• Public parking facilities and lots. 
• Non-residential buildings shall not exceed sixty thousand (60,000) square feet in one building, except where the design features, building placement, or other site issues make it compatible with the surrounding internal and external residential areas and is approved as part of the site plan process. 
(2)  Neo-traditional single family detached developments on a minimum of three (3) acres, may be developed in the RMU district as a sole use of land, subject to the following minimum provisions: 
• Streets must be laid out in a grid pattern, with sidewalks, street lights, street signs and other site amenities provided by the developer; such amenities shall be of a design acceptable to the city and approved by the city council; on-street parking areas shall be provided and designated. 
• Houses shall be constructed in a vernacular, historic Florida architecture, replete with front porches, wood finishes, metal roofs, and rear garages. 
• Lot sizes may be a minimum of fifty (50) by one hundred (100) and shall be platted. 
• Minimum house size shall be one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
• Density shall be established at six (6) dwellings per acre; however, for each additional one-half acre aggregated into the development parcel and for exceeding the required design elements, up to four (4) additional dwellings per acre may be approved by the city council, but in no case shall the density exceed ten (10) dwelling units per acre. 
• Front setbacks shall not exceed ten (10) feet from the sidewalk. 
• Distance between homes or structures shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet. 
• Landscaping shall consist of seventy (70) percent canopy material and be at a height of six (6) feet at the time of planting. 
• Alleyways shall be permitted and encouraged. Where alleys are provided, garages must face the alleyway. 
• Garages may be separate structures from the house and set behind the house. They may contain living quarters, which shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet and share all utility meters with the principal structure. 
• Garages connected to a house must face the side lot line, if the lot width is greater than fifty (50) feet. 
• The developer shall be responsible for installing all streetscape improvements including lighting, landscaping in the rights-of-way, and all infrastructure. All utilities shall be underground. 
• No "snout" houses (garages facing the front) will be allowed, except on lots having widths of less than fifty (50) feet. 
• No other uses are permitted within this area. 
(3)  Light industrial: 
a.  All uses must be totally enclosed within a structure to minimize noise, odor, toxic chemical and wastes. 
b.  Types of primary uses include: 
• Light assembly and manufacturing. 
• Packaging. 
• Business/professional offices. 
• Radio/T.V. studios, medical clinics. 
• Veterinarians. 
• Vocational/trade schools. 
• Building trade contractors. 
c.  Lot and yard dimensions for new industrial uses: 
• Two-acre minimum lot size. 
• Twenty (20) feet perimeter setbacks. 
• Light industrial uses; all activities must be contained within an enclosed structure. 
d.  Outside storage of any materials, vehicles or products is prohibited. 
• Nonresidential buildings shall not exceed sixty thousand (60,000) square feet in one building, except where the design features, building placement, or other site issues make it compatible with the surrounding internal and external residential areas and is approved as part of the site plan process. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures permitted: Customary accessory uses incidental and subordinate to the principal use. 
(c)  Special exceptions: 
(1)  The city manager shall be responsible for making final determinations regarding uses that may not be specifically or provisionally identified herein. Appeals of his/her decision shall be processed as a special exception. 
(2)  Expansion, enlargement, replacement of existing industrial uses within the district, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A minimum of eight (8) architectural and site design features must be used. 
b.  There shall be no outside storage of any materials, vehicles or products. 
c.  All activities must be contained within an enclosed structure. 
d.  Solid, opaque visual screens shall separate industrial uses from commercial and residential uses for the full perimeter of the property. 
(3)  Where expansion, enlargement or replacement of industrial uses is allowed, the use shall be limited to light industrial uses only; all activities shall be within enclosed structures and shall not cause the percentage of industrial uses in the RMU to exceed the standards in the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  Lot and yard dimensions for new industrial uses: 
a.  One acre minimum lot size. 
b.  Twenty (20) feet perimeter setbacks. 
(d)  Prohibited uses in all mixed-use areas: 
(1)  Adult entertainment. 
(2)  Heavy manufacturing and/or heavy industrial uses. 
(3)  New automotive repair, storage or servicing. 
(4)  New warehousing. 
(5)  Any other uses not specifically or professionally provided for herein. 
(e)  Building height: Maximum building height is fifty (50) feet without design bonuses. Buildings incorporating up to eight (8) design features may be able to extend to sixty-five (65) feet; buildings using all twelve (12) minimum design features into the building and site may extend to one hundred ten (110) feet. Changes to the heights shall be upon recommendation by the planning commission, community redevelopment agency advisory committee, and approval by the city council. 
(f)  Setbacks: In the RMU district as a whole, the structures are intended to be developed closer to the roadway to create a sense of place and pedestrian usage. Thus, front yard setbacks are set at a maximum build-to line of twenty (20) feet from a property line or an established road right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
(g)  Rear yard: Every lot or parcel shall have a minimum rear yard setback of twenty (20) feet. In the event of an alley, the only required setback shall be five (5) feet from the edge of the alley. In the event the lot or parcel backs up onto a canal, lake, retention area or other water body, the rear setback shall be fifteen (15) feet for the principal structure and zero (0) feet for porches, pools, and accessory structures. 
(h)  Side yard: Side yards for commercial uses shall be regulated by FAR and through the site plan review process. For corner parcels, there shall be a corner side setback of fifteen (15) feet. Residential side yards shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet from the perimeter, unless otherwise established through site plan review. 
(i)  Bonuses: All development using density and height bonuses are subject to review and recommendations by the development review committee and planning commission, and approval by the Rockledge City Council. The city council may also request that the community redevelopment agency advisory committee or community redevelopment agency review and comment upon proposed developments. 
(j)  Minimum development standards for all sites within the RMU: 
(1)  The style of architecture for development shall promote a unified theme, while allowing for varying sizes and types of individual structures, such as Historic Vernacular, Mediterranean, Colonial, etc. Garages must be placed behind the principal structures, unless they are incorporated within the structure, in which case the garage door must not face the primary street. The use of vernacular architectural elements such as porches, dormers, cupolas, and other such features shall be encouraged. 
(2)  Lot sizes for platted areas shall depend on type of residential dwellings. 
(3)  Landscaping shall consist of seventy (70) percent canopy material, which shall be at a height of six (6) feet clear trunk space at the time of planting. Landscaping may be clustered. The remaining thirty (30) percent shall be comprised of a mix of decorative plants, shrubs, groundcover. All open areas shall be sodded. 
(4)  Distance between buildings shall be the minimum necessary for fire access and safety, and in no case shall exceed ten (10) feet, except where required by the Fire Code. 
(5)  All utilities shall be located underground. 
(6)  Streets shall contain sidewalks, decorative and non-standard Florida Power & Light (FPL) street lights, street signs and other site amenities provided by the developer; such amenities shall be of a design acceptable to the city and approved by the city council. 
(7)  All vehicular access and parking areas shall be paved and contain curb and gutter. 
(8)  No new metal buildings may be constructed without finishing the front, sides and rear with stucco, finished concrete, or wood covering. This shall apply to expansions, as well. 
(9)  The use of thematic parking lot lighting and signage shall be required in public and private developments. 
(k)  Waivers: Waivers not covered by the community redevelopment agency subcommittee may be considered by the planning commission and the city council, upon recommendation of the DRC. 
(l)  Architectural and site guidelines: To ensure quality design and development within the mixed-use district, architectural and site design guidelines are hereby established and are attached to this section as Exhibit "A". The content of Exhibit "A", titled "Architectural and Site Design Guidelines" may be amended as deemed necessary by Resolution of the Rockledge City Council and are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1377-2005, § 1, 5-4-05; Ord. No. 1534-2009, § 3, 11-4-09) 
SECTION 62.190. - HC-HOSPITAL CAMPUS DISTRICT 

62.191 - Definition and uses. 
    Hospital campus (HC) district. Activity within this land use offers medical care more intensive than personal care services and offers facilities and beds for use beyond twenty-four (24) hours for individuals requiring diagnosis, treatment or cure for illness, injury, deformity, infirmity, abnormality, disease, or pregnancy and which regularly makes available at least clinical laboratory services, diagnostic x-ray services, and treatment facilities for surgery or obstetrical care, or other definitive medical treatment of similar extent. The term hospital shall include the buildings themselves and any accessory uses such as hospital maintenance and storage facilities, helistops for hospital emergency services, parking and parking garages, emergency facilities, related teaching and training activities, accessory indoor auditoriums/conference rooms, accessory indoor minor retail, miscellaneous service, and personal service uses, and incidental publishing and printing of hospital related information. The term "hospital" does not include congregate living facilities; nursing, skilled nursing, convalescent, and extended care facilities; or professional residential facilities. The outside boundaries of this district shall be defined as Longwood Avenue, Seminole Drive, Rockledge Boulevard and Orange Avenue, comprising twelve and twelve hundredths (12.12) acres. 
(Ord. No. 1371-2005, § 2, 4-20-05) 
62.192. - Intent. 
    To ensure quality development and to maintain and enhance an attractive physical environment within the hospital campus (HC) district, this section outlines compliance with design criteria for all development projects. The design of the site, use of colors and materials, signage, building orientation, architectural style and compatibility with surrounding structures creates an attractive physical environment for the public. These standards supersede any other land development criteria. In the event of a conflict between any land development provisions, these standards will prevail. If this section does not address specific criteria, the general code criteria will prevail. 
    This chapter is intended to promote imagination, innovation, and variety by focusing on design principles and encouraging creative solutions that serve the following purposes: 
(1)  Create a sense of permanence and place by promoting development that emulates enduring character through use of quality design and building materials; 
(2)  Minimize compatibility conflicts with surrounding uses which prevent orderly site development; and 
(3)  Foster the development of a positive visual character for the Hospital by promoting a standard for quality development. 
(Ord. No. 1371-2005, § 2, 4-20-05) 
62.193. - Master campus plan. 
    Wuesthoff Hospital has submitted a master plan guideline, which proposes potential buildings and the uses associated with those buildings within this district. This is a guideline; major proposed changes must be reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the Rockledge City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1371-2005, § 2, 4-20-05) 
62.194. - Lot requirements. 
    No lot area shall be established for this district. 
(Ord. No. 1371-2005, § 2, 4-20-05) 
62.195. - Building setbacks. 
    Front setbacks adjacent to R-O-W and across from residentially zoned property: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
    Front setbacks adjacent to all other R-O-W: Ten (10) feet. 
    Side setbacks: Five (5) feet. 
    Rear setbacks: Zero (0) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1371-2005, § 2, 4-20-05) 
62.196. - Building requirements. 
1.  The maximum lot coverage for the entire twelve and twelve hundredths (12.12) acre site is ninety (90) percent of the land that may be covered by principal and accessory buildings or structures including driveways and parking lots. 
2.  Floor area ratio (FAR) shall be established at one and one-half (1.5) for the entire twelve and twelve hundredths (12.12) acres, which shall exclude parking areas and parking garages. All future construction plans submitted for this area will include the current FAR and the proposed FAR after development. 
3.  Height shall be limited to no greater than seventy-five (75) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1371-2005, § 2, 4-20-05) 
62.197. - Special requirements. 
A.  Increased buffering technique next to residential neighborhoods with increased building heights: 
1.  Thirty-five (35) feet or less; no additional buffering required. 
2.  Thirty-six (36) to fifty (50) feet: 
a.  An increased use of urban design treatments (greater than required in subsection C.(2)), for building treatments; or 
b.  An increased use of landscaping (greater than required in subsection C.(4)), within the perimeter setback including additional canopy trees, palm groupings, shrub masses, and ground cover treatments; and 
c.  Review and approval of the proposed enhanced design treatments by the planning commission. 
3.  Fifty-one (51) to seventy-five (75) feet: 
a.  New building development shall not exceed fifty (50) feet in height unless additional setbacks and/or design and landscape treatments are provided. A maximum seventy-five-foot height may be permitted if the following are proposed: 
i.  An increased building setback, one foot additional setback for every additional one foot in height over fifty (50) feet; and 
ii.  An increased use of urban design treatments (greater than required in subsection C.(2)), for all building treatments; or 
iii.  An increased use of landscaping (greater than required in subsection C.(4)), within the perimeter setback including additional canopy trees, palm groupings, shrub masses, and groundcover treatments; and 
iv.  Review and approval of the proposed enhanced design treatments by the planning commission. 
4.  Exception. The future 5th and 6th floor expansions to the Wuesthoff Hospital east tower shall be located on top of the existing building. Total building height shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet. Additional landscaping shall be placed along the Orange Avenue and Seminole Drive rights-of-way. 
B.  In general. 
(1)  Application to development. The site design of all development shall comply with the requirements of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this subsection. Architectural elevations of all facades of all structures to be constructed within the district shall be a required exhibit for development plan approval. Such exhibit shall include colors, materials, building dimensions, location of service areas and mechanical equipment, screening devices, lighting fixtures, and any other information as determined necessary to ensure consistency with the intent of this chapter. 
(2)  City approval required. The city, as part of the development plan approval process, shall determine final approval of all site designs. Such approval shall include, but not be limited to, materials, colors, orientation, signage and landscaping. 
(3)  Approval for change of exterior design required. Any exterior change of any structure in the district shall require review and approval by the city. Such changes shall include, but not be limited to, colors, materials, and signage. The purpose of such approval shall be to ensure that any exterior change is consistent with the intent and requirements of this chapter. Routine maintenance and replacement of materials, which do not affect the approved exterior design, shall be exempt from this subsection. 
(4)  Recognized architectural style. Site development within the district shall incorporate a unified architectural style, which is recognized by design professionals as having a basis in classical, historical, or academic architectural design philosophies. The use of features deemed by this chapter to be "integral features of a recognized architectural style" shall have a rational and aesthetic relationship to the elevation of a structure, and be harmonious with the pattern, proportions, and materials of surrounding structures. 
(5)  Use. New development within the district shall comply with the following requirements. Properties within the district include those identified as such on the attached map and official zoning map. 
a.  Full architectural treatment shall be required on all sides of any structure. Such treatment shall include, but not be limited to, building finishes and materials, window and door styles, architectural details and colors. 
b.  The height, shape, and mass of structures shall be consistent with surrounding on-site structures and transition to off-site residential uses. 
c.  The use of a unified thematic parking lot lighting and site signage shall be required. 
d.  Off-street vehicular use areas shall be screened from the public right-of-way with opaque landscaping and/or berms, architecturally finished walls, or combinations thereof. 
C.  Mandatory standard design criteria. New development, renovation, redevelopment, alterations, and additions of any kind, including accessory structures and appurtenances, in the District shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Required project standards: This section applies to both single and multi-use buildings, all new development, and any redevelopment and post-disaster redevelopment projects of pre-existing uses. Such projects shall be required to include a minimum of four (4) of the twelve (12) following building design treatments in this section only. The city council may impose more of the requirements upon finding that it will improve the general safety, welfare, health, appearance, or aesthetics and is in conformance with the comprehensive plan and this Code. An explanation and detailed description of each follows this section. 
(2)  All development and redevelopment, regardless of the size, value or amount shall be required to include the following as shown: 
a.  Choose any three (3): 
a.  Canopies or porticos, integrated with the building's massing and style; 
b.  Overhangs; 
c.  Arcades, a minimum of six (6) feet clear in width; 
d.  Sculptured artwork; 
e.  Raised cornice parapets over doors; 
f.  Peaked roof forms; 
g.  Arches; 
h.  Ornamental and structural architectural details, other than cornices, which are integrated into the building structure and overall design, pursuant to these regulations; 
i.  External downspouts enclosed within the building structure; 
j.  Any other treatment which, in the opinion of the city meets the intent of this section; ornamental and structural architectural details, which are integrated into the building structure and overall design, pursuant to these regulations. 
b.  And, one of the following site design elements: 
a.  Decorative landscape planters or planting areas, a minimum of five (5) feet wide located within paved pedestrian walkways; 
b.  Shaded seating areas consisting of a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet; 
c.  Integration of specialty pavers, or stamped concrete along the buildings walkway; said treatment shall constitute a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the walkway area; or 
d.  Water elements(s), such as fountains, architectural pools, statuary, etc. 
(3)  Lighting: 
a.  Decorative, low-level intensity, non-concealed source lighting, which defines vehicular and/or pedestrian ways, is acceptable. All site lighting shall be so designed to minimize the light source or high levels of light from being visible from the adjacent off-site residential use. 
b.  Exterior building (architectural or decorative) lighting shall be generated from concealed light source, low-level light fixtures. Color lamps shall not be used. 
c.  Street lamps shall conform to the style adopted by the city or as part of the development theme and must be located at any driveway entrance, or pedestrian entrance within three (3) feet of the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Landscaping: 
a.  Landscaping for the proposed development shall provide visually harmonious and compatible settings for structures on the same lot and on adjoining and nearby lots. Natural appearing landscape massing and forms are strongly encouraged; formal plans and the appearance of straight hedges are discouraged. 
b.  Perimeter landscaping shall be required for new structures and off-street vehicular use areas along all public rights-of-way, except at points of access. The scale of proposed landscaping shall be in proportion to the building. As a minimum, perimeter landscaping shall include: 
i.  Canopy trees: Tree installations shall be provided based upon a one tree per thirty (30) linear feet of right-of-way frontage. As a minimum, trees shall be twelve (12) feet in height and measure three-inch caliper at time of installation. Installations should be spread along the entire length of the right-of-way and may be grouped to provide a natural appearance. 
ii.  Screening hedge: Shrub installations shall provide a continuous screen to all off-street vehicular use areas. As a minimum, shrubs shall attain a three (3) feet overall height. Materials that grow in excess of three (3) feet in height shall not be permitted along the frontage portion of the properties for both safety and aesthetic purposes, without an approved maintenance plan. 
iii.  Foundation plantings: All structures and remaining open space shall be stabilized with a combination of shrub, groundcover, or sodding. 
iv.  Irrigation system: All landscaping shall provide a programmable, one hundred (100) percent coverage, automatic underground irrigation system with rain shutoff sensor. 
v.  Xeriscape practices: It is strongly encouraged that plant material combinations should be designed to group similar water dependent species within common irrigation zones. 
c.  Creativity and diversity in landscaping is desired. If in the opinion of the staff and the planning commission, a landscape plan meets the intent of this Code, the city may approve the plan, waiving the strict requirements of this section. 
(5)  Screening walls: 
a.  A maximum of a three-foot high decorative wall may be allowed along rights-of-way. A six-foot wall may be approved by the city to screen off-street vehicular loading areas, building mechanicals, and garbage dumpsters, etc. 
b.  Such walls shall only be of masonry, decorative stone and/or brick, and architecturally finished on the public right-of-way side. Such wall is only permitted within three (3) feet of the right-of-way. Required landscaping must be placed between the fence and the right-of-way (or sidewalk). 
c.  No chain-link fencing is allowed. 
d.  Any wall, which is visible from any public right-of-way, shall be designed as an integral feature of the architectural design of the principal structure. Such design shall include the use of similar materials, colors and finishes as the principal structure and, to the greatest extent possible, avoid extensive, monotonous sections by having breaks and bends and incorporating landscaping and other natural features. 
(6)  Signs: 
a.  Freestanding and wall signs, as permitted by this Code, shall be designed to be compatible and integral to the structure to be identified. Signboards, canopies, fascias, and other architectural features shall be designed to incorporate signage or a uniform sign program as applicable. 
b.  The base treatment of all freestanding signs shall be compatible with the principal structure with regard to style, color and finish. 
c.  New signs, replacement signs or alterations to existing signs shall be required to conform to these regulations and be approved by the city as part of the development review process. 
d.  The city council, based upon recommendations from the planning commission may place further requirements on signage in addition to those included herein. 
(7)  Service areas: 
a.  All service areas and mechanical equipment (ground or roof), including, but not limited to, air conditioning condensers, heating units, electric meters, satellite dishes, irrigation pumps, ice machines and dispensers, outdoor vending machines, and propane tanks, displays and refilling areas, shall be screened using architectural features consistent with the structure, or landscaping of sufficient density and maturity at planting to provide opaque screening. 
(Ord. No. 1371-2005, § 2, 4-20-05) 
62.198. - Parking requirements. 
    Hospital Campus District parking requirements shall be as required in Section 55.12 of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1371-2005, § 2, 4-20-05) 
SECTION 62.200. - ROC-RECREATION OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1572-2011, § 1, adopted February 2, 2011, retitled 62.200 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such title pertained to COR-Conservation, Open Space and Recreation. 

62.201. - Intent. 
    The conservation, open space and recreation zoning district is created to ensure that properties identified in the City of Rockledge Comprehensive Plan as having the following land uses: "Recreational public passive", "recreational public active" and "recreational public mixed use" are built and designed to meet the needs of the citizens. Each land use category brings a little different use and function to the property. 
(Ord. No. 1418-2006, § 1, 8-16-06) 
62.202. - Uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in each of the described comprehensive plan land use districts: 
A.  Recreational, public passive (RPP). Activities within this land area are predominantly associated with land areas being preserved, which contain areas of wetlands and/or habitats that serve to protect valuable threatened and endangered species. These areas may also be used to enhance the passive recreational needs of the population. 
(1)  Uses. Permitted uses include the following: 
(a)  Principal. 
1.  Hiking and bicycle trails. 
2.  Information centers. 
3.  Scenic vistas. 
4.  Boating, non-motorized. 
5.  Fishing. 
6.  Fishing/mooring docks. 
7.  Conservation areas. 
8.  Open space. 
(b)  Accessory. 
1.  Roadways. 
2.  Parking. 
3.  Government and public utility facilities approved by city council. 
4.  Fairs. 
5.  Special events. 
6.  Caretaker residence. 
7.  Signage. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Telecommunication towers. 
2.  Commercial leases. 
(d)  Prohibited. 
1.  Industrial and commercial uses not approved by city council. 
2.  Motorized vehicles. 
(e)  Special requirements. Whenever possible the city will work with permitting agencies to combine functional uses of all properties. 
B.  Recreational, public mixed use (RPMU). Activities within this land use area shall be predominantly connected to areas that serve a mixture of public functions. These areas will often be in the process of transitioning from a public works project to public use project and may be transformed into open space parks. 
(1)  Uses. Permitted public uses include the following: 
(a)  Principal. 
1.  Master storm water lakes. 
2.  Wetland areas. 
3.  Conservation areas. 
4.  Canoeing. 
5.  Sailing. 
6.  Freshwater fishing. 
7.  Hiking and bicycle trails. 
8.  Picnic areas. 
9.  Water skiing, if allowed by ordinance. 
10.  Scenic vistas. 
11.  Fishing piers and dock and boat ramps. 
12.  Campgrounds. 
13.  Dog parks. 
(b)  Accessory. 
1.  Roadways. 
2.  Parking. 
3.  Government and public utility facilities approved by city council. 
4.  Fairs. 
5.  Special events. 
6.  Caretaker residence. 
7.  Signage. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Telecommunication towers. 
2.  Commercial leases. 
(d)  Prohibited. 
1.  Industrial and commercial uses not approved by city council. 
(e)  Special requirements. Whenever possible the city will work with permitting agencies to combine functional uses of all properties. 
C.  Recreational, public active (RPA). Activities within this land area are predominantly connected to land areas being used for active recreational purposes. 
(1)  Uses. Permitted public uses include the following: 
(a)  Principal. 
1.  Field sports. 
2.  Basketball. 
3.  Soccer. 
4.  Tennis courts. 
5.  Community centers. 
6.  Recreation centers. 
7.  Water recreation, if determined to be environmentally safe. 
8.  Horseshoes pits. 
9.  Volleyball. 
10.  Skateboarding areas. 
11.  Shuffleboard. 
12.  In-line skating. 
13.  Dog parks. 
14.  Public golf courses. 
15.  Other activities deemed appropriate by the city. 
(b)  Accessory. 
1.  Roadways. 
2.  Parking. 
3.  Government and public utility facilities approved by city council. 
4.  Fairs. 
5.  Special events. 
6.  Caretaker residence. 
7.  Signage. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
1.  Telecommunication towers. 
2.  Commercial leases. 
(d)  Prohibited. 
1.  Industrial and commercial uses not approved by city council. 
(e)  Special requirements. Whenever possible the city will work with permitting agencies to combine functional uses of all properties. 
(Ord. No. 1418-2006, § 1, 8-16-06) 
62.203. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Area: No minimum area requirements. 
(b)  Width: No minimum width requirements. 
(c)  Depth: No minimum depth requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1418-2006, § 1, 8-16-06) 
62.204. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Adjoining properties and rights-of-way: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1418-2006, § 1, 8-16-06) 
62.205. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Coverage: Maximum impervious coverage ten (10) percent. 
(b)  Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, except telecommunication towers. 
(c)  Floor area ratio (FAR): 0.1 percent. 
(d)  Open space/landscape: Minimum open space ninety (90) percent. 
(Ord. No. 1418-2006, § 1, 8-16-06) 
Part VII - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The exhibits referred to in this part are not included in this publication, but are available for public inspection at the offices of the city. 

SECTION 70.00. - SUBDIVISIONS 

70.01. - Short title. 
    This part shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the "Rockledge Subdivision Regulations." 
70.02. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Rockledge to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as subject to the control of the City of Rockledge pursuant to the adopted comprehensive plan for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the municipality. 
    Land shall not be subdivided until proper provision has been made for paved streets, drainage, water, sewage and capital improvements such as schools, parks, fire, police and recreational facilities. 
    The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the proposals showing the comprehensive plan, official zoning map and the capital budget of the City of Rockledge. It is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the building code, zoning ordinance, comprehensive plan and capital improvements budget of the City of Rockledge. 
70.03. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The public health, safety, comfort and welfare require the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within the incorporated areas of the City of Rockledge. The subdivision of land is a vital step in the progress of community development. Once land has been shaped into lots, blocks and streets, correction of defects is costly and difficult. Substantial public responsibility is created by each new subdivision, involving the maintenance of streets, drainage, utilities and other health facilities and the provision of additional public services. As the general welfare, health, safety and convenience of the community are thereby directly affected by the use of land as a subdivision, it is in the interest of the public that subdivisions are designed and developed in accordance with sound rules and proper minimum standards. 
(b)  The purpose and intent of this part is as follows: 
(1)  To establish reasonable and equitable standards of subdivision design and procedures for subdivision of land that will encourage stable communities and the creation of healthy living environments which preserve the natural beauty and topography of Rockledge and ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features. 
(2)  To ensure that public facilities and utilities are available and will have a sufficient capability and capacity to service land developments and their occupants. 
(3)  To prevent traffic hazards and to require the provision of safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation in land developments having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper location, widths and design of streets. 
(4)  To coordinate the furnishing and establishment of streets, drainage and utilities in an orderly planned manner to ensure protection to the environment and promotion of the general welfare. 
(5)  To increase safety from fire, flood and other dangers. 
(6)  To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of the population. 
(7)  To ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land. 
(8)  To prevent or reduce the pollution of air, streams and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the natural value of the land. 
(9)  To guide the future growth and development of the municipality in accordance with the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan and the Rockledge Zoning Ordinance. 
70.04. - Authority. 
(a)  By authority of ordinance, the city council of the City of Rockledge (hereinafter referred to as "council") adopted pursuant to the powers and jurisdictions vested through Chapter 177, Florida Statutes, the council does hereby exercise the power to review, approve and disapprove plats for subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City of Rockledge, Florida. 
(b)  Further, in compliance with Chapter 63-177, Florida Statutes, 1974, there was created a planning commission of Rockledge, Florida, in city Ordinance No. 412-76 by the Rockledge City Council to act in an advisory capacity to said council and said actions are hereby confirmed by this part. 
(c)  By the same authority, the city council does hereby exercise the power and authority to approve or deny subdivisions of land already recorded in the office of the clerk of Brevard County, Florida, if such plats are entirely or partially undeveloped. 
(d)  The plat shall be considered to be entirely or partially undeveloped if: 
(1)  Said plat has been recorded with the office of the clerk of Brevard County, Florida, without a prior approval by the city council; or, 
(2)  Said plat has been approved by the city council, yet the council finds that the public interest will be best served by vacating all or part of said plat pursuant to the authority of Section 163.280, Florida Statutes, when the conditions set forth in said statute exist. 
70.05. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  These subdivision regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land, as defined herein, located within the corporate limits of the City of Rockledge. 
(b)  No land shall be subdivided within the corporate limits of the City of Rockledge until the requirements of these regulations have been fulfilled. 
(c)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land which was created after the effective date of and not in conformity with the provisions of these subdivision regulations, and no construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with the regulations. 
70.06. - Enactment. 
    In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes and policy, these subdivision regulations are hereby adopted. 
70.07. - Interpretation, conflict and severability. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control. 
(c)  If any part or provision of these regulations or application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision or application directly involved in all controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations. 
70.08. - Savings clause. 
    Any applicant who has submitted a subdivision plan to the city council for approval prior to the adoption of this part may elect to proceed under the prior subdivision regulations of this part for the recording of such plat. If the applicant elects to proceed under the prior subdivision regulations, the applicant must serve written notice to the city council within sixty (60) days from the date of the adoption of this part. In the absence of such written notice, the applicant must comply with the provisions of this part. 
70.09. - Amendments. 
    For the purpose of providing the public health, safety and general welfare, the city council may, from time to time, amend the provisions imposed by these regulations. Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall be held by the city council in the manner prescribed by law. 
70.10. - Waiver. 
(a)  Generally. Where the city council finds that undue hardship or unreasonable practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with this part, the council may approve a waiver to the requirements of this part if the waiver serves the public interest. 
(b)  Conditions of waiver. An applicant seeking a waiver will submit a written request to the city council for the waiver stating the reasons for the waiver and the facts which support such waiver. The council shall not approve a waiver unless it determines as follows: 
(1)  The particular physical conditions, shape or topography of the specific property involved cause an undue hardship to the applicant if the strict letter of this part is carried out; 
(2)  The granting of the waiver will not be injurious to the other adjacent property; 
(3)  The conditions upon which a request for waiver are based are peculiar to the property for which the waiver is sought and are not generally applicable to other property and do not result from actions of the applicant; and, 
(4)  The waiver is consistent with the intent and purpose of the Rockledge Zoning Ordinance, the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan and the requirements of this part. 
70.11. - Resubdivision of land. 
(a)  Procedure for resubdivision. For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such a change affects any street layout shown on such a map, or an area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the council by the same procedures, rules and regulations as for a subdivision. 
(b)  Procedure for subdivisions where future resubdivision is indicated. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plan shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into small building sites, the city council may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements provided for the future opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat. 
70.12. - Vacation of plats. 
    An applicant may apply for the vacation of any plat or any part of any plat at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, requesting the same to be vacated. 
70.13. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(a)  Generally. No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the city council, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, and filed with the clerk of the court of Brevard County, Florida. 
    No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  Violations and penalties. The zoning official is hereby authorized and directed to take any action authorized by Chapter 63-177, Florida Statutes, 1974, and these regulations, to ensure compliance with or prevent violation of the provisions of this part. 
SECTION 70.20. - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVALS OF SUBDIVISIONScustom>[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 70.20 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. 

70.21. - Intent. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to submit a plat for the subdivision of land located in the City of Rockledge to the clerk of Brevard County or his representative for the purpose of recording such plat in the office of the clerk until said plat has been approved by the Rockledge City Council under the provisions of this part and signed by the city mayor. In the event an unapproved plat is recorded, it shall be stricken from the public records upon the adoption of an appropriate resolution by the council. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat after approval by city council without the consent of the city council. 
70.22. - Plat review procedure overview. 
    There are three (3) stages of review for plat approval: The development plan review, the preliminary plat review, and the final plat approval. 
(a)  Development plan review. This stage allows the applicant to solicit comments from the city staff based on a concept delineation of the proposed subdivision. 
(b)  Preliminary plat review. This stage commences on the applicant making formal application for plat review by the city staff, planning commission and city council. 
(c)  Final plat approval. This third stage follows the preliminary plat approval and is the final stage necessary before recording a plat. After preliminary plat approval, the applicant may receive final plat approval by providing the city council security that the subdivision improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the approved plans for the plat. Construction of subdivision improvements may only begin after the final plat is approved by the city and recorded. 
70.23. - Development plan review. 
(a)  Intent. The purpose of the development plan is to provide for an initial review of the development proposal and the basic development concepts prior to proceeding with the detailed phases of the preliminary plat. The developer will provide a concise statement and description of the development proposal. The expenses for engineering studies, surveying, legal information and planning studies will not be necessitated at this stage. This step is to provide an opportunity for the applicant to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the city staff to facilitate the preparation and review of the preliminary and final plats. 
(b)  Consistency with other regulations. To ensure that the proposed subdivision is consistent with other regulations upon initial submission of the development plan, all applicants will complete to the extent possible, with the assistance of the city, the Rockledge Development Fact Sheet. The subdivision development plan application will first be checked for consistency with the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan by the zoning official; no subdivision application can proceed until it is consistent with the adopted plan. All subdivision applications will then be checked for consistency with the adopted zoning ordinance; no subdivision application can proceed until it is consistent with the adopted zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Required submittals. The development plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet and show: 
(1)  Location map: Drawn to scale, showing the relationship of the proposed subdividing to existing and proposed facilities as indicated in the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan and other applicable facility plans. 
(2)  Legend: Title, legal description, scale, north arrow, approximate acreage to be subdivided, current zoning, total number of lots, minimum lot size, name, address and telephone number of the owner and his representative(s). 
(3)  Existing streets: The name, location and right-of-way width of all existing streets which abut the proposed subdivision, and existing easements on the property. 
(4)  Proposed streets: The width of proposed street rights-of-way. 
(5)  Lots: Preliminary lot layout with approximate dimensions shown. 
(6)  Soil types: Soil information from the Brevard Soil Survey will be sufficient, and shall be available at Rockledge city offices. 
(7)  Topography: As delineated by the United States Geological Survey Maps will be adequate, and shall be available at Rockledge city offices. 
(8)  Other natural features: Including lakes, marshes or swamps, watercourses, floodprone areas, and other pertinent features. 
(9)  Utilities: Proposed source of potable water and sewage disposal. 
(10)  Required submittals: The applicant shall submit eight (8) of the required submittals to the zoning official at least ten (10) days prior to the development plan review conference. 
(d)  Review process. Upon submittal of required copies of the specified development plan submittal and the completed Rockledge Development Fact Sheet, the zoning official will contact the various officials and agencies that will be affected by the proposed subdivision to schedule the development plan review conference within seven (7) days of the submittal date. The zoning official will make his required review with respect to the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance within this seven-day period. 
    The development plan will not be approved or denied at this stage. The zoning official will prepare a written statement advising the applicant on issues, problems or shortcomings that should be addressed in the preliminary plat submission and will transmit this statement to the applicant within two (2) weeks of the development plan review conference. 
(e)  Fees. There is no required fee associated with the preliminary development plan review and conceptual conference. 
(f)  Time limit on statement. The comments provided in the development plan review statement will automatically lapse if a preliminary plan is not submitted for the site within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of the statement. 
70.24. - Preliminary plat review. 
(a)  Intent. The purpose of the preliminary plat is to permit complete and accurate presentation of technical data and preliminary engineering drawings in such a manner as to allow complete review and evaluation of the proposed development and its impact upon both the site and surrounding areas. 
(b)  Consistency with other regulations. A completed Rockledge Development Fact Sheet and current development plan review statement are required before the preliminary plats can be accepted for review. 
(c)  Required submittals: 
(1)  Generally. All applicants shall make application for formal plat review by furnishing to the subdivision inspector eight (8) copies of the preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision, together with a completed and up-to-date development fact sheet, a current development plan review statement and the specified information. Said preliminary plat shall be drawn at a uniform scale of not smaller than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet. In the event the subdivision exceeds one hundred (100) acres in area, the applicant may submit a preliminary plat at a uniform scale of not less than one inch equals two hundred (200) feet. Said preliminary plat shall be designed in conformity with the general design standards established in these regulations and shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Title block: The title or name of the proposed subdivision and the name and address of the owner of the tract proposed for development, and the name and address of the engineer and surveyor engaged to prepare and design the preliminary plat. 
(b)  Legend: Date, scale of plat, north arrow, current zoning, total number of lots, and minimum lot size. 
(c)  Legal description: A full and detailed legal description of the tract to be platted and its approximate acreage. 
(d)  Vicinity map: A vicinity map, at scale, showing the proposed subdivision in relation to the abutting land uses and streets. 
(e)  Streets: The location, name and right-of-way and pavement width, both on and immediately contiguous to the subdivision tract will be shown. 
(f)  Public open space and easements: Existing parklands, lakes and waterways within the tract to be subdivided shall be shown on the plat. The purpose for such easements shall be indicated. 
(g)  Parks and recreation dedication: Land to be dedicated for parks and recreation shall be shown and its approximate acreage indicated. 
(h)  Dedications and reservations: All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use, such as roads, easements, parks, sidewalks, bike or pedestrian trails, shall be indicated on the plat. Proposed rights-of-way and street names shall be indicated. 
(i)  Lot lines and lot numbers: The proposed lot line with appropriate dimensions and lot numbers shall be shown. Lots shall be numbered in consecutive order, starting with the numeral one (1) for the first lot in each block. 
(j)  Topography: Contour intervals of one foot, except where determined to be unreasonable by the city's subdivision inspector. 
(k)  Proposed building setback lines: See Exhibit 5 of this part. 
(l)  Finished floor elevations. Finished floor elevations shall be shown on plans and follow uniform flow patterns with adjacent streets. Finished floor elevations shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches above the crown of the adjacent road or roads. 
(m)  Bench marks. Plans shall show bench marks used to determine construction elevations in subdivision. Plans shall include description and elevation of bench marks or temporary bench marks to be used on site. 
Cross reference- At the direction of the city, subsections (a) and (c) of former § 20-118 of the Code of Ordinances have been included herein as subsections 70.24(c)(1)(l) and (m). 
(2)  Engineering drawings. Preliminary engineering drawings shall be submitted in two (2) copies to the subdivision inspector and show the following: 
(a)  Water system lines and support facilities. 
(b)  Sewer system lines and support facilities. 
(c)  Storm water and drainage facilities, easements and other features. 
(d)  Bulkheads. 
(e)  Street profiles. 
(f)  Sidewalks, bicycle paths and pedestrian paths. 
(g)  Excavation and fill areas. 
(3)  Other submittals: 
(a)  Covenants: A draft copy of any proposed protective covenants or deed restrictions shall be submitted. 
(b)  Dredge and fill: If any dredging or filling operation is intended in development of the area, application shall be made to the Brevard County official responsible for dredging permits. No such work will be done prior to issuance of such permit. 
(c)  Erosion control: When erosion problems are anticipated, plans and specifications for temporary and/or permanent control measures shall be outlined. 
(d)  Additional data: Such other additional information shall be such data as necessary to show that the soil and topography is suitable for the uses proposed for the property in the subdivision. Information obtained from the Brevard County Soil and Water Conservation District may be submitted for this purpose. The applicant shall also furnish the city's subdivision inspector with written or graphic information about elevations for the proposed homesites using a one-hundred-year flood with a twenty-four-hour duration, and for roads a twenty-five-year flood with a twenty-four-hour duration. The applicant shall also furnish the city's subdivision inspector such additional information as may be necessary to provide reasonable assurances that the subdivision shall conform with the requirements of this section and other sections of this part and other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(d)  Review process (preliminary): 
(1)  Upon receipt of said preliminary development plans by the zoning official, one copy of the proposed plat shall, within five (5) days of receipt, be forwarded to each of the following: To all city department heads and associated city staff who will review the preliminary development plan prior to the preliminary review conference for conformity with the provisions of this part and other applicable ordinances, policies, laws and regulations, and shall forward written comments and recommendations pertaining to the development to the zoning official. 
(2)  The preliminary review conference will be scheduled within fourteen (14) working days to include the necessary city personnel, the city engineer, the applicant, and the engineer/surveyor engaged to prepare the development plan. Comments submitted by all city staff members shall be forwarded to the developer's engineer of record for necessary revisions/changes that must occur before final plan review can be granted. 
(3)  The preliminary plat and all comments will be referred to the planning commission for its review and recommendations. The proposed plat and comments will be made part of the planning commission agenda and appear in the site plan-subdivision section. Advertisements for the planning commission public hearing on said preliminary plat are to be prepared consistent with requirements of due public notice. 
(4)  The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the Rockledge City Council to approve the application, disapprove the application, or approve the application subject to specified changes based on a consideration of the requirements of this part and other applicable policies, ordinances, laws and regulations and the conditions which affect development within the vicinity of the tract. 
(5)  The city council shall consider the application at its earliest convenience and then take action after considering the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(e)  Fees. The city council will establish from time to time, by resolution, a fee schedule for amounts deemed necessary to reimburse the City of Rockledge for the costs incurred in reviewing preliminary plats. 
(Ord. No. 1268-2002, § 29, 4-3-02) 
70.25. - Final plat review. 
(a)  Intent. The purpose of the final plat is to ensure the preparation, completion and recording of a final plat map and its accompanying legal documentation and the review and approval of final technical submittal and engineering drawings. 
(b)  Consistency with other regulations. An approved preliminary subdivision plat is required before the final plat will be accepted for review. 
(c)  Required submittals. Eight (8) copies of the final plat shall be submitted for approval to the subdivision inspector and shall be designed in conformity with the design standards and requirements established in these regulations, and the requirements of Chapter 177, Florida Statutes, as amended, and shall be in conformity with the preliminary plat as approved. In addition, certifications and documents shall accompany the final plat as follows: 
(1)  Linen. The final plat shall be prepared in black drawing ink upon one or more linen sheets thirty (30) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in size. A three-inch margin shall be provided on the left edge of all sheets; all sheets shall be numbered and the number of sheets shall be indicated in each sheet below the title. Said final plat shall be in the same format as the preliminary plat as specified in section 70.24(c). Said final plat shall contain sufficient data to determine readily and locate accurately on the ground the location, bearing and length of every right-of-way line, lot line, easement boundary line, and block line, including the radii, arcs and central angles of all curves. 
(2)  Certificate of ownership. 
(3)  Construction plans and specifications. 
(4)  Security for performance of construction as provided in this part. 
(5)  Security for maintenance meeting the requirements of this part. 
(6)  Certification of the plat by a professional land surveyor registered in the State of Florida. 
(7)  The recommendation of the city's subdivision inspector for approval of said construction plans and specifications and said final plat based upon the requirements and provisions of this part. 
(8)  Dedication of public improvements. All public improvements or property designated for public purpose on any approved final plat, including, but not limited to, all streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way, parks and public areas, shall be expressly dedicated on the face of the final plat by the owner as indicated on the certificate of ownership. In addition, said final plat shall contain a statement of dedication to the City of Rockledge, other appropriate government units or public utilities for all water lines, sewer lines and pumping stations and appurtenances located within the tract prior to recording. 
(d)  Review process (final): 
(1)  The final plat shall be submitted to the city with documents specified in this Code at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting of the final approval conference, at which time the final plat is to be submitted for review and recommendation. Upon receipt of said information, the subdivision inspector will schedule a meeting for final review conference, and said meeting shall include the necessary city personnel: The city engineer, the applicant, and the engineer/surveyor engaged to prepare the necessary drawings. Minutes of the conference will be the reference for necessary changes or revisions before final plat approval is granted. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the minutes of the final review conference, the city will schedule the subdivision on the next agenda of the Rockledge City Council. The council shall either approve, disapprove or approve subject to specified conditions said final plat for recording based upon compliance with the required certifications and security requirements, and with the other requirements and provisions of this part and other applicable policies, ordinances, laws and regulations. Upon approval by the city council, said final plat shall be signed by the mayor of the City of Rockledge and entitled to be recorded by the clerk of the Brevard County Court under the applicable provisions of Chapter 177, Florida Statutes. Under no circumstances will the subdivision inspector schedule the subdivision on the agenda of the city council until such time as all required documents have been received. Approval of said final plat shall be deemed acceptance by the city of said proposed public improvements, water lines, sewer lines, pumping stations, appurtenances, streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas, ponding areas, water recharge areas, canals, drainage facilities, and other public areas dedicated to the City of Rockledge. The acceptance of dedications for public purposes shall be affixed to the face of the plat. 
(e)  Fees. The city council shall establish, from time to time, by resolution, a fee schedule for amounts deemed necessary to reimburse the City of Rockledge for costs incurred in reviewing final plats and to defray the cost for recording plat, copies of plat and travel expenses. 
70.26. - Time allowed for completion of procedures preliminary to final plat approval. 
    All procedures, steps and requirements preliminary to final plat approval, as determined from when the city council approves the preliminary plat to final plat approval by the city council shall be completed by the developer within a period of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days; the city manager may, at his discretion, provide additional extensions in sixty (60) day increments for documented delays. If the platting procedures preliminary to final plat approval are not completed within the time prescribed by this section, including extensions for documented delays, no further action will be taken by the city toward approval of the proposed plat for a period of ninety (90) days after expiration of the time herein prescribed for completion of the platting procedures. If, after the expiration of said ninety-day waiting period, the developer still seeks approval of the same or a substantially similar plat, he must recommence the prescribed platting procedures from the beginning as a newly proposed plat. 
(Ord. No. 1278-2002, § 1, 7-17-02) 
70.27. - Construction plans and specifications. 
(a)  Intent. An applicant shall obtain permission of the city before commencing construction of subdivision improvements. After approval of the final plat by the city council, and the construction plans and specifications have been approved by the subdivision inspector, an applicant may begin construction under the following procedures: 
(1)  Construction after final plat approval: The applicant may submit construction plans and specifications as required in this part for subdivision improvements after the final plat is approved if performance bonds or other assurances are secured. The plans and specifications shall provide security required for the performance of such construction. Once the improvements are completed, a certificate of completion will be issued, and a maintenance bond will be submitted. 
(b)  Required submittal. The applicant requesting a permit under the procedures in paragraph (a) hereof shall furnish to the city's subdivision inspector the construction plans and specifications designed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations for the construction of the roads, sidewalks, bikeways, drainage and water management facilities, utilities, lot filling and other improvements as required by this part, including a master drainage map and subsoil investigation report. All construction plans and specifications must be designed, signed and sealed by a professional engineer who is registered in the State of Florida. The city's subdivision inspector shall review plans and specifications for conformity with the design of the final plat and the construction specification requirements of these regulations and any other applicable policy, ordinance, law or regulation. 
    If a subdivision is to be furnished public water by a municipality or Brevard County, the applicant shall provide the city's subdivision inspector with written confirmation that the municipal or county utilities department has approved the plans and specifications for the water system in the subdivision. 
SECTION 70.40. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN A SUBDIVISION 

70.41. - Generally. 
    Each subdivision shall contain improvements designed and constructed according to the requirements and specifications of these regulations and the applicable policies, regulations and ordinances of the City of Rockledge and the laws of the State of Florida. The following services and facilities are required improvements within subdivisions (see Part V): 
(1)  Streets paved, designed and constructed for public use according the standards and requirements of this Code. 
(2)  Sidewalks designed and constructed for public use according to the standards and requirements of this Code. 
(3)  Drainage and water management facilities designed and constructed according to the standards and requirements of this Code. The term "drainage," where appropriate, shall include, but not be limited to, swales, ditches, storm sewers, seepage basins, culverts, sidedrains, retention or detention basis, crossdrains and canals. 
(4)  A sanitary sewage system or individual sewage disposal system is permitted in the absence of access to a gravity sewage system (three hundred (300) feet distance). The requirements and rules and regulations of the Florida DER, covering the sanitary facilities for subdivisions, shall be considered with the minimum requirements of the City of Rockledge. 
(5)  A water system, unless an individual water supply is permitted within the tract, based upon the required standards of the Florida DER, the provisions of this Code and other applicable policies, laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(6)  Approved street signs and markers and traffic signs and signals shall be provided to control and circulate traffic within the street pattern within the subdivision in accordance with the Florida Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, published by the Florida Department of Transportation. 
(7)  All utilities are to be constructed underground. 
(8)  Such other improvements as deemed necessary to comply with the requirements of this Code and to protect the public health, safety and welfare because of topography or other problems of the tract. 
(9)  Green space as may be required by ordinance. 
Section 70.42. - [Design standards.] 
(a)  Use of natural features. The arrangement of lots and blocks and the street system shall make the most advantageous use of topography and preserve mature trees and other natural features wherever possible. 
(b)  Consideration of soil and flood hazards. A subdivision plan shall not be approved unless all land intended for use as building sites can be used safely for building purposes without danger from flood or other inundation or from adverse soil or foundation conditions or from any other menace to health, safety or public welfare. In particular, lands which are within the one-hundred-year flood-prone areas, as determined by the USGS or other reliable agency, shall not be subdivided and developed until proper provisions are made for protective flood-control measures and water management facilities necessary for flood-free development and flood-free vehicular access to such sites. No filling or grade level changes will be permitted which will alter the natural drainage or adversely affect other areas downstream through added runoff or adverse water quality. Guidelines for development within the one-hundred-year floodplain are contained in the flood damage prevention ordinance, Ordinance No. 510-79, of these regulations. 
(c)  Special consideration. Special consideration shall be given in the layout of streets, lots, blocks, buildings and easements to the preservation of large and specimen individual trees. Special consideration shall also be given to preserving natural drainage methods and natural topography and landscape. Special consideration shall be given to providing special screening, buffers or berms where developments abut noncompatible land uses. 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, subsections (B)-(D) of former § 20-111 of the Code of Ordinances have been included herein as Section 70.42. 
Section 70.45. - Low density subdivision. 
    The purpose of this section is to permit the development of subdivisions of large lots and low density areas that, due to street design, drainage requirements, location and topography, justify the construction of streets, without sidewalks or bikeways. Such subdivision will maximize percolation in drainage swales. These subdivisions are intended to be located within areas of the city where low density development will be consistent with future development patterns expressed in the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan. In any subdivision where all the lots are one acre or greater, no sidewalks or bikeways shall be required and local roadways shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty-four (24) feet with a sixty-six (66) foot right-of-way if adequate drainage facilities can be located within the right-of-way. Underground utilities shall still be required. 
Section 70.50. - Planned unit development. 
    The development of a subdivision as a planned unit development under the zoning regulations shall be in conformity with said zoning regulations and the final development plan for a planned unit development. The city council shall have the right to waive or vary the design, dedication and construction requirements of such a planned unit development from any of the provisions of these regulations if the proposed final development plan is in conformity with the requirement of said zoning regulations for a planned unit development and provided that: 
(1)  Such waiver does not violate the purpose and intent of any requirement of these regulations for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare in the subdivision of land. 
(2)  All procedures specified in this part for the approval of a final plat for recording or the issuance of a certificate of completion as the case may be, are strictly adhered to. 
(3)  All exhibits, certificates and information required in this part for the approval of a preliminary and final plat and the issuance of a certificate of completion are strictly adhered to under the applicable specified procedure. 
SECTION 70.60. - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTScustom>[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 70.60 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. 

70.61. - Generally. 
    Construction of required improvements may commence after recording the final plat if performance bonds or other assurances are secured. 
70.62. - Performance security. 
(A)  Generally. Construction shall not commence until after recording the final plat. An applicant shall be required to secure its performance of the construction required under these regulations by a performance bond, letter of credit, savings account or cash. Where security is required, the applicant shall deliver an estimate certified by a professional engineer for the complete construction of all improvements in compliance with the approved construction plans and specifications, design of the final plat, and the requirements of these regulations. 
(B)  Nature of security. The applicant shall deliver security in the amount of one hundred ten (110) per cent of the estimated construction costs of the improvements that such improvements will be built according to the final plat, and the requirements of these regulations, within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of recordation of the plat; provided, however, the city manager may, in his discretion, extend the due date for the completion of such construction an additional one hundred twenty (120) days for documented delays. The applicant will file security in the amount of fifty (50) per cent paving and drainage, and fifty (50) per cent of all other improvements, of the engineer's estimated cost of the initial security for maintenance of the improvements on completion. The applicant shall provide the city security as follows: (see section 70.63). 
(1)  The applicant shall deliver to the city a good and sufficient performance bond guaranteeing the construction of the subdivision improvements and that such improvements shall be free from defects in materials and workmanship. All bonds required by this section shall be issued from a company licensed as a surety in the State of Florida. The form of the bond submitted under this section shall be approved by the council and shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(2)  The applicant shall deliver to the city a good and sufficient letter of credit issued by a banking institution located in Brevard County in accordance with Exhibit 1 of this part that such improvements shall be free from defects in materials and workmanship. 
A letter of credit shall be accepted as security where the total cost of the subdivision improvements does not exceed five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). The applicant shall execute a performance agreement with the council and the bank or financial institution when a letter of credit, certificate of deposit or savings account is furnished as security. Any bond or letter of credit furnished the council shall contain an agreement that the surety or financial institution shall pay the council costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, if the council finds it necessary to commence legal action on the security. 
(3)  The applicant shall establish a savings account or provide a certificate of deposit in a bank or savings and loan institution in Brevard County. The savings account or certificate of deposit shall specify that payment to the City of Rockledge shall be made on the written demand of the city to the bank or institution and notice to the applicant that subdivision improvements have not been completed as required or that such improvements are not free from defects in materials or workmanship. 
(4)  In lieu of a surety on the payment and performance bond or on the maintenance bond herein required, and as an alternative to the payment and performance contract described in applicable sections of this Code, the developer may, subject to the terms and conditions herein set forth, secure such payment, performance or maintenance by an irrevocable letter of credit, certificate of deposit, savings account, or cash, delivered to the city contemporaneous with the execution and delivery of a written bond, assignment, security agreement, or escrow agreement in form and content acceptable to the city; provided, however, that only one of such forms of security will be accepted to secure a developer's entire construction and payment obligation, or maintenance obligation, with respect to any one development. Said bond, assignment, security agreement or escrow agreement shall by its terms expressly acknowledge and describe the developer's performance, payment or maintenance obligations, as the case may be, and provide that in the event of any breach or default by the developer in any of such obligations, as determined solely by the city, the city may obtain immediate and exclusive possession of the funds represented by the aforesaid security for the purpose of completing performance of the obligations of the developer. 
The following terms and conditions shall apply to the different forms of security as indicated below: 
(a)  Surety bonds. All terms and conditions prescribed in this section of the Rockledge Code, and in addition thereto, the bond shall contain an agreement that the principal and surety therein agree to pay the city all court costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city if the city commences legal action to enforce the terms of the bond. Any bond shall be issued by a company licensed as a surety in the State of Florida, listed by the U.S. Treasury Department, and rated AAAAA in Best Insurance Guide. The form of the bond submitted under this section shall be approved by the city and shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  Irrevocable letters of credit. Such will be accepted as security only if issued by a bank located in Brevard County, Florida, and if the face amount of any such letter of credit is not more than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). The developer shall execute a written agreement with the city authorizing the city to draw upon the letter of credit if the developer fails to fully and timely complete the performance, payment or maintenance obligations undertaken by the developer. Only one letter of credit shall be accepted as security for a developer's construction obligation, or maintenance obligation, with respect to a subdivision or development, and multiple, combined, partial or successive letters of credit to secure the construction of a single subdivision, or the maintenance thereof, will not be accepted. Letters of credit shall be in form and content substantially as set out in Exhibit 1 of this part. 
(c)  Certificates of deposit and savings accounts. Such shall be in account with a bank or savings and loan institution located in Brevard County, Florida. Said certificate or account shall be assigned by the owner to the city, or in blank, at the election of the city, and shall be delivered to the city contemporaneous with the execution and delivery to the city of a written performance, payment or maintenance agreement, as the case may be in, in form and content acceptable to the city, together with a written escrow agreement, collateral pledge or security agreement providing that in the event of any default in the developer's performance, payment or maintenance obligations, the city may negotiate the certificate or draw upon the savings account and utilize the funds therefrom to complete the obligations of the developer. The agreement shall contain a provision that the developer will pay all of the city's court costs and reasonable attorney's fees in any litigation arising out of any of said agreements of the developer. 
(5)  Payment and performance contract, alternate procedure. In instances wherein strict compliance with the requirements of applicable sections of this part of this Code will impose an undue financial hardship and burden upon the developer, the developer may apply to the city council for approval of a written payment and performance contract to be executed by the developer and lending institution and the city, which contract shall provide substantially as follows: 
(a)  That the developer warrants that it will timely construct, complete and pay for the improvements and utilities in accordance with the agreement referred to in applicable sections of this part of this Code. 
(b)  That the developer will be liable to the city for all costs of completing said improvements, including, but not limited to, engineering, legal and other costs which the city may sustain on account of the developer's default in completion of said improvements. In the event the city is required to commence legal proceedings for the collection of any monies which the city is entitled to receive under the terms of said payment and performance contract, interest shall accrue at the rate of eight (8) per cent per annum on the sums due the city beginning with the commencement of such legal proceedings. In the event the city commences suit for the collection of any such sums of money, the developer agrees to pay all costs incurred by the city, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(c)  That the lending institution agrees to the following: 
1.  To loan the developer sufficient money to complete said improvements, and to disburse the proceeds of said loan pursuant to a loan agreement approved by the city. 
2.  To withhold ten (10) per cent of each construction draw and requested payment until all improvements are completed and finally approved in writing by the city. 
3.  To make no loan disbursement on said account without the prior written approval of the city. 
4.  To make no loan disbursement until after the developer has furnished to the lending institution partial releases of lien properly executed by the persons to whom the monies to be disbursed are intended to be paid, in an amount equal to the disbursement requested, and a certified statement or bill of the particular contractor or subcontractor to whom the monies disbursed are due. 
5.  To make no loan disbursement on said account without first being furnished by the developer's consulting engineer with a certificate evidencing: 
a.  That the work has been done; 
b.  That the particular contractor or subcontractor is entitled to the said progress payment as billed; 
c.  That the city has inspected and approved and accepted that portion of the work; 
d.  That a ten (10) per cent holdback has been deducted; 
e.  That the undisbursed portion of the mortgage loan for improvements will be sufficient to pay in full all unpaid bills for work done and materials supplied in the construction and installation of the improvements, and the cost of all work and materials remaining to be done and supplied to fully complete the improvements. 
6.  To refrain from disbursing the cumulative ten (10) per cent holdback until all improvements have been completed and all work and materials incorporated therein have been fully paid for, completion of the work to be established [by]: 
a.  A certificate of the developer's consulting engineer to said effect; 
b.  The contractor's affidavit conforming to the requirements of the Florida Mechanic's Lien Law; 
c.  Full and complete releases of liens from each and every party who performed any work or supplied any materials in the construction and installation of the improvements or upon the lands involved in the development; 
d.  The acceptance in writing of the improvements by the City of Rockledge; 
e.  The acceptance and approval by the city in writing of a maintenance bond in accordance with applicable city ordinances; and, 
f.  Such other documents and papers as may be required by the city to satisfy itself that the improvements have been properly and fully completed and paid for, and that no person has any right or claim of lien upon said land for any work done. 
7.  If the developer shall fail to complete the improvements contemplated within the agreed time, and the lending institution does not elect in writing to complete said improvements within fifteen (15) days of request to complete same by the city, then and in that event, the lending institution will upon demand therefor in writing by the city disburse to the city in a lump sum all of the undisbursed funds remaining in said loan account, including the ten (10) per cent holdback, and the city shall thereupon be obligated to utilize said funds received from the lending institution toward completion of the improvements, and for no other purpose; provided, however, that the city shall be under no liability to the developer or the lending institution to continue to complete the improvements after the monies received from the lending institution as aforesaid have been exhausted toward that end. 
(d)  The city council shall not approve any payment and performance contract nor waive the bond requirements of this Code unless the following criteria are met to the satisfaction of the city council. 
1.  That the developer is solvent and will have "at risk" capital or equity in the development. 
2.  That the developer and its principals have a general reputation for responsible and reliable dealings. 
3.  That the lending institution is a corporate entity which is solvent and has a general reputation for responsible and reliable dealings. 
4.  If the lending institution is a foreign corporation, that it has obtained a permit to transact business in the State of Florida and has lawfully designated an agent in the State of Florida to accept service of process in behalf of such corporation. 
5.  That the official governing board of the lending institution has authorized by appropriate resolution the execution of the contract by its authorized agents for and in behalf of the corporation. 
6.  That neither the lending institution nor any of its principals have, within the immediate past five (5) years, been a party defendant in any litigation to enforce compliance with the terms and provisions of a development contract, or a payment bond, or a performance bond. 
7.  That neither the developer nor any of its principals have, within the immediate past five (5) years, been a party defendant in any litigation to enforce compliance with the terms and provisions of a development contract, or a payment bond, or a performance bond. 
(e)  The request for waiver of the bond requirements of this Code, and for approval of a payment and performance contract as herein described, shall be initiated by the developer and the lending institution completing and submitting to the city written applications on the prescribed forms hereinafter set forth to be supplied by the city. Said applications shall be executed under oath, and by an executive officer of any corporate applicant. In addition to completing the applications referred to above, the developer and the lending institution shall be required to furnish the city such additional information, and complete such additional forms, as the city may request or prescribe in order to obtain sufficient data and information to determine whether or not the interests of the city will be adequately protected with respect to the development described in the application. 
(f)  The form of application to be executed under oath by the developer shall be substantially as set out in Exhibit 1 of this section. 
(g)  The form of application to be executed under oath by the lending institution shall be substantially as set out in Exhibit 1 of this section. 
70.63. - Maintenance security. 
    Where a request is made for acceptance for maintenance by the city of public improvements, security for maintenance in the amount of twenty-five (25) percent of the construction cost of paving and drainage, and twenty-five (25) percent of the construction cost of all other public improvements, shall be posted with the city. The security shall provide that the city shall be indemnified if the applicant does not replace or fully repair any public improvements in the subdivision which are defective in materials or workmanship, or which were not constructed in compliance with approved plans and specifications, the design of said final plat, or the requirements of these regulations. The terms of the security shall provide that the security shall expire two (2) years from the date the improvement was accepted for maintenance by the city unless the city serves by mail to the applicant written notice that the improvements are defective in materials or workmanship or were not constructed in compliance with the approved plans and specifications, the design of said final plat, or the requirements of these regulations within the two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 33, 8-14-96) 
70.64. - Inspections. 
(a)  Generally. As the improvements are being constructed within the subdivision, the city staff and the city's engineer or consulting engineer or their representatives shall have the right and privilege to inspect and visit the tract for the purpose of ensuring that all improvements are being constructed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations and said approved construction plans and specifications. 
(b)  Notifications. The city's subdivision inspectors (public works, wastewater treatment, building department) or their authorized representative shall be specifically notified of the commencement and completion of the following items of construction so that an immediate inspection can be performed to assure construction in conformity with said approved construction plans and specifications and the requirements of these regulations: 
(1)  Drainage facilities, lift stations, and sanitary sewer lines, and all other appurtenances, prior to backfilling. 
(2)  Stabilized subgrade. 
(3)  Curb, base and concrete work. 
(4)  Roadway base. 
(5)  Surface course. 
(6)  Permanent reference monuments and permanent control points. 
The failure to notify the city's Department Heads or their designated representatives of the commencement and completion of the construction of such items may be good cause for the city's Department Heads to refuse to issue a certificate of completion. 
70.65. - Issuance of certificate of completion. 
(a)  Upon completion of construction of the improvements, the applicant or his authorized representative shall provide to the city's engineering coordinator the following items: 
(1)  A letter stipulating that construction of the improvements has been completed and requesting final inspection and approval. 
(2)  The testing reports and certificates of compliance from material suppliers specified in Part V of this Code. 
(3)  Three (3) sets of as-built construction plans. 
(4)  If a municipality is accepting a public water system, there must be a document indicating municipal acceptance of the construction of the water system. 
(5)  A document of Certificate of Completion (DER form 17-1,205(81) or as amended) must be presented to the city upon completion and final acceptance of construction of a sewer collection system. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the above items, the city's subdivision inspectors or their authorized representative shall review said data and make a final inspection of the constructed improvements and shall notify the applicant of any items of noncompliance with said construction with the design contained in the final plat, the approved construction plans and specifications and the provisions and requirements of these regulations. A certificate of completion shall be issued by the city when the construction of said improvements is completed in conformity with the design contained in the approved construction plans and specifications, and the provisions and requirements of these regulations. 
(c)  As-built information. 
(1)  The developer of a commercial or subdivision project shall be responsible for delivering a set of as-built plans to the city and proof of a final inspection approval by the Rockledge Public Works Department before a certificate of occupancy is granted. 
(2)  The as-built set of plans must bear the official seal of a currently registered professional engineer licensed by the State of Florida. 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, former § 20-119 of the Code of Ordinances has been included herein as subsection 70.65(c). 
70.66. - Time for construction of sidewalks. 
    No person shall occupy, inhabit or dwell in any structure on any lot or parcel of land in a subdivision until after the developer of the subdivision, or the owner of such lot or parcel of land, shall have first constructed and installed in the right-of-way of any public street or streets abutting such lot or parcel of land, and on the side of such street or streets nearest such lot or parcel of land, a sidewalk extending the entire distance that such lot or parcel of land abuts the public street or streets. The sidewalk shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications and requirements of these regulations applicable to the construction of sidewalks within subdivisions, and shall conform in all respects to the applicable portion of the plans and specifications for construction of public improvements in the subdivision submitted by the developer prior to approval of the plat by the governing body of the city. No certificate of occupancy shall be granted or issued for the occupancy of any structure on any lot, piece or parcel of land in a subdivision until after the sidewalk required by this section has been installed as herein required and finally inspected and approved by the Rockledge Building Official. 
70.67. - Extended time for construction of sidewalks. 
    The developer shall be responsible for constructing sidewalks and such sidewalks shall be installed prior to the final city inspection and approval of the public improvements in the subdivision as required for the issuance of a certificate of completion; provided, however, that a developer desiring to defer construction of the sidewalks until dwellings have been constructed on the subdivision lots may extend the time for construction of the sidewalks for a period of time not to exceed two (2) years from the date the subdivision has received its certificate of completion from the city, provided the subdivision developer shall, prior to final plat approval by the city council, obtain the city council's consent to such an extension and to the posting by the developer with the city of a bond or other form of security, hereinafter referred to as "performance security," in form and amount satisfactory to the city, guarantying and securing the developer's timely completion of construction of the sidewalks in accordance with city specifications, requirements and regulations. Such bond or security shall be in the amount of fifty (50) per cent of the estimated material and labor cost of constructing the sidewalks, such estimated cost being that set forth in the engineering estimate approved by the city. Said performance security shall be accompanied by a written sidewalk construction agreement executed and acknowledged by the developer in form and content satisfactory to the city and delivered to the city with the performance security before the subdivision receives its certificate of completion. The sidewalk construction agreement shall contain, but not in way of limitation, substantially the following provisions: 
(a)  That no part of said performance security shall be refunded to the developer until all sidewalks in the entire subdivision are constructed and completed in accordance with city specifications; 
(b)  That if said sidewalks are not completed by the developer or his designee within said two-year period, all performance security shall automatically stand forfeited to the city; 
(c)  That the developer shall be liable to the city for all costs, expenses and damages incurred and sustained by the city, including reasonable attorney's fees and court costs in the event of the developer's default in any provision of said sidewalk construction agreement; and 
(d)  In the event the developer fails to complete construction of the sidewalks and the performance security is forfeited, the city may elect to take all or any of the following actions: 
(1)  Complete construction of some or all of the sidewalks, utilizing city employees and materials. 
(2)  Contract for completion of the construction of some or all of said sidewalks. 
(e)  In the event the developer fails to complete the construction of the sidewalks within the required timeframe and all performance security is forfeited to the city, the city shall not be liable to any party to continue the sidewalk improvements after said performance security has been exhausted toward that end. 
(Ord. No. 1066-93, § 2, 10-6-93) 
SECTION 70.70. - SUBDIVISION SUBMITTAL AND PROCESSING PROCEDURE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 70.70 was originally unnumbered. The section number has been assigned by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. Provisions originally numbered as § 70.70 have been renumbered as § 70.71. 

70.71. - Step 1: Development plan review. 
    This step is a mandatory preapplication conference (contact the Rockledge Zoning Official). 
(a)  Required submittals: 
(1)  Development fact sheet; 
(2)  Development plan. 
(b)  Development plan review conference with department heads and city manager: Submittals must be made ten (10) days prior to conference date. 
(c)  Outcome: Applicant must get a development plan review statement (good for one hundred eighty (180) days). 
Note- See the editor's note to the title of § 70.70. 
70.75. - Step 2: Preliminary plat review. 
    This step follows the development plan review, and a completed Rockledge Development Fact Sheet and current development plan review statement are required before a preliminary plat can be accepted for review. Make all submittals to the subdivision inspector. 
(a)  Review process: 
(1)  Preliminary plat: Eight (8) copies. 
(2)  Preliminary engineering drawings: Two (2) copies. 
(3)  Covenants: A draft copy of proposed protective covenants, if any. 
(4)  Special permits: If dredge and fill or other special permits will be required. 
(5)  Concurrency review forms. 
(b)  Review process: 
(1)  Preliminary review conference: City departments will recommend for or against submittal of the preliminary plat to city council for review by the planning commission. 
(2)  Referral to planning commission: City council refers the preliminary plat to the Rockledge Planning Commission for review and recommendation. 
(3)  Planning commission public hearing: The planning commission takes action and forwards all comments and recommendations to the city council. 
(4)  City council consideration: The city council will consider recommendations at their next meeting. 
(c)  Outcome: 
(1)  Approval: An approved preliminary plat is obtained. 
(2)  Submittal of construction plans and specifications: After approval of the preliminary plat, and after the Department Heads have approved the preliminary engineering drawings, construction plans and specifications may now be submitted. 
70.80. - Step 3: Final plat review. 
    An approved preliminary plat is required prior to submitting a final plat for review. 
(a)  Required submittals: 
(1)  Final plat linen and eight (8) copies properly signed as to the dedication and certification. Joinder agreements shall accompany the linen plat. 
(2)  Certificate of ownership. 
(3)  Construction drawings and specifications properly signed and sealed (eight (8) copies). 
(4)  Engineer's letter of certification as to cost of entire construction. 
(5)  Agreement for construction, properly executed. 
(6)  Performance bond or other approved surety. 
(7)  Attorney's opinion or certification as to fee simple title and mortgage interests. 
(8)  Certificate of completion (if improvements are completed prior to recording.). 
(9)  Maintenance bond (if improvements are completed prior to recording). 
(10)  Certification of the plat by a professional land surveyor. 
(11)  Recommendation from the Department Heads. 
(12)  Dedication of improvements to the City of Rockledge. 
(13)  Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or two (2) per cent of the construction cost, whichever is greater, as a platting fee, is required to be paid to defray the cost to the city of legal, engineering, administrative and inspection fees. Not refundable. 
(14)  Developer shall pay to the City of Rockledge one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each concrete light pole, for the purpose of street lighting within said subdivision (Ordinance No. 210-67). 
(15)  Developer shall pay the cost of installation of street identification signs. 
(b)  Review process: 
(1)  Submit to the Building Official to have checked in and scheduled on the next agenda of the city council. 
(2)  Approval of documents by city council. 
(3)  If approved, the mayor will sign the plan linen. 
(4)  One hundred dollars ($100.00) to defray the cost for recording plat, copies of plat and travel expense. 
(5)  Proof of real estate taxes having been paid. 
(6)  Final plat recording with the clerk of the Brevard Court. 
70.85. - Step 4: Construction procedure. 
    [Construction procedure is as follows:] 
(a)  Construction plans and specifications shall be approved prior to the start of construction. 
(b)  Preconstruction conference with city staff. 
(c)  Construction of improvements. 
(d)  Final inspection of improvements. 
(e)  Developer shall submit maintenance bond and conveyance of utilities. 
(f)  Final acceptance of improvements. 
Part VIII - SPECIAL REGULATION/USES IN ZONING DISTRICTS 
SECTION 80.00. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 80.00 was originally unnumbered. The section number and title have been added by the editor to provide for uniformity in numbering. Provisions originally numbered as § 80.00 have been renumbered as § 80.00.1. 

80.00.1. - Accessory buildings and uses in residential areas. 
(1)  Accessory building shall be constructed simultaneously with or following the construction of the primary structure. 
(2)  Setbacks for accessory uses: 
(a)  Portable sheds of one hundred (100) square feet in area or less and not attached to a permanent base or slab may be installed not less than six (6) inches from a side or rear lot line, nor closer than ten (10) feet to a principal building on an adjoining lot. 
(b)  Accessory structures shall not be closer than seven and one-half (71/2) feet to a lot line; unless the property abuts a designated retention area recognized by the City of Rockledge; in which case the setback on the abutting side is reduced to six (6) inches, provided further, that the accessory structure may not be placed on an designated easement. 
(c)  No accessory structure shall be located forward of the front building line of the primary structure. 
(d)  All accessory structures in the defined historical districts of Valencia Road, Barton Avenue and Rockledge Drive may be placed seven and one-half (71/2)) feet from the property line, provided the applicant first obtains signed consent forms allowing the reduced setback from all adjoining property owners in accordance with the procedural guidelines of the administrative setback waiver provisions of Section 21.42. 
(e)  The side-corner setback for an accessory structure on a corner lot shall be the same as for the primary structure. If the property has a six (6) foot tall privacy fence, installed and maintained in compliance with Section 81.30(c) of these regulations, along the side corner property line, the setback may be reduced to fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, an accessory structure shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and may not occupy more than thirty-five (35) percent of a required rear yard. This provision does not apply to swimming pools. The height of an accessory structure shall be measured as the vertical distance from grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface. 
(4)  The height of an accessory structure may be increased, provided that the setback be increased two (2) feet for every one foot in increased height above twelve (12) feet. No accessory structure shall be taller than the maximum building height as allowed by the applicable zoning district regulations. 
(5)  The maximum allowable size of an accessory structure in any residential zoning district shall depend upon the lot size of the property on which the structure is located and shall be as follows: 
Lot Size *Maximum Building Area (floor area). Less than one acre 600 square feet floor area 1 acre or more, but less than 50 acres 3% of total lot area, maximum 5000 square feet floor area 50 acres or more Maximum of 7,500 square feet  
* Maximum building area is the aggregate total of all accessory structures on the lot. No single accessory structure shall exceed 2500 square feet in area, unless on a parcel of 50 acres or more. 
(Ord. No. 992-91, § 1, 2-6-91; Ord. No. 1098-95, § 11, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 1364-2004, §§ 8, 9, 12-1-04; Ord. No. 1436-2007, §§ 1, 2, 1-17-07; Ord. No. 1469-2007, § 1, 11-7-07) 
Note- See the editor's note to the title of § 80.00. 
80.00.2. - Portable storage units. 
    Structures which are constructed in whole, or in part, off of the property; are not built or attached to the property pursuant to a building permit; and are not licensed by the Florida Department of Motor Vehicles must meet the requirements set out in this section. These shall be deemed to be portable storage units without regard to the structures' actual use. 
(a)  Only one portable storage unit may be located on a property at any one time. The property owner or tenant may apply to the Rockledge Building Department for additional units, which shall be granted only if it is determined that such would not adversely impact the area in any way, and would comply with all other requirements of this section. 
(b)  A portable storage unit will not exceed eight (8) feet in height, eight (8) feet in width, and sixteen (16) feet in length. 
(c)  The property owner or tenant thereon shall notify the Rockledge Building Department in writing prior to the location of a portable storage unit on any property. Said notification must establish where the portable storage unit is to be located. The owner or tenant must receive prior approval of the Rockledge Building Department as to the location of the portable storage unit. 
(d)  A portable storage unit shall not be located in such a manner to impair a motor vehicle operator's view of vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic either on or off of the property. 
(e)  A portable storage unit shall not be located in such a manner to obstruct the flow of vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian traffic. 
(f)  A portable storage unit may have affixed to it no more than two (2), twelve (12) inch by eighteen (18) inch signs. 
(g)  A portable storage unit must have affixed to it by the unit's owner a tag indicating the most recent delivery date on which the portable storage unit was delivered to the property. 
(h)  If the National Weather Advisory Service or other qualified weather advisory service identifies weather conditions which are predicted to include winds of seventy-five (75) mph or greater, all portable storage units shall be removed from all properties and placed in approved storage locations at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the predicted onset of such winds or as soon as reasonably practical if less notice is provided. This requirement may be modified by the building official upon receipt of adequate documentation from a registered architect or engineer or other professional qualified to give such opinion that a greater wind loading pertain to a particular portable storage unit model or manufacturer so that the portable storage unit is unlikely to be moved by winds greater than the predicted winds. As an alternative to removal, the portable storage vendor may submit a tie-down proposal for approval by the building official and each portable storage unit not removed shall be tied down in the approved manner. 
(i)  Any portable storage unit which is not removed at the end of the time for which it may lawfully remain in place, or immediately upon the direction of a code enforcement officer for removal of such temporary structure for safety reasons, may be removed by the city immediately, without notice, and the cost of such removal may be assessed against the property on which the temporary structure was located and may be filed as a lien against such property by the city clerk. 
(j)  A portable storage unit may be placed upon property without permit, subject to the provisions of this section and any other applicable land development regulations as follows: 
1.  Residentially zoned property: A portable storage unit may be placed on residentially zoned property for four (4) days, no more than four (4) times per year. 
2.  Nonresidentially zoned property: A portable storage unit may be placed on nonresidentially zoned property for thirty (30) days, no more than four (4) times a year. 
3.  The Rockledge Building Department may allow portable storage units to be located on a property for a larger period of time than set out above in emergency situations, for fifteen (15) days, with the right to grant an additional fifteen (15) days extension if necessary to complete emergency repairs. 
(k)  The owner or tenant will not allow any living creature to reside within a portable storage unit, at any time, for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 1302-2003, § 1, 2-5-03) 
80.01. - Churches, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
A.  Purpose: This section shall control the development of churches, synagogues, mosques or other places of worship, including all affiliated activities, of all types, to ensure that the unique impact associated with such activities are addressed, while still allowing for a wide range of possible locations. 
(1)  Permitted use: Churches, temples, synagogues, mosques or other places of worship, including all affiliated activities shall be a permitted use within the following zoning districts: 
a.  C1-Neighborhood retain commercial. 
b.  C1A-Restricted commercial district. 
c.  C2-General commercial. 
d.  P2-Professional. 
e.  M1-General industrial. 
f.  M2-Light industrial and warehouse. 
g.  IP-Industrial park. 
h.  PUD-Planned unit development. 
(2)  Special exceptions: Special exceptions are not permitted. 
B.  Calculation of seating capacity: For the purpose of this regulation, a seat is defined as either: 
(1)  One individual fixed seat; or 
(2)  A length of eighteen (18) inches on a pew or bench; or 
(3)  A measurement of seven (7) square feet per person for the area seating the general assembly with movable chairs or other portable seating fixtures. The total area includes aisle space, but excludes areas such as stage and podium areas, space for musical instruments, and lobbies. 
C.  General development criteria: The following development criteria shall apply to places of worship and related activities without regards to the zoning district in which it is located or the permit under which the use is processed: 
(1)  Lighting for parking lot areas, structures, statuary and signage shall comply with the development regulations for parking, lighting and signs and the design standard as required in any commercial project in the City of Rockledge. 
(2)  The use shall comply with the parking regulations for assembly uses, except that in no event shall the parking be in excess of one space per three (3) seats in a residential zone. 
(3)  The storage of buses and vans over ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross weight is permitted on-site under the following conditions: 
(a)  The location of the parking areas for these vehicles is indicated on the site plan at the time of application. 
(b)  Vehicles must be leased or owned by the owner or tenant of the site, must be in operable condition, and must have a current vehicle registration. 
(c)  Vehicles shall not intrude into the public rights-of-way or obstruct sight visibility from any driveway. 
(d)  Structural and/or natural screening, as approved by the city, shall screen the vehicles from neighboring properties. The screening requirement or amount of screening may be eliminated or reduced in commercial and industrial zones to the extent that the storage of vehicles is treated uniformly with other uses in the same zoning district. 
(4)  A transportation management plan (TMP) shall be submitted for approval by the City of Rockledge. The TMP shall address the following: traffic control, parking management (including the mitigation of overflow parking into adjoining residential areas), and traffic movement to the arterial street system. In addition to on-site parking requirements, parking in excess of the maximum may be permitted on existing off-site satellite parking lots, subject to City of Rockledge approval of a joint use agreement. Off-site parking in residential zones shall be limited to lots shared with existing institutional uses, such as schools. 
(5)  The maximum height for separate structures on-site such as bell towers, crosses, statuary, or other symbolic religious icons shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(6)  The proposed structure(s) shall comply with the applicable design criteria for which the use is located. 
(7)  Additional standards are applicable to the use. The underlying zoning and size of the facility shall be determined if designs standards will be needed. 
D.  Development criteria for seating capacities in a residential zoning district: 
(1)  Places of worship with seating capacity of less than two hundred fifty (250) seats; 
(a)  The facility shall be located within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet, as measured along the centerline of the right-of-way, of an arterial road (minor or principal); 
(b)  The facility shall be located on a paved road having two (2) lanes with a minimum width equal to the public works standard for a local access street; 
(c)  Buildings shall maintain a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet from all property lines; building setbacks shall be increased by five (5) feet for every one foot in building height over thirty (30) feet; 
(d)  The maximum building height does not exceed fifty (50) feet inclusive of steeples, bell towers, crosses, or other symbolic religious icons; 
(e)  The minimum lot size shall be the same as that required in the zoning district in which the proposed facility is located; 
(f)  The maximum lot coverage of structures may not exceed thirty-five (35) percent; total impervious surfaces may not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of lot area; 
(g)  No more than two (2) large vehicles in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross weight each may be stored on-site at a given period of time; and 
(h)  Structures, parking lots and lighting shall be designed to avoid excessive light and glare impacts on adjacent properties. Restrictions on light pole height and type, deflectors and other such measures may be required as necessary to prevent overspill and excessive intensity of light. 
(2)  Places of worship with a seating capacity between two hundred fifty (250) to seven hundred fifty (750): 
(a)  The proposed facility must be located adjacent to at least one arterial road (collector, minor or principal); 
(b)  Buildings shall maintain a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet from all property lines; 
(c)  The maximum building height may not exceed fifty (50) feet, inclusive, of steeples, bell towers, crosses, or other symbolic religious icons. However, building setbacks shall be increased five (5) feet for every one foot in building height over thirty (30) feet; 
(d)  The maximum lot coverage of structures may not exceed thirty-five (35) percent; total impervious surfaces may not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the lot area; and 
(e)  No more than two (2) large vehicles in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross weight each may be stored on-site at a given period of time. 
E.  Development criteria for seating capacities in a commercial or industrial zoning district: 
(1)  Places of worship with a seating capacity between five hundred (500) to two thousand (2,000) seats. Site development shall comply with the general standards for the zone in which it is located with the exception of the following: 
(a)  The proposed facility must be located adjacent to at least one arterial road (minor or principal); 
(b)  The maximum building height permitted is fifty (50) feet. An additional allowance of fifteen (15) feet for a steeple, bell tower, cross, or other symbolic religious icon is permitted. Building setbacks shall be increased five (5) feet for every one foot in building height over forty-five (45) feet; 
(c)  Accessory/stand-along parking facilities are prohibited; 
(d)  Primary and secondary schools are permitted as a related or accessory use; 
(e)  The proposed structure(s) shall comply with the applicable design standards contained in the zoning district; 
(f)  Lighting for parking lot areas, structures and statuary shall comply with the development regulations for parking and lighting and with the design standards set forth in each zoning district. 
(2)  Places of worship with a seating capacity greater than two thousand (2,000) seats: 
(a)  The proposed facility must be located adjacent to at least one arterial road (collector, minor or principal); 
(b)  Site development shall comply with the general standards for the zone in which it is located with the exception of the following: The maximum building height permitted is fifty (50) feet. An additional allowance of fifteen (15) feet is allowed for a steeple, bell tower, cross, or other symbolic religious icon. Building setbacks shall be increased five (5) feet for every one foot in building height over forty-five (45) feet; 
(c)  Accessory/stand-alone parking facilities are prohibited; 
(d)  Primary and secondary schools are permitted as a related or accessory use; and 
(e)  Lighting for parking lot areas, structures and statuary shall comply with the design criteria set forth in each zoning district. 
F.  Day care centers and schools uses: Day care centers and schools are grandfathered to existing uses in all zoning districts; however, no expansion will be allowed except for those having commercial or industrial zoning classifications. The placement of all new day care centers and schools will only be allowed if it is a permitted use in that zoning district in which the church is located. Parking licensing standards will be the same as any other commercial day care facility. 
G.  Food distribution centers for the needy: Place of worship food distribution centers are allowed in all zoning categories that have restaurants as a permitted use. All other existing food distribution centers in the city shall have the following restrictions: 
(1)  No more than twenty (20) meals may be served in a twenty-four-hour period. 
(2)  The place of religious assembly can physically provide an indoor eating area meeting all state, county and city codes for the proposed use. 
(3)  No food distribution center for the needy may be closer than one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet from any other food distribution center for the needy, nor shall the place of worship have more than one food distribution center on each property. 
(4)  Each food distribution center shall provide information to the city manager addressing the following issues. 
(a)  Hours of operations; 
(b)  Personnel operating the facility; 
(c)  Management of solid waste, litter and lighting; 
(d)  Parking requirements; 
(e)  The name, address and phone number of the person responsible. 
(5)  Signage for food distribution centers for the needy shall be limited to two wall-mounted, non-illuminated signs displaying the name of the facility, hours of operation and other functional information or directions. No more than one sign shall be displayed on any building face. No sign shall exceed eighteen (18) square feet, nor shall the total combined area for two signs exceed thirty (30) square feet. 
H.  Residences for destitute people (homeless shelters): Place of worship homeless shelters are allowed only where the existing zoning district allow hotels and/or motels. Each place of worship homeless shelter shall be restricted to the following: 
(1)  The total number of beds in any one facility is fifteen (15). 
(2)  Meals may be provided only to residents. 
(3)  No one over the age of eighteen (18) may be admitted as a resident without first having been verified by the police department that that person has no outstanding warrants for his or her arrest. 
(4)  Each homeless shelter shall provide information to the city manager addressing the following issues: 
(a)  Hours of operations; 
(b)  Personnel operating the facility; 
(c)  Management of solid waste, litter and lighting; 
(d)  Parking requirements; 
(e)  The name, address and phone number of the person responsible. 
(5)  Each homeless shelter must provide an indoor area meeting all state, county and city codes for the use of homeless shelters. The area must be inspected and approved by the building official prior to being used as a homeless shelter facility, either on a temporary or recurring basis. 
(6)  There must be at least one staff person or volunteer on site and the director or administrator on call whenever anyone is occupying the facility. 
Combined facilities (food distribution and homeless shelter) are allowed provided the zoning classification allows for both uses and the restrictions noted above are met. 
Development plan approval is the same process for all commercial site plan submittals. 
I.  Pre-existing properties used for religious purposes: Those properties on which all or a portion is utilized in the exercise of religion, whether churches, temples, synagogues or other types of like institutions, which had been pre-existing before the effective date of this ordinance, shall be deemed a pre-existing non-conforming use to which the provisions of this section will not apply. Should thereafter fifty (50) percent or more of the building be replaced or repaired (not to include re-roofing or general period maintenance) after such date, then the entire property will become subject to the effects of this section. 
J.  Waiver of alcoholic beverage restriction: Should the construction of a house of worship, or one of its affiliated uses, be within two hundred (200) feet of a neighboring property, which at the time of such construction, under existing land development regulation, would invoke the provisions of Sections 80.08 (a), (b) and (c) of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations, or other regulation which would act to prohibit licensed sale of alcoholic beverages due to the construction, then said provision is deemed waived by the house of worship, or its affiliated use, in favor of the neighboring property and shall not act to prohibit the licensed sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 27, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1379-2005, § 3, 6-1-05; Ord. No. 1531-2009, § 2, 9-23-09) 
80.02. - Guardhouses. 
(a)  "Guardhouse" shall mean a structure designed, built or used exclusively for the shelter and on-duty accommodation of persons engaged in the protection, guarding and security of persons and property, so long as same is not utilized as a residence. 
(b)  Upon specific approval by the city council of an application for a building permit to construct a guardhouse within the city and issuance of a building permit therefor, a guardhouse may be constructed within any zoning district in the city. 
(c)  Any person or party desiring to construct any guardhouse within the city shall apply to the building official for a permit therefor. Such application shall meet all requirements of applications for building permits in the city and shall be accompanied by a building permit fee required by this Code for commercial structures. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the application, filing fee and planning commission recommendations, the city council shall, as soon as practicable, either approve and authorize issuance of the permit or deny the same. In the event the permit is authorized, the building official shall issue a permit for such guardhouse. 
(e)  No guardhouse shall be utilized until the same has passed all city inspections and received all certificates and permits as provided by the Rockledge building code. 
(f)  When any guardhouse has ceased to be used for such purpose, as herein defined, and the same does not meet all setback, square footage, electrical, plumbing and other requirements of this Code for issuance of a building permit as a principal use, accessory use or conditional use in the zoning district where such building is located, it shall be removed at the owner's expense unless the city council shall authorize the continued use thereof as a conditional use. 
(g)  If any property owner required to remove a guardhouse under the provisions of paragraph (f) of this section shall fail to do so within sixty (60) days after notice has been given to the owner of such building, the city may remove the same and charge, assess and collect the expenses thereof against the real property upon which the building was located. Such assessment shall be created and be a lien against the property upon which the building was located, subject only to the lien for taxes due the city and the state. Such assessment shall bear interest at the maximum legal rate and shall constitute a lien upon the property from the date of the assessment and shall be collectible in the same manner as liens for taxes and with the same attorneys' fees, interest and penalties for default in payment, and under the same provisions as to sale and forfeiture, as apply to other city taxes. Collection of such assessment, with such interest and with a reasonable attorney's fee, may also be made by the city council by a proceeding in a court of equity to foreclose the lien of the assessment in the manner in which a lien for mortgages is foreclosed under the laws of Florida, and it shall be lawful to join in any complaint for foreclosure any one or more lots or parcels of land, by whomever owned, if assessed under the provisions of this section. The property subject to lien may be redeemed by the owner at any time prior to sale by paying the total amount due under such lien including interest, court costs, advertising costs and reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(h)  Mobile homes or trailers may not be used as a guardhouse. 
80.03. - Home occupations. 
    Every home occupation shall be conducted in such a manner that the operations and activities of the home occupation cannot be seen nor observed by passersby, neighbors or persons outside the residence where such home occupation is being conducted. A home occupation shall not create, cause or produce any by-product, noise, scene, odor or other effect whatsoever that may be detected by the human senses from outside the residence building where such home occupation is being conducted, or which will in any way detract from the residential character and property value of the area, or adversely affect the health, safety, morals, comfort or welfare of the residents of said area. 
(A)  Specific requirements. Home occupations may be conducted when permitted in residential districts under the following provisions: 
(1)  There shall be no display of goods or advertising visible from any street. 
(2)  There shall be no customer traffic to or from the premises. 
(3)  No home occupation shall occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the first floor area of the total area, exclusive of any open porch or attached garage or similar space not suited or intended for occupancy as living quarters. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of any other story shall be used for a home occupation. 
(4)  No home occupation shall be conducted in an accessory building, but must be conducted in the residence of the proprietor. 
(5)  No person except two (2) members of the immediate family who reside on the premises shall be employed in any home occupation. 
(6)  No electric motor having greater than one-third ( 1/3 ) horsepower rating shall be used in the conduct of any home occupation, and the total combined rating of such permitted electric motors shall not exceed one horsepower. 
(7)  All motors and equipment used in the conduct of any home occupation shall be shielded so as not to cause radio or television interference. 
(8)  Fabrication of articles such as are commonly classified under the terms "arts" and "handicrafts" may be deemed a home occupation; and the operation of a business referral service which does not involve the transfer of any commercial products or tangible personal property at the homesite, nor the storage of same at such site, may be deemed a home occupation, subject to the terms and conditions of these regulations. 
(9)  Occupations at a homesite may qualify for a home occupation permit if the service rendered does not involve the customer's presence at the homesite at any time (for example, where the service is performed by telephone, fax, computer, or an electronically generated product-actual work is performed at the homesite, and the customer is not present at the homesite at any time before, during or after rendition of the service.) 
(10)  The preparation at a homesite of certain commodities and products (such as clothing items by a seamstress, novelty items by a craftsperson, video editing of video cassettes by a photographer, and computer software design) may qualify for a home occupation permit provided the preparation of any such commodity or product does not involve the customer's presence at the homesite at any time, and the commodity or product is delivered to the customer or otherwise disposed of at locations other than the homesite. 
(B)  Prohibited occupations. The following businesses and occupations are expressly prohibited as home occupations in any residential district: 
(1)  Barbershops. 
(2)  Beauty shops. 
(3)  Public dining facilities, including restaurants, tea rooms and the like. 
(4)  Antique or gift shops. 
(5)  Fortune-telling or clairvoyance. 
(6)  Repair shops, excepting fine watch repair. 
(7)  Any use involving the use of chemicals or matter of energy that may create or cause to be created noises, noxious odors or hazards dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(8)  All retail and wholesale business with on-site point of sale. 
(9)  All other businesses with customer traffic to and from the premise. 
(10)  Food processing plants. 
(11)  Commercial kennels. 
(12)  Professional, real estate or insurance offices. 
(C)  Procedure for obtaining a permit: 
(1)  Any person desiring to conduct a home occupation in a district where such home occupation is permitted shall apply to the City for a permit therefor. Such application shall be on a form provided by the City, and shall include, but not by way of limitation, the following information: 
(a)  Name of applicant. 
(b)  Location of residence where the home occupation, if approved, will be conducted. 
(c)  Total floor area of the first floor of the residence. 
(d)  Area of room or rooms to utilized in the conduct of the home occupation. 
(e)  A sketch showing the floor plan and the area thereof to be utilized for the conduct of the home occupation. 
(f)  The nature of the home occupation sought to be approved. 
(2)  Submittal of the "home occupation conditions, and affidavit of agreement." The affidavit must be signed by the applicant and notarized. 
(3)  The applicant must petition the Rockledge City Council, who shall refer the application to the planning commission of the city for its study and recommendations, and within fifteen (15) days after such referral the planning commission shall report its recommendation pertaining to the application to the city council in writing. The report of the planning commission shall state the specific reasons and findings of fact upon which its recommendation is based. As soon as practicable after receipt of the planning commission's report and recommendation aforesaid, the city council shall at a regular meeting consider the application for home occupation permit together with the planning commission's report and recommendation thereon and the city council shall either deny or authorize the issuance of the permit, and in the event the permit is authorized, the city manager shall then issue a permit for such home occupation. Written notice of the time and place of the regular meeting at which the city council will consider the application for such home occupation permit and consider the report and recommendation of the planning commission shall be given to the owners of all property situated within a radius of five hundred (500) feet from the property described in the application for the home occupation permit. 
(4)  If the application for the home occupation permit purports to be accompanied by the "home occupation conditions, and affidavit of agreement," a filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid at the time of filing of the application. If the Rockledge Building Official determines that the applicant is entitled to administrative issuance of the home occupation permit, no further filing fee shall be required. If the Rockledge Building Official determines that the application fails to qualify for administrative issuance, the applicant shall be given the option of either withdrawing the application, or appealing the building official's determination, or proceeding to have the application with the provisions of subsection (3) of this section. If the application is withdrawn no part of the filing fee shall be refunded, and said fee shall be retained by the city to defray its administrative costs and expenses. If the applicant elects to either appeal the building official's determination, or elects to proceed to have the application heard by the city council, the fifty dollars ($50.00) filing fee previously paid by the applicant shall be credited pro tanto as part of the required filing fee for the appeal or proceeding before the city council. 
(5)  Any home occupation permit may be revoked by the City Council at any time the City Council determines that the home occupation has become a public nuisance or the holder of the permit has violated any of the restrictions, conditions or requirements imposed upon the holder by the Rockledge City Council or by any provision of this Code. 
(6)  Restrictions, conditions and requirements applicable to home occupations may be enforced by either proceedings before the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board, revocation of the home occupation permit by the City Council and the simultaneous revocation of the occupational permit for the home occupation, or by suit for injunctive relief. 
(7)  If an application for a home occupation permit is denied by the City Council, no application for substantially the same home occupation permit on the same premises shall be accepted or acted upon by the City Council within twelve (12) months from the date of such last denial. 
(Ord. No. 1017-91, §§ 1, 2, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 1153-97, § 12, 12-17-97) 
80.04. - Service stations. 
    Within the districts permitting automobile service stations, the following requirements shall apply: 
(a)  Location. The property on which an automobile service station is located shall not be within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any residential district or any property containing a school, public playground, church, hospital, public library or institution for children or dependents. 
(b)  Site requirements. An automobile service station shall have a minimum frontage on the primary street of one hundred twenty (120) feet and a minimum area of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. All buildings shall be set back forty (40) feet from all street right-of-way lines and all canopies shall be set back fifteen (15) feet from all street right-of-way lines. 
(c)  Access to site. Vehicular entrances or exits at an automobile service station: 
(1)  Shall not be provided with more than two (2) curb cuts for the first one hundred twenty (120) feet of street frontage or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Shall contain an access width along the curbline of the street of not more than forty (40) feet as measured parallel to the street at its narrowest point and shall not be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a street intersection along an arterial or collector street and no closer than fifty (50) feet to a street intersection on a local street, or closer than ten (10) feet to the adjoining property. 
(3)  Shall not have any two (2) driveways or curb cuts any closer than twenty (20) feet at both the right-of-way line and the curb or edge of the pavement along a single street. 
(4)  All gasoline pump islands shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way lines, or where a future widening line has been established, the setback line shall be at least sixty (60) feet from the center line of a collector street and forty-five (45) feet from the center line of other streets. 
(d)  Limitations. Uses permissible at a service station do not include body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in service stations. A service station is not a repair garage or a body shop. 
80.06. - Utility structures. 
    Structures or uses required for public utilities such as gas, water, electric, sewage or telephone can be located within any district upon recommendation of the planning commission and approval of the city council. 
80.06.1. - DCA approved modular units used as temporary office or classroom. 
    A permit to use modular units as a temporary office or classroom may be granted by the Rockledge City Council subject to the following conditions, limitations, regulations and restrictions: 
(1)  Approval for temporary office or classroom shall not exceed two (2) years, unless specifically authorized by city council. 
(2)  The use of such structures for temporary office or classroom shall be allowed only as an accessory use in conjunction with an existing principle structure and the use allowed as a principle use or special exception as granted by that particular zoning district. 
(3)  The applicant shall submit to the building official a site plan showing where the temporary office or classroom will be placed on site. The applicant shall also submit tie-down plans and engineering specifications for the structure. 
(4)  Such structure must be screened from all adjacent road right-of-way or placed behind the principle structure, away from the road right-of-way. It shall be completely screened by an appropriate shield such as fencing, trees, berm, wall or other device sufficient to prevent the unit or any part thereof from being seen by any person upon any public road, street, alley, easement, highway or thoroughfare. It shall conform to the standards of section 62.75(d) of this Code. 
(5)  The required parking must be provided pursuant to Section 55.00 of these regulations. 
(6)  Such structures shall be considered commercial in nature and must meet the commercial setback requirements when proposed to be along any residential property lines. 
(7)  All sewer connection and tap fees must be paid before receiving a permit, if the temporary unit is removed the city shall credit any additional building on the property in question, with those fees paid. If the sewer connection fee increases in the future those additional fees will not be charged to those credited water closets or urinal connections. 
(8)  At a minimum the use must meet the building setback requirements for a principal structure as required in the district in which the facility is located. 
(9)  All temporary modular units must be department of community affairs approved and certified based upon the occupancy classification for which they are intended to be used. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 29, 8-20-97) 
80.07. - Temporary field office during construction. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, a modular unit or trailer may be used as a temporary construction field office at a development project after obtaining a permit from the Rockledge Building Department and complying with the requirements stated below. Any such permit shall be for a period of time not to exceed six (6) months from date of issuance of the permit, at the end of which time such permit may be renewed for an additional period not to exceed six (6) months. After a permit has been issued a trailer or modular unit may be moved from its initially approved location to a new location within the same development project provided the new location is first approved by the building official, and the new location of the trailer or modular unit is not within two hundred (200) feet of an existing home. 
(b)  The following conditions, regulations and restrictions shall apply to any permit issued for use of a modular unit or trailer as a temporary construction field office: 
(1)  No outside storage shall be allowed. 
(2)  The size of the office shall not exceed twelve (12) feet by thirty (30) feet. 
(3)  The temporary field office shall not be placed or maintained within two hundred (200) feet of an existing dwelling. 
(4)  Only one temporary field office shall be allowed for each contractor actively building on the site or subdivision. 
(5)  All temporary field offices shall be removed when ninety (90) percent of the subdivision or building project is completed. 
(6)  A renewal permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid when any expired permit is renewed. 
(7)  A relocation fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid with any application for a permit to relocate an existing temporary field office to a new location. 
(8)  Temporary field offices shall be separated by a distance of two hundred (200) feet. 
(9)  A port-o-let toilet facility must be maintained on the project site in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(10)  No temporary construction field office shall be used as a sales office, or for sales purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1032-92, § 1, 2-19-92) 
80.07.1. - Temporary construction trailers or structures. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation may obtain a permit from the building official, subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in Section 80.07 of this Code for the construction and/or use of a temporary trailer or structure to be used as a construction shed and tool house for contractors and construction workers on the site. This temporary trailer or structure shall not be placed or erected on the property prior to the issuance of a development order for the applicable construction project, and shall be immediately removed upon the completion of the construction project or upon the expiration of a period of one year, whichever comes sooner, from the date of issuance of the development order for the project. The building official shall have the authority to designate an exact location where the construction trailer or structure shall be located. It shall be a violation of this section for said construction trailer or structure to be located at a place on the property other than that designated or approved by the building official. 
(b)  No such temporary construction trailer or structure shall be used as a sales office or for sales purposes. 
(c)  Construction trailers or structures shall not be used for the purpose of living quarters, and said trailers or structures shall have upon the unit, or attached thereto, an identification sign designating the owner or company and the words "construction office" in full view. 
(d)  Temporary living quarters (recreational vehicle or camper) during construction. City council may grant occupation of temporary living quarters at an established residential address once a primary structure has been ruled uninhabitable as determined by the building official due only to an act of God or catastrophic occurrences. The applicant for temporary living quarters must comply with the following provisions listed below: 
(1)  Permit for temporary living quarters (TLQ) will only be valid for a period of three (3) months, with the potential to extend the permit for an additional three (3) months with the approval of the city council. 
(2)  Permit will only be issued once a building permit for the rehabilitation of the primary structure has been issued. 
(3)  TLQ must be connected to address assigned potable water and sewer systems, along with being metered by the electrical utility company with a temporary power pole. 
(4)  TLQ must not block any sidewalk or city right-of-way. 
(5)  Only one (1) TLQ will be allowed per residential address. 
(6)  TLQ must be removed within forty-eight (48) hours of receiving a certificate of occupancy for the primary structure. 
(7)  Once the TLQ has been installed on the property, the Rockledge Building Office shall, and from time to time during the occupancy of the TLQ, inspect the quarters to insure all applicable code provisions (electrical, water, etc.) are in compliance at the TLQ. The building official shall also inspect to insure the TLQ remains habitable and complies with minimum health standards. 
(8)  Should the temporary quarters fail to pass any building official inspection called for in paragraph (7) of this subsection, the building official may cite the owner, setting out the defects and a period of time to bring the TLQ into compliance or, in his sole discretion, recommend to the city manager that the TLQ be removed. 
(9)  The city manager shall have the authority to direct the immediate removal of any TLQ found in a building official's inspection to fail applicable code standards. The notice to remove shall be in writing and delivered to the owner or posted on the TLQ. The city council may review such notices to remove the TLQ upon written request by the owner delivered to the city manager, who shall place same on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the city council. 
(10)  Any violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be enforced by code enforcement procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1032-92, § 1, 2-10-92; Ord. No. 1547-2010, § 1, 5-5-10) 
80.07.2. - Temporary sales offices. 
    A permit to use a model home, modular unit, mobile home, or trailer as a temporary sales office for commercial properties and residential subdivisions may be granted by the Rockledge City Council subject to the following conditions, limitations, regulations, and restrictions: 
(1)  Model homes in subdivisions. 
a.  No such sales office may be used as living quarters. 
b.  No such permit will be granted unless the owner of the property has duly obtained from the City a development order for the ongoing development project for which the sales office is to be used, and is in compliance with all building and development regulations of the City. 
c.  Any model home to be used as a temporary sales office shall be built to the standards and regulations of Rockledge Land Development Regulations. 
d.  Any model home used as a temporary sales office for a subdivision project shall provide one parking space for each ten (10) lots within the subdivision, on an improved surface that is of a pervious nature on-site. When the model home is sold, the parking lot area will be restored and resodded. 
e.  No permit shall be issued for use of a model home as a temporary sales office until the developer has first obtained a certificate of occupancy for said model home. 
f.  Before any model home used as a temporary sales office is sold for residential purposes the owner or developer of the project will convert the garage, sidewalk and driveway of the model home to match other existing homes within the subdivision and meet all other requirements of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations. 
g.  Not more than a maximum of two (2) flags may at any one time be displayed simultaneously on the premises of any model home used as a temporary sales office, and such flags shall contain no advertising or message other than the words "model" or "open house." 
h.  The permit for the model home sales office will automatically expire when construction of homes has been completed and certificates of occupancy issued for ninety (90) of the buildable lots in the subdivision. 
(2)  Trailers and modular units in subdivisions. 
a.  Trailers and modular units utilized as temporary sales offices shall be placed on a lot within the subdivision, and meet all setback requirements of the zoning district. 
b.  The application for the permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing where the temporary sales trailer or modular unit will be placed. 
c.  The application for the permit will include a description of how and where sanitary facilities will be available to the trailer or modular unit. 
d.  A permit for use of a trailer or modular unit as a temporary sales office shall be effective for a period of six (6) months from date of issuance. At expiration of the initial six (6) month term a permit may be renewed by the Rockledge Building Official for an additional term not exceeding six (6) months provided that at the time of any such renewal the owner or developer must first demonstrate to the city that no residential unit has been constructed within a distance of two hundred (200) feet from the temporary sales office, failing which to do no renewal shall be granted unless the temporary sales office is moved to a different location meeting the requirements of this Code and which new location is not within two hundred (200) feet of any existing residential unit. 
e.  The grounds on which the trailer or modular unit is located shall be landscaped. The trailer or modular unit shall be skirted and the wheels on the trailer shall remain affixed at all times. 
f.  For each temporary sales trailer or modular unit the owner or developer of the project shall provide one parking space for each ten (10) lots within the subdivision, on an improved surface that is of a pervious nature on-site. When the trailer or modular unit is moved the parking lot area will be restored and sodded. 
g.  Not more than one flag may be displayed on the premises of any temporary sales trailer or modular unit, and such flag shall contain no advertising or message other than the words "sales office." 
h.  The permit for the temporary sales trailer or modular unit will automatically expire when construction of homes has been completed and certificates of occupancy issued for ninety (90) percent of the buildable lots in the subdivision. 
(3)  Trailers, modular units, or mobile homes for commercial projects. 
a.  Trailers, modular units or mobile homes utilized for sales office purposes in commercial projects shall be placed on a lot within the project and meet all setback requirements of the zoning district. 
b.  The applicant shall submit to the building official a site plan showing where the temporary sales trailer, modular unit or mobile home will be placed, and it shall not be placed along any residential property lines. 
c.  The application for the permit will describe how and where sanitary facilities will be available to the trailer, modular unit or mobile home. 
d.  Temporary sales trailers, modular units, or mobile homes are limited to the time they may stay within a commercial project boundary. The trailer, modular unit or mobile home shall be removed within six (6) months from the date of issuance of the permit, however the developer may apply to the Rockledge City Council for a renewal permit for an additional period of time not to exceed six (6) months. After the initial permit is issued, a trailer, modular unit or mobile home may be moved from its original approved location to a new location within the commercial project on only one occasion, provided the new location is first approved in writing by the building official and the trailer, modular unit or mobile home remains distanced from residential property. 
e.  The trailer or mobile home shall maintain a clean appearance at all times and the wheels shall remain affixed thereto at all times. 
f.  Temporary sales trailers, modular units or mobile homes shall have adequate parking on an improved surface that is of a pervious nature on-site. When the trailer, modular unit or mobile home is moved, the parking lot area will be restored in accordance with the original approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 1032-92, § 2, 2-19-92) 
80.08. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises is permissible for licensed restaurants, regardless of the distance from a single-family zoning district, church or school board-owned facility, and shall not be restricted beyond the provisions of the Administrative Code of the City of Rockledge. Designated outdoor areas that allow the consumption of alcohol must comply with provisions of subsection (b). 
(b)  The sale of alcohol for consumption on premises (bars and non-restaurant facilities that sell beer, wine, liquor, whiskey, or other alcoholic beverages) shall be prohibited in a building any part of which is located within a radius of two hundred (200) feet from any point on any property line of real property in a single-family residential zoning district, or any church, school or school-board-owned athletic field that is being used for such purposes. Real property used for a church, school, or school board-owned athletic facility may waive the provisions of this section in writing. Such waiver shall not prohibit the use of real property for a church, school, or school board-owned athletic facility. Once waived by a church, school, or school board-owned athletic facility, this section shall not thereafter be reasserted with respect to the same establishment. 
(c)  Package stores, grocery stores and convenience markets that sell alcohol for off-site consumption only, regardless of the distance from a single-family zoning district, church or school board-owned facilities, shall not be restricted beyond the provisions of the Administrative Code of the City of Rockledge. 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 1, 6-15-94; Ord. No. 1507-2008, § 1, 10-15-08) 
80.09. - Security guard quarters. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this paragraph: 
(1)  Interior security guard quarters shall mean a "one unit apartment," as defined in these regulations, to be used exclusively as living accommodations for a security guard and his or her spouse, if any, which quarters are totally enclosed within the principal building or an accessory building located in either an M1, M2 or IP zoning district, and which quarters and the use thereof meet all of the standards and requirements hereinafter set forth. Interior security guard quarters will be allowed in C-2 zoning districts with the approval of a special exception. Property zoned C-1 may apply for a special exception, but may only have interior security quarters within an existing principal building on-site. 
(2)  Mobile home, used as security guard quarters, shall mean a "mobile home" as defined in subsection 1.95 (219) of this Code. 
(3)  Security guard shall mean a person whose sole purpose for being upon the premises and quarters is to safeguard and protect the property and personnel of the entity conducting business activities at such location. An owner, tenant or other person having a proprietary interest in the business conducted on said premises, or in property located on said premises, shall be deemed a security guard when occupying security guard quarters in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Conditions governing placement and uses of security guard quarters. Security guard quarters may be constructed, placed, maintained and occupied as living quarters for a security guard under the following restrictions, regulations, limitations and conditions, all of which must be complied with simultaneously and concurrently at all times: 
(1)  The maximum size of security guard quarters shall be four hundred (400) square feet of habitable area. 
(2)  Said quarters shall meet the minimum of the Standard Housing Code requirements and consist of the following: one bedroom, living room, bathroom and kitchen/dining room, and all entrances or exits shall be located within the rear half of the structure. 
(3)  Security guard quarters shall conform to all applicable standards, requirements and restrictions of building and housing codes in force and effect in the City of Rockledge, and shall contain kitchen and toilet facilities for the exclusive use of the occupant of said quarters. 
(4)  At any given time said quarters shall not be occupied by more than one security guard and his or her spouse, if any, and in no event by more than two (2) persons. 
(5)  No person occupying said quarters shall permit anything to exist outside of said quarters and on such premises to indicate or give the appearance of personal residency or habitation on said premises; that is to say, no furniture, furnishings, appliances, fixtures, clothesline, personal garbage container, vehicles or recreational equipment for the personal use of any person occupying said quarters shall be kept or maintained in any yard or exterior portion of any premises where said quarters are located, except two (2) private vehicles for the transportation of the person or persons occupying the quarters. 
(6)  Security guard quarters may be constructed, placed and occupied on premises located in M1, M2, or IP zoning districts, or on premises used as a church, recreational facility, or by a governmental agency. 
(7)  Not more than one such security guard quarters shall be permitted on any individually owned business site or premises used as a church or recreational facility, or by a government agency. 
(c)  Additional conditions governing use of mobile homes as security guard quarters. A mobile home may be placed, maintained and occupied as living quarters for a security guard only on the premises as hereinafter described under the following restrictions, regulations, limitations and conditions, all of which must be complied with simultaneously and concurrently at all times: 
(1)  The mobile home shall at all times be connected to either a sewer system or septic tank approved by the Brevard County Health Department, shall be connected to a source of potable water and electrical current, and meet all state, county, and city health requirements. 
(2)  The mobile home shall be so situated on the premises as to comply with all yard setback requirements. 
(3)  A cleared, clean, unobstructed grassy yard shall be kept and maintained at all times in the area surrounding the mobile home and extending a distance of not less than ten (10) feet outwardly from each exterior wall of the mobile home. 
(4)  When placed upon authorized premises other than property used as a church or recreational facility, or by a government agency, the mobile home shall be completely screened by an appropriate shield such as fencing, trees, berm, wall or other device sufficient to prevent the mobile home or any part thereof from being seen by any person upon any public road, street, alley, easement, highway, or thoroughfare. It shall conform to the standards of subsection 62.75(d) of this Code. 
(d)  Permit conditions. No person shall reside in or occupy any security guard quarters unless the owner, landlord, tenant or other person in charge of or in possession of the premises to be guarded is the holder of a valid and unexpired written permit issued by the City of Rockledge permitting such quarters. Before such permit is issued the Rockledge Building Official shall inspect the security quarters and ascertain that the provisions of this section have been complied with. No permit for a security guard quarters shall be initially issued unless and until authorized by a majority vote by the Rockledge City Council. Renewal of permits may be issued by the Rockledge Building Official provided all requirements of ordinances of the City of Rockledge are first met and satisfied. When a permit has been issued, it shall be unlawful for any person to make or permit to be made any change in the character of the permitted quarters, so as to render the same in violation of any provision of this section unless the aforesaid permit is first surrendered to the Rockledge Building Official and invalidated, and the proposed change or modification has been approved by the building official as being consistent with ordinances of the city. A permit issued for businesses as aforesaid shall expire on September 30th next following the date of issuance of the permit and shall be paid upon the renewal of the occupational license, all others shall expire of December 31st; however, a permit may be renewed but only after the building official has first reinspected the premises and determined that all requirements of this section are then being met. 
(e)  Regulatory fee. A regulatory fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the City of Rockledge at the time of original issuance, or renewal, of each permit described in paragraph (d) of this section. 
(f)  Revocation of permit of occupancy. A permit for occupancy of a security guard quarters, may at any time be revoked by the city council upon a showing that any provision of this section is being violated. 
(g)  Penalty for violation and enforcement. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the City of Rockledge and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in Section 1-8 of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances; or, in the event a violation of this section is found to exist by a duly constituted code enforcement board in the City of Rockledge, such violation shall be punished as provided in the ordinance establishing said code enforcement board and providing the penalty to be imposed by such board. 
(Ord. No. 1038-92, § 1, 9-16-92; Ord. No. 1144-97, § 28, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1174-98, § 8, 11-4-98) 
80.10. - Borrow pit regulations. 
(A)  Definitions: A borrow pit shall be defined as any site, area or location from which earth, and, dirt, rock, shell or other material is excavated, and where such excavated material is to be removed from one lot piece, parcel or tract of land for use on another site, regardless of whether it is to be donated, sold, traded or bargained for anything of value. 
(B)  Borrow pits prohibited. Borrow pits are prohibited within the City of Rockledge and shall not be permitted even by special exception. 
(C)  The prohibition as to borrow pits shall not include any excavation or construction of facilities contained in any site plan or other development order, which is a normal incident thereto, i.e. drainage ditches, retention ponds, etc. 
(D)  The subsequent construction of, or retrofitting of drainage facilities servicing existing improvements to properties or private lakes for recreational or aesthetic purposes only, on residentially zoned lots which are greater than one-half (1/2) acre in size, but less than five (5) acres in size, shall be allowed only by special exception. The rebuttable presumption shall exist that the earth removal is a borrow pit which may be overcome by the petitioner through the presentation of evidence to the contrary to the appropriate hearing body. This provision does not apply to the City of Rockledge and its existing or future stormwater, drainage facilities, or other works by the city deemed necessary for its benefit. 
(Ord. No. 1028-92, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-92; Ord. No. 1274-2002, § 1, 7-3-02) 
80.11. - Garage sales. 
(a)  Garage sale shall mean the display of, sale, or offering for sale any type of personal household goods, ware or merchandise at any residential location within the city, whether the garage sale is referred to as "carport sale", "yard sale", "rummage sale" or other similar type of sale. All merchandise shall remain on private property until sold. 
(b)  A garage sale shall not be carried on for more than three (3) consecutive days and no more than four (4) such sales shall be permitted within one (1) calendar year from any single lot, parcel or tract of land. The said sales must be separated by a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days. 
(c)  At the conclusion of such garage sale, all unsold items and articles shall be removed or packed in such a manner so as not to be visible from any public streets or abutting property. 
(d)  Posting of garage sale signs shall be in accordance with Section 86.04(f) of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations. 
(e)  Sales conducted in accordance with this provision of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations shall be exempt from the requirements of Chapter 11 of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances dealing with business regulation and taxation. Failure to comply with this provision, in full, shall terminate the exemption granted herein. 
(Ord. No. 1541-2010, § 1, 1-20-10) 
80.20. - Single-family medium density subdivision. 
(a)  Intent. To encourage the provision of quality housing which is available and affordable to current and future residents of the city. This section is enacted to achieve the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Uses. 
(1)  Principal. No building, structure, land, or water shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one of the following permitted uses: 
(a)  Single-family detached dwelling. 
(b)  Community residential home, six (6) or fewer residents meeting the requirements in Section 83.00 of this Code. 
(2)  Accessory. The following uses may be used in conjunction with one or more of the principal uses: 
(a)  Garages and spaces for parking automobiles. 
(b)  Swimming pools. 
(c)  Ordinary public utility uses and rights-of-way. 
(3)  Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited: 
(a)  Commercial pursuits. 
(b)  Mobile homes. 
(c)  Retail, wholesale or manufacturing establishments. 
(d)  Keeping and/or maintaining farm animals and/or fowl. 
(e)  Restaurants. 
(f)  Child care centers, other than as special exceptions under the circumstances and conditions set forth in subsection 62.32(c)(2) of this Code. 
(c)  Lot requirements. 
(1)  Area. The minimum acreage needed to subdivide is five (5) acres. 
(2)  Lot size. The minimum lot size required is four thousand (4,000) square feet, except corner lots shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(3)  Width. The minimum lot width required is fifty (50) feet. 
(4)  Depth. The minimum lot depth required is fifty (50) feet. 
(d)  Setback requirements. 
(1)  Front. The front yard building setback line for each lot in the subdivision is twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Rear. The rear yard building setback line for each lot in the subdivision is fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Side. The sum of the setbacks of the two side yard lines shall be no less than a combined total of fifteen (15) feet. No structure shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet to another primary structure. 
(4)  Corner lots. The front yard building setback line is twenty (20) feet from the front street right-of-way line; and the building setback line for the side yard fronting on the side street is twenty (20) feet from the side street right-of-way line. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of the principal building and shall be set back no less than five (5) feet from the side and rear lot lines, but in no case within the setbacks from the side street. A detached accessory building shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to the principal building on the same lot. 
(6)  Measurement. The exterior wall of a house, or the wall or roof vertical support of an addition, shall be considered the building line when measuring. 
(e)  Building requirements. 
(1)  Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage is fifty (50) percent of the land that may be covered by the principal and accessory buildings or structures, excluding driveways and concrete slab located thereon. A maximum of twenty (20) percent coverage [is allowed] for driveways and concrete slabs. 
(2)  Area. The minimum living area is one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
(3)  Height. The maximum height of building structures shall be no more than twenty-five (25) feet, subject to section 60.04. 
(4)  Density. The maximum density is eight (8) dwelling units per acre. Lower densities may be applicable to other districts, if allowable. 
(f)  Special requirements. 
(1)  Landscaping, in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth in section 40.30 of this Code. 
(2)  Required garage and parking spaces. Each dwelling unit shall be constructed with at least a one car enclosed garage, and provisions for two (2) paved additional off-street parking places on site. 
(3)  Site plan approval required, in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth in Part III. 
(4)  Plat. Before any building permit is issued for construction of a single-family dwelling, a subdivision plat of the land upon which the single-family dwellings are to be located shall be duly recorded in the public records of Brevard County, Florida. All provisions under Part VII of this Code shall be followed except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(5)  Porches: 
(i)  Screened porch: A covered room, portico, piazza, veranda, or structure attached to a main dwelling at least two (2) exterior walls or sides of which porches are constructed principally of screen or mesh material pervious to air. A screened porch is characterized by the fact that at least two (2) of its sides consist primarily of broad expanses of uncovered screen material through which air circulates freely and visibility is not significantly impeded. 
(ii)  Front porches may be extended ten (10) feet into the required front setback area in all residential zoning categories, except mobile home. Porch style shall match the existing architectural style of the principal structure. 
(iii)  Required space for rear porch. Unless the site plan submitted with an application for a building permit for a dwelling discloses and provides for a rear screened porch having at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor area to be constructed at the time of construction of the main dwelling, the site plan shall demonstrate reservation of a sufficient open area of land between the rear wall of the dwelling and the twenty-five-foot rear setback line applicable to rear screened porches as space available for possible future construction or enlargement of a rear screened porch which would upon completion have at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. The minimum width and depth of a porch shall be no less than eight (8) feet. 
(6)  Reduced roadway requirements. The right-of-way for roadways may be reduced by up to twenty (20) percent with permission of the city manager, however easements must be maintained on each side for the construction of sidewalks and for utility usage. All changes require the approval of the public works director and must follow proper engineering design. 
(7)  [Conditions for mixed uses.] When a subdivision qualifying for this use includes types of uses which are mixed with other different types of allowable uses within the subdivision, the following conditions shall be enforced: 
(a)  Each separate allowable use shall be developed in minimum pod sizes of two and one-half (2.5) gross acres. 
(b)  Each use POD shall face a like use POD, fronting along road rights-of-way (i.e.: townhouse use will face townhouse use, medium density use will face a medium density use, etc.). See illustration. 
Townhouse Units Apartment Units Single-Family Detached Townhouse Unit Min. 2.5 Ac. Min. 2.5 Ac Min. 2.5 Ac. Min. 2.5 Ac. ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY Townhouse Units Apartment Units Single-Family Detached Townhouse Unit Min. 2.5 Ac. Min. 2.5 Ac. Min. 2.5 Ac. Min. 2.5 Ac. Apartment Units Single-Family Detached Apartment Units Townhouse Unit ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY  
(c)  Gross acres may include drainage and roadway areas and shall be clearly shown on the submitted site plan. 
(d)  Each separate use POD and/or the entire acreage involved will satisfy all the requirements of the subdivision chapter. 
(Ord. No. 995-91, §§ 1-3, 4-17-91; Ord. No. 1333-2003, § 1, 12-17-03; Ord. No. 1530-2009, § 3, 9-23-09) 
80.21. - Rear setbacks for lots abutting on the rear of surface water retention area easements, conservation easements and golf courses (all residential categories). 
    The rear setback in all residential categories which abut at their rear surface water retention area easements or conservation easements or golf courses shall be: 
Principal Structure 15 feet Accessory Structures 0 feet Porches and Patios  
Lot coverage shall be according to the zoning district requirements and shall be noted on all site plans. Front setback requirements are not affected. 
(Ord. No. 1334-2003, § 1, 12-17-03; Ord. No. 1362-2004, § 1, 12-1-04) 
80.25. - Outdoor eating areas for restaurants. 
    An outdoor eating area is that area adjacent to and in conjunction with a licensed restaurant establishment whose principal use and function is the preparation and serving of food and beverage. The outdoor eating area shall have direct access to the facility. 
    The applicant shall submit a site plan showing the layout of the facility, parking spaces, driveways, and the proposed outdoor eating area. The site plan shall show the type, color, and materials of all tables, chairs, umbrellas, trash receptacles and other amenities to be used in the outdoor eating area. The applicant shall comply with the following criteria: 
1.  Outdoor food services will terminate no later than 10:00 p.m. on weekdays (Monday through Thursday) and 11:00 p.m. on weekends (Friday, Saturday and Sunday). 
2.  A three-foot masonry street wall or other barrier in keeping with the need for safety shall be erected along the front setback area and adjacent to all required parking areas. The street wall shall be construction in the style of the principal structure. 
3.  The number of total seats, either inside or outside, shall be determined by the approved occupational license of the establishment. The outside seating shall not impact the number of parking spaces required by Code. 
4.  No outdoor eating area shall be closer than the front setback line of the principal structure unless approved by city council during the approval process. 
5.  Outdoor sound systems are not permitted unless the system is in compliance with the city's performance standards. 
6.  Lighting shall be installed at restaurants which have outdoor eating after sunset in the street wall or other barrier area and directed towards the outdoor eating area. No direct light shall be visible from adjacent property. 
    After review of the foregoing by the Rockledge Building Department and a finding that the plans are in compliance a permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 1186-99, § 12, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 1298-2002, § 1, 12-18-02) 
80.30. - Outdoor sales lot requirements. 
    New and used motor vehicle, boat, agricultural equipment and mobile home sales or rentals with accessory services, subject to the following requirements, where allowed by Code: 
(1)  All outside areas where merchandise is displayed shall be paved. 
(2)  All servicing and repair facilities, except gasoline pumps shall be located, in an enclosed structure. 
(3)  There shall be no storage of junked or wrecked vehicles other than temporary storage for those awaiting repair. Such temporary storage areas shall be in an enclosed area and the vehicles shall not be visible from outside the property. 
(4)  Ingress and egress points shall be placed so as to cause minimum interference with the movement of pedestrian traffic on public sidewalks. 
(5)  All other provisions of the Rockledge Land Development Regulations shall apply before the issuance of an occupational license. 
(6)  All new and used motor vehicle, boat, agricultural equipment and mobile home sales or rentals with accessory services, must have a frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet on a paved street. 
(Ord. No. 1186-99, § 12, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 1211-2000, § 7, 4-5-00) 
80.40. - Exclusion of arbors and trellises as accessory structures. 
    Arbors, trellises and like garden amenities are excluded from the rules governing accessory structures in all residentially zoned areas. Such uses shall be allowed within all residentially zoned areas subject to the following: 
(1)  No arbors, trellises or amenities shall be constructed, placed or maintained within the "sight triangle" of corner lots; 
(2)  No arbors, trellises or garden amenities shall be constructed, placed or maintained within ten (10) feet of any road right-of-way; 
(3)  No arbors, trellises or garden amenities shall exceed fifty (50) square feet in area or ten (10) feet in height. 
(4)  Arbors, trellises and garden amenities must be open on at least three (3) sides. Sides may be covered with lattice work or similar material. 
(Ord. No. 1441-2007, § 1, 3-21-07) 
SECTION 81.00. - DOCKS AND PIERS 
    Section 81.00 of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to docks and piers is hereby made and declared to be a Zoning Ordinance in its entirety as fully and completely as if the same were set out at length in the zoning provisions of the Code, but said section 81.00 and the sections and parts thereof shall be cited by the numbers, letters and designations assigned in said section 81.00. 

81.01. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the plural number include the singular; and words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always a mandatory word; the word "may" is a discretionary word. 
(1)  Activity means any use of sovereignty lands which requires approval of the Board of Trustees of the Internal Improvement Trust Fund of the State of Florida for consent of use, lease, easement, sale, or transfer of interest in such sovereignty lands or materials. Activity includes, but is not limited to, the construction of docks, piers, boat ramps, board walks, mooring pilings, dredging of channels, filling, removal of logs, sand, silt, clay, gravel or shell, and the removal or planting of vegetation of sovereignty lands. 
(2)  Applicant means any person or party applying to the city for a building permit or any other form of approval for the construction of a dock. 
(3)  Dock shall mean any pier, wharf, quay, boathouse, or other manmade facility, structure, or framework located along the shore of or extending into any waterway. 
(4)  Indian River shall mean all that body of water within the City described as the Indian River by the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Surveys and by subdivision plat of the City. 
(5)  Mean high water line means the horizontal plane of the intersection of the local elevation of mean high water with the shore. Mean high water line along the shore of land immediately bordering on navigable waters is recognized and declared to be the boundary between the foreshore owned by the State of Florida in its sovereign capacity and the uplands subject to private ownership. 
(6)  Mean low water line means the horizontal plane of the intersection of the local elevation of mean low water with the shore. 
(7)  Ownership oriented facility means docking facilities where the use of the docking facility requires ownership of some real property interest in the adjacent upland parcel of land. Use of a docking facility by members of a condominium or homeowners association owning a real property interest in the upland riparian parcel shall be included within this definition. 
(8)  Preempted area means the area of sovereignty lands from which the traditional public uses have been or would be excluded to any extent by an activity. The area may include, but is not limited to, the sovereignty lands occupied by a dock and other structures, the area between the dock and out to any mooring pilings, and the area between the dock and the shoreline. 
(9)  Private noncommercial recreational dock means a dock that is not used for any revenue generating income related activity, the use of which facility is restricted to purely recreational activities such as sport fishing where the catch is either returned to the waterways or retained by the family, guests, or donees of the dock owner without payment of compensation or a valuable consideration; or recreational sailing, rowing, rafting or power boating; swimming, and like traditional recreational activities unassociated with any commercial interest or activity. 
(10)  Revenue generating income related activity means any commercial, industrial or other activity for the production of income or gain, or which serves as an accessory to any commercial, industrial or gain producing operation. 
(11)  Riparian rights means those rights incident to lands bordering upon navigable waters, as recognized by the courts and common law. 
(12)  Sideline of riparian rights shall mean, for the purposes of construing, interpreting, applying and enforcing the provisions of this section only, a line commencing at the point where a side lot line of property abutting the west bank of the Indian River intersects the mean high water mark of the Indian River, and from thence extending easterly into the waters of the Indian River on a bearing that will intersect the channel of the Indian River approximately at a right angle. 
(13)  Watercraft, as used in this section, shall mean any boat, vessel, or other floating structure having a length exceeding ten (10) feet. 
(14)  Waterfront width shall mean the distance measured in a straight line between the points where each of the side lot lines of a lot, piece or parcel of upland riparian property intersect with the mean high water line of the waterway. 
(15)  Waterway shall be a collective term including any artificial waterway and/or any body of water and the Indian River. 
81.02. - Application requirements. 
    Any person desiring to construct a private, non-commercial dock shall first submit an application and required exhibits as stated below to the Building Official's office: 
(a)  Application for Dock Construction Permit. 
(b)  Certified survey of the upland property to which the dock is to be attached. If said upland property has a depth of more than 150 feet from the shoreline, only the 150 feet of said upland property nearest the shoreline need be shown on the survey. If the application is for construction of a dock in the Indian River, said survey shall also show the side lines of riparian rights applicable to the property from the shoreline out into the Indian River for a distance of at least 150 feet from the shoreline. 
(c)  Construction plans for the proposed structure indicating length, width, height, design and type. 
(d)  Site plan of the proposed structure of the dock in relation to the shoreline, and in relation to the side lines of the upland property, and in relation to the side lines of the riparian rights applicable to said upland property. 
(e)  A written permit or authorization from all state and federal regulatory agencies having advisory, recommendatory, or permitting authority with respect to the proposed dock. 
81.03. - Lot requirements. 
    Width: No dock shall be erected, placed, affixed to, kept or maintained on or as part of any lot, piece or parcel of riparian property unless such lot, piece or parcel of riparian property shall meet the minimum lot width, depth and area requirements of the zoning district wherein said property is located. (But see Section 81.09 for width exemption of certain grandfathered lots of record.) 
81.04. - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Roadway: The minimum setback of any portion of the dock from any public road right-of-way shall be five feet (5'). 
(b)  Side: The minimum setback of a dock from any side lot line of the upland property shall be twenty-five feet (25'), except that if the upland lot to which the dock is affixed is entitled to an exemption as a grandfathered lot of record as described in Section 81.09 of this section, then the minimum setback of the dock from any side lot line of the upland property shall be twenty feet (20'). 
(c)  Sideline of riparian rights: The minimum setback of a dock from any sideline of riparian rights shall be twenty-five feet (25'), except that if the upland lot to which the dock is affixed is entitled to an exemption as a grandfathered lot of record as described in Section 81.09 of this section, then the minimum setback of the dock from any sideline of riparian rights shall be twenty feet (20'). 
(d)  Rear: For properties abutting a waterway as to which the submerged land beneath the water is privately owned by the owner of the upland property, no portion of the dock shall be constructed, placed or maintained within ten feet (10') of the rear property line of the privately owned submerged land. 
81.05. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Density: Only one dock shall be permitted on any lot, piece, or parcel of property having a waterfront width of not more than eighty (80) feet; however, more than one dock shall be permitted on any lot, piece or parcel of property having more than eighty (80) feet of waterfront width provided the property has at least eighty (80) feet of waterfront width for each dock and there is a minimum distance of sixty-five (65) feet between any part of any two (2) docks on the same property, and all setback requirements and other provisions of this section are complied with. 
(b)  Height: The maximum height of any part or portion of the entire dock, including the roof covering, shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') above mean high water level. 
(c)  Covering area: 
(1)  Indian River: Covering shall be permitted over boat slips and water areas where boats are docked, kept or moored, as well as over the walking deck or surface of the dock structure. (This Section pertains only to properties abutting the Indian River.) 
(2)  Other than in the Indian River: Coverings on docks in waterways other than the Indian River shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area. 
(d)  Lighting: All lighting on any dock shall be so placed, shielded, covered or guarded that no direct light rays or beams are projected or radiated onto or upon, or are visible from, any part of any dwelling, road, street, private driveway, or property lying landward and upland of mean high water mark on the shoreline to which the dock is attached. The material utilized for the light shield, cover, guard, or barrier shall be such that it completely and totally blocks out direct light rays in the directions in which direct lighting is prohibited by this Section, as distinguished from a translucent or semi-opaque material. 
(e)  Pilings: The pilings and materials used in and for the construction of docks, including the structure, foundation and base support of the dock, shall be of such material and quality as is approved by the Florida Department of Natural Resources, the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation, Florida Fish and Game Commission and the United States Corps of Engineers. 
(f)  Length: No dock shall extend more than two hundred feet (200') into the Indian River. In waterways other than the Indian River the maximum length shall be twenty feet (20') from the shore line; and if the property abuts a waterway as to which the submerged land beneath the water is privately owned by the owner of the upland property, no portion of the dock shall be constructed, placed, or maintained within ten feet (10') of the rear property line of the privately owned submerged land. 
(g)  [Number of slips:] No dock shall be constructed with more than three (3) separate slips or berths specifically designed to accommodate watercraft. See Subsection 81.07(d) limiting to three (3) the number of watercraft to be kept at a dock. 
81.06. - Zoning locations. 
    (a) No dock in the Indian River, or in any R1, or R2, R2A, or RCE zoning district of the City, nor any dock which is connected or attached to upland riparian property on the Indian River in any of said zoning districts, shall be used for any revenue generating income related activity, or for any purpose other than a private noncommercial, recreational dock. In the interpretation and enforcement of this section, a rebuttable presumption shall exist, and is hereby created, that any boat or vessel that is designed, constructed, modified, or equipped for a revenue generating income related activity, or that is licensed by any governmental agency for a commercial use, is being used for a revenue generating income related activity, and any such boat or vessel is prohibited by the provisions of this section from being kept or maintained at any dock connected or attached to upland property on the Indian River or in an R1, R2, R2A, or RCE zoning district of the City. 
81.07. - Special requirements and restrictions. 
(a)  No dock in the Indian River, or in any R1, R2, R2A, or RCE zoning district of the City shall be used for any revenue generating income related activity. 
(b)  No dock in the Indian River, or in any R1, R2, R2A, or RCE zoning district of the City, or which is connected or attached to upland riparian property on the Indian River or in any of said zoning districts, shall be used for any purpose other than as a private noncommercial recreational dock. 
(c)  No dock shall hereafter be constructed on, or affixed to, any property in an R1, R2, R2A, or RCE zoning district of the City except as an accessory use to a principal residence situate upon the same property or upon property adjoining and contiguous to the land upon which the dock is to be located, and in the same ownership as the land upon which the dock is to be located. 
(d)  No portion of any dock which is an accessory use to a principal residence shall be rented, let, or leased to any person or party other than the occupant or occupants of the principal residence building; nor shall any portion of a dock heretofore erected upon property without a principal residence be rented, let, or leased to any person or party. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit an owner of property upon which a residence and dock is located from renting, letting, or leasing the principal residence in compliance with applicable zoning restrictions, and reserving unto such owner rights to the use and occupancy of the dock. 
(e)  No tenant or lessee of a dock shall subrent or sublease any portion of said dock. 
(f)  A homeowners or condominium association owning and maintaining a dock solely for the use and benefit of association members, which dock is in existence on May 1st, 1990, may rent or lease docking or mooring space at said dock to a member of such association or tenant in possession of a dwelling unit under the authority of such association. No member of such association nor tenant in possession as aforesaid shall subrent docking or mooring space at the dock to any other person or party. 
(g)  The use or utilization of any dock space for the mooring or keeping of watercraft utilized in or specially designed for, or licensed by any governmental agency for, any commercial pursuit including, but not limited to, commercial fishing, clamming, crabbing, shrimping, lobstering, oyster harvesting, scalloping, chartering, boat rentals, or other activity for monetary gain, shall be deemed to be a revenue generating income related activity and is hereby prohibited in any R1, R2, or R2A, or RCE zoning district of the City. 
(h)  No dock shall be designed, constructed, or modified to have living accommodations, fixed fueling or permanent fuel storage facilities. 
(i)  No more than three (3) watercraft shall be simultaneously docked, kept, placed, moored, or maintained at any single dock located in the Indian River or in any R1, R2, R2A, or RCE zoning district of the City, except in case of emergency in which event a watercraft which has become inoperable may be kept at a dock for a period not exceeding seventy-two (72) hours for the purpose of making emergency repairs, notwithstanding the number of other watercraft at said dock. This limitation on the number of watercraft to be kept at a dock shall be inapplicable to a dock owned and used exclusively by members of a condominium or homeowners association at the time of enactment of this section, which shall be governed by applicable provisions of Florida law. 
(j)  The main access pier shall not be more than six (6) feet wide. 
(k)  Any person desiring electrical or utility services for a dock, and [where] the installation of such service requires passage of a conduit, pipe, or other material underneath any public street or right-of-way, must first apply to and obtain from the City of Rockledge an excavation permit to bore and jack under said public street or right-of-way. All utilities will be installed not less than eighteen (18?) inches underground. 
(l)  The Building Official shall first determine that the plans and proposed dock meet all the requirements of this section. 
(m)  No sign or signs shall be placed on or displayed from any dock, apparatus, or equipment on or about a dock so as to be visible to persons upon any public way, waterway or private property, except signs directly related to dock safety, or to the posting of the premises against trespassing. 
(n)  Tires shall not be affixed to the structure as fenders. 
(o)  Structures will be so designed, placed and constructed so as to permit the free and unimpeded flow of the waters of the waterway in such a manner that the waters beneath the structure will not be inhibited or obstructed. 
(p)  No watercraft shall be docked, kept, berthed, moored, or maintained at or about any dock in such position that any part of the watercraft extends over and beyond any sideline of the riparian rights of the upland property to which the dock is affixed, but this limitation shall not apply to watercraft at anchor and in use in navigation or fishing or recreational purposes. 
81.08. - Maintenance, structural safety, abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  No owner of any lot, tract, or parcel of land lying within the corporate limits of the City shall permit any pier, dock, pile, davit, boatlift, boat ramp, or seawall located on or connected to his property to become dilapidated, deteriorated, structurally unsound, a safety hazard, a hazard to navigation, or otherwise to become in nonconformance with the provisions of this section. 
81.09. - Exemption from minimum lot width requirements of certain grandfathered lots of record. 
    Any lot, piece, parcel or tract of land described in a deed of conveyance or contract for deed recorded in the public records of Brevard County, Florida, prior to May 1st, 1990, and which has a waterfront width of fifty feet (50') or more as described in said recorded deed or contract for deed, shall be deemed to meet the minimum lot width requirements for construction of a dock, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 81.03 of this section. 
81.10. - Preexisting nonconforming docks and uses. 
(a)  Structures grandfathered. If at the time of adoption of this section, a dock exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this section, such dock may continue to exist provided no such nonconforming dock shall be enlarged, increased, or expanded other than in conformity with the provisions of this section. This subsection applies only to the physical characteristics of a preexisting nonconforming dock, as distinguished from the use of the dock. 
(b)  Uses grandfathered. Any dock use which on and prior to May 1st, 1990, was being lawfully exercised in compliance with all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the State of Florida, County of Brevard, and City of Rockledge, including applicable provisions of the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan, and which use was and is contrary to the provisions of this section, shall be deemed a "grandfathered use" subject to registration, continuation, amortization and termination as hereinafter provided. To be qualified as a grandfathered use the owner, lessee, or other party claiming the right to such use must register the same with the city on or before May 1st, 1991, and obtain a certificate of registration from the city. A certificate of registration issued by the city shall entitled the registrant to continue the grandfathered use until May 1st, 1996, but no such use shall be expanded, enlarged or relocated. A registered grandfathered use which is discontinued for a continuous period of six (6) months shall thereupon cease to be a valid grandfathered use, and the registration thereof shall then become null and void. If not sooner terminated, every registered grandfathered use shall terminate and expire at midnight on April 30th, 1996. 
(c)  Applications for registration of grandfathered uses. Applications for a grandfathered use registration shall include the following: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of applicant and applicant's authorized agent, if applicable. 
(2)  Location of the grandfathered use or activity including street address; affected waterbody; vicinity map; schematic site plan of the dock; a detailed description of the pre-existing nonconforming use with identification of the part of parts of the dock involved therein. 
(3)  Satisfactory evidence of applicant's right, title, or interest in the dock and the pre-existing nonconforming use. 
(4)  Satisfactory evidence that the alleged nonconforming use was being exercised and in existence on and prior to May 1st, 1990. 
(5)  A $50.00 non-refundable processing and registration fee. 
    The city through its authorized officials will examine and investigate every application for registration of a grandfathered use, and if the application is well founded, shall issue a certificate of registration which, unless sooner terminated due to discontinuance of such use, will terminate and expire at midnight on April 30th, 1996. If the city determines that the application is not well founded the city will furnish the applicant written notice thereof stating the findings and reasons forming the basis for such determination and denial. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days after receipt of such written notice of denial within which time to appeal the same to the board of adjustment of the city, upon payment of the established fee required for appeals to such board. 
(d)  Unsafe docks. Any dock or portion thereof declared unsafe may be restored to a safe condition. 
(e)  Maintenance. A nonconforming dock may be maintained, and repairs and minor alterations may be made, except that no structural alterations shall be made except those required by law. Repairs, as plumbing or changing of partitions or other alterations, are permitted. 
(f)  [Moving.] No such nonconforming dock shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the upland riparian property, or submerged lands, other than that occupied by such dock at the effective date of adoption of this section. 
(g)  Damage and restoration. If a dock is damaged or destroyed by any cause whatsoever, regardless of the extent of the damage, said dock may be replaced and restored to the same condition as the dock existed on the date of enactment of this section, provided that such replacement and restoration is performed and completed within one year from the date of damage or destruction of the dock; and provided further that the upland riparian property to which the dock is affixed has not been sold or transferred by the owner between the date of enactment of this section and the date of issuance of a building permit for replacement or restoration of the dock. The term "sold or transferred" shall not include a transfer by devise, descent, or by operation of law upon the death of a joint tenant. If the upland riparian property to which a dock is affixed has been "sold or transferred" between the date of enactment of this section and the date of destruction or damage to the dock, no building permit shall be issued for the replacement and restoration of the dock if said dock has been destroyed or damaged by any cause and such damage exceeds fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the dock. Fair market value for the purposes of this section shall be deemed the valuation of such dock by the Tax Assessor of Brevard County in his assessment for the levying of ad valorem taxes for the tax year in which such damage was sustained. If the upland riparian property has been sold or transferred as aforesaid and a dock affixed to said upland property is damaged by any cause and such damage does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the dock, the owner of the upland property may replace and restore the dock to the same condition as it existed at the time of enactment of this section provided such replacement and restoration is completed within one year after the date of the damage to the dock. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the dock to establish and verify the date of destruction of the dock. 
81.11. - Section inapplicable to public docks. 
    The limitations, restrictions and provisions of this section shall be inapplicable to any public dock constructed by a governmental agency and attached to riparian upland property in which said governmental agency has an ownership interest. An easement or public street right-of-way shall be deemed a sufficient ownership interest for construction of a public dock by a governmental agency. 
SECTION 81.30. - HEDGES AND FENCES 
A.  General requirements: 
(1)  No owner or occupant of any property or any other person shall erect, construct or install any fence or wall within the city without first obtaining a permit therefore from the building official. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for the erection, construction or installation of any fence or wall within the city, the building official shall first approve the type, design and location of the proposed fence or wall to be erected. 
(3)  The use of barbed wire or strands of barbed wire, and electrified fences are prohibited in all residential zoning districts unless provided for elsewhere in these regulations. 
(4)  The outside (the side nearest and facing abutting property) of any fence shall be the finished side of such fence except when the fence is erected and located within three (3) feet from a required masonry wall separating commercially zoned property from residentially zoned property, in which exceptional event the fence shall not be required to be finished on the outside at such places where the outside of the fence cannot be seen by the public from public property. 
(b)  Height: 
(1)  No owner, occupant, or other person, or party whosoever shall erect, keep, or maintain in existence any fence, wall or structure, nor plant, keep, or maintain any hedge, bush, or shrubbery, in any front yard between the building setback line applicable to such front yard and the right-of-way line of the street upon which the property fronts, nor in any side yard of a corner lot between the building setback line applicable to lot fronting on the side street, and the right-of-way line of the side street, except as follows: 
Residentially zoned properties: (i, ii, iv, v). 
Commercially and professionally zoned properties: (i, ii). 
Manufacturing and industrially zoned properties: (i, iii). 
(i)  Opaque walls, fences, structures, shrubbery, hedges and bushes, three (3) feet in height or less. 
(ii)  Four-foot high fence with no more than forty (40) percent opaqueness. 
(iii)  Chain link security fence, six (6) feet in height. 
(iv)  Subdivision buffer walls/fences designed and approved in accordance with Section 81.31 of this Code. 
(v)  Hedges maintained and kept within three (3) feet of a side lot line may be extended into the front yard area at a height up to six (6) feet provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The side lot line must abut another side line or rear lot line and be at least ten (10) feet from any driveway; and 
(b)  Hedges must be set back from any sidewalk or front property line by one (1) foot; and 
(c)  A clear zone of fifteen (15) feet is maintained from the back of the curb or paved roadway to any part of the hedge over three (3) feet in height, in the front setback area. 
(2)  No fence or wall exceeding six (6) feet in height shall be erected, constructed, installed or maintained in the city, except as may be permitted under the provisions of subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(3)  Upon specific application therefore, and showing of good cause, the city council may authorize the city manager or his representative to issue a permit in writing for the erection, construction, installation or maintenance of a fence exceeding the height limitation established by subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(c)  Corner lots, side fences: 
(1)  Any corner lot (which is a lot adjacent to the intersection of two public streets, both having minimum right-of-way of fifty (50) feet), with at least forty (40) feet of frontage on the street side where the fence is to be erected, can request a fence permit from the Building Department, which after making a determination that there is no obstruction to the sight triangle, may allow a fence set back ten (10) feet from the property line that complies with fence height requirements. 
(2)  In the event the subject lot is a corner lot without a key lot adjoining at the rear, and is a corner lot having a rear property line in common with the rear line of another corner lot, then the required side-corner setback distance may be reduced to five (5) feet, however, only along the common side-corner yard setback line. 
(d)  Maintenance: 
(1)  No owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land lying within the corporate limits of the city shall permit any fence located on their property to become dilapidated, structurally unsound or otherwise to become in nonconformance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  At any point when a fence or wall is missing boards or materials of which it was built, leaning beyond twelve (12) inches from the vertical or no longer serves the function for which it was permitted, it shall be considered dilapidated and structurally unsound. 
(3)  No owner or occupant of property whereon a fence, wall or structure is situated within an area as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall cause, permit or allow the clear visibility through all portions of such fence, wall or structure which exceeds three (3) feet in height, if any, to be or become obstructed by vines, leaves, flowers, debris or other objects or materials. 
(e)  Pre-existing nonconforming fences: Any pre-existing nonconforming fence, wall or structure lawfully in existence on the effective date of this section shall be exempt from the provisions hereof; provided that no such pre-existing nonconforming fence, wall or structure shall hereafter be extended in further violation hereof; and provided further, that any replacement thereof shall be in compliance with the provisions of this section, unless the property owner has obtained a waiver at the discretion of the city manager or his designee, and it can be shown that public traffic, bicycle and pedestrian safety can be adequately addressed, as established in this Code. 
(f)  Visibility: 
(1)  No owner, occupant or other person in possession or control of private property adjacent to a street intersection shall cause, permit, or allow to continue any obstruction to the clear view of such intersection in violation of the provisions of Section 52.23 of this Code. Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, fences, landscaping, bushes, shrubbery, hedges, plantings or structures. 
(2)  Visibility through a fence in accordance with subsection (d)(3) must be maintained. 
(g)  Prohibited locations: No owner, occupant, or other person or party whosoever shall erect, keep, or maintain in existence any wall or structure, nor plant, keep or maintain any hedge, bush or shrubbery, in any drainage maintenance access easement or tract, except as provided for in Section 57.15(1). 
(Ord. No. 1532-2009, § 1, 9-23-09) 
SECTION 81.31. - SUBDIVISION SIGNS AND BUFFER WALLS ABUTTING RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
(A)  Generally. The applicant may construct a subdivision sign and buffer wall in conjunction with the development of a subdivision, provided such construction is in accordance with these regulations. 
(1)  Subdivision developments. Street graphics of a permanent nature, designed only to identify a subdivision development and including accessory entrance structural features, and buffer walls may be erected upon application to and approval by the planning commission and in accordance with the following regulations: 
(a)  Permanent identification graphics and structures shall be permitted only for a total development as approved in a final plat. When considering such graphics, the planning commission shall consider the location of public utilities, sidewalks and future street widenings. 
(b)  Graphics and entrance structures shall be for identification purposes only, giving only the name of the subdivision. Graphic signs for commercial and industrial subdivisions, are allowed to have up to ninety-six (96) square feet, of which up to thirty-two (32) square feet may be used for identification purposes of the subdivision name, the remaining area may be used to identify the name and location of each occupant located therein, no one occupant identification individual sign area may exceed six (6) square feet. 
(c)  Only one identification graphic and structure will be permitted at one entrance into such development or subdivision from each abutting street. Such graphic may be a single graphic with two (2) faces equal in size or may be two (2) single-faced structures equal in size located on each side of such entrance way. Each signage face of such subdivision development graphics shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet for residential and ninety-six (96) square feet for commercial and industrial in size. 
(d)  Such street graphics shall be illuminated with a shielded steady light, but not animated. 
(B)  Conditions: 
(1)  No subdivision sign or buffer wall shall be constructed which interferes with the line of sight of motorists approaching, entering or exiting a subdivision. No sign or buffer wall can be constructed within a sight distance triangle as defined in section 52.23. 
(2)  A buffer wall, along and adjacent to rights-of-way where a through lot would be created is required to be constructed, and shall be built on private property along the entire frontage of the subdivision adjacent to the highway or arterial road. The wall shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and shall be designed and sealed by an engineer registered in the State of Florida. 
(3)  All buffer walls and subdivision signs and supports thereof shall be constructed of essentially maintenance-free materials, and shall not be constructed of wood or wood derivatives. All such walls, fences and signs shall be constructed in accordance with building and construction standards and codes. The city's building department shall approve the location, size and materials of all buffer walls and subdivision signs. The plans for such walls, fences and signs shall be submitted to the city's building department at the time the plans for other subdivision improvements are submitted. The subdivision sign and buffer wall specifications and drawings must be submitted and approved by the building department and planning commission before final plat approval. No freestanding sign shall be higher than ten (10) feet in height. Subdivision signs which are part of a buffer wall shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 35, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1144-97, § 30A, 8-20-97) 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, former § 20-97 of the Code of Ordinances has been included herein as § 81.31. 
SECTION 81.35. - BUFFERING HEIGHT STANDARDS AND BUFFER WALLS 
A.  When a lot or parcel in a commercial, professional, manufacturing or industrial district is being developed and abuts residentially zoned property, either to a side or to the rear, there shall be a solid opaque wall, a minimum of six (6) feet in height built and maintained along the nonresidential property line of abutment, except if modified by the planning commission and city council, and shall be constructed in such a manner that there is no visibility through the wall on a horizontal plane. It shall be constructed of essentially maintenance-free materials and shall not be constructed of any wood or wood derivative product. Each wall shall be constructed as to present a finished appearance (i.e., block walls shall be stuccoed and overlaid with a fungus resistant paint; concrete walls will be overlaid with a fungus resistant paint and be in a neutral color approved by the building official; brick walls will have all mortar joints struck). Construction of such walls shall conform to the standards of the Standard Building Code. The wall shall run the entire length of the line of abutment except that a wall running along a side line shall be constructed three (3) feet in height from the front yard setback point of the abutting residential district to the street or end of nonresidential line of abutment. The wall shall be constructed on the nonresidential property and the height of the wall shall be measured from the finished ground level of the nonresidential property or abutting residential property, whichever is the highest elevation. Additional conditions and regulations may be found in each individual zoning district. 
B.  When a buffer wall is required between unlike land uses as determined by code and a new development is being proposed next to an existing development a height compatibility slope shall be established between the two (2) uses. 
1.  Establishment of a mean height on the existing development directly adjacent to any new development. The developer of any new project shall calculate the mean height of all adjacent developed properties using the roof tops as the highest point. This calculation shall only be used where the code calls for increased buffering. ("H" is established) 
2.  The top height of the buffer wall in relationship to the project through the site plan review process shall be established, this will determine the buffer wall height. ("W" is established) 
3.  The required separation distance between property line and structure setback shall be determined for the new development will be determined. ("S" is established) 
4.  Compatibility height slope shall be established using the following method. (From the property line, "S" point shall be established, from that point an imaginary height point shall be established using "H", creating (H-1). A height slope line shall be established by running a line from W to H-1. The new development height of any structure shall encroach above this established line. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 31, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1299-2002, § 1, 11-20-02) 
SECTION 81.36. - ENCLOSED STORAGE SPACE/OPEN STORAGE YARD 
(a)  Enclosed storage spaces/open storage yards are areas that are entirely enclosed within a continuous nontransparent, opaque wall and gates. Said enclosure and gates shall be constructed of essentially maintenance-free materials and shall not be constructed of any wood or wood derivative product and must be a uniform height of six (6) feet. Any gate in the enclosure shall also be nontransparent and six (6) feet in height and be kept closed at all times except when ingress and egress is being made to or from the storage space. No materials, equipment, supplies or other form of tangible personal property shall at any time be placed, stored or kept within the storage space so as to exceed the height of the wall constituting the enclosure, or so as to be visible to persons and members of the public who may walk, or travel in motor vehicles, adjacent to the enclosure. Additional restrictions may be found in each additional zoning district. 
(b)  Unoccupied recreational vehicle storage is a facility for the storage of recreational vehicles. A recreational vehicle is a general term for a vehicle bearing current license and/or registration which includes the following: camper trailer, travel trailer, truck camper, motor home, boat trailer, horse trailer, utility trailer, and recreational boat. The storage facility shall not include any occupancy of the vehicles. A security guard quarters/office shall be permitted within the facility to allow on-premises supervision. Said facility shall be considered an open storage yard, and shall meet the above referenced conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1144-97, § 31, 8-20-97; Ord. No. 1240-2000, § 14, 10-18-00) 
SECTION 81.50. - VEGETATIVE BUFFERING ALTERNATIVE REQUIREMENTS 
    The purpose of the following vegetative buffering requirements is to provide an alternative to the solid masonry wall requirement between residential zoning districts and nonresidential zoning districts. This buffer is intended to provide visual and physical screening and buffering between potentially incompatible uses and to reduce the effects of glare, noise, and incompatible activities, specifically commercial and industrial uses when they abut existing residential zoning. The planning commission must review and approve all site plans when a request is made to use the vegetative buffering alternative. 
A.  Opaque vegetative buffer: This shall be completely opaque from the ground up to a minimum height of six (6) feet (except when located within twenty-five (25) feet of a road right-of-way, where the buffer shall be three (3) feet in height). In conjunction with this vegetative buffer, an irrigation plan must be submitted and approved by city staff and the planning commission. A wood fence must be erected to a height of six (6) feet toward the interior of the lot/parcel and within the required seven-and-one-half (7.5) foot vegetative green area. This fence shall be maintained until such time as the vegetative buffer is established at its minimum height of six (6) feet and depth of four (4) feet. The vegetative buffer must be planted at least two (2) feet from the interior easement line. The opaque vegetative buffer must be located within a landscape easement with a minimums width of seven-and-one-half (7.5) feet and cannot be used for any other purpose, except green space. There shall be at least a three (3) foot open area toward the outer property line for the care and maintenance of the vegetative buffer. 
B.  Plant species and spacing of plants: The following plant species may be used on any project when installing a vegetative buffer planting. Any other proposed species to be used must be approved by the planning commission during the site plan review process. 
(1)  Podocarpus macrophylla (Podocarpus), with a planting height of two (2) to two-and-one-half (2.5) feet and spaced no further than three (3) feet apart. 
(2)  Bambusa multiplex (Pea-shooter, Hedge Bamboo) "symodial category", with a planting height of two (2) to two-and-one-half (2.5) feet and spaced no further than four (4) feet apart. 
(3)  Myrica cerifera (Wax Myrtle), with a planting height of three (3) to three-and-one-half (3.5) feet and spaced no further than six (6) feet apart. 
C.  Planting beds and irrigation systems: 
(1)  The planting beds shall be covered with a mulch product, which shall be confined and maintained with an average thickness of four (4) inches and shall be kept clear of weeds. 
(2)  The irrigation system to be used and approved by the city, shall be of a type and design which encourages deep root growth and keeps run-off to a minimum. 
D.  Maintenance: The owner of the property is responsible for the maintenance and care of the vegetative buffer, including the irrigation system and the six-foot wood fence (until removed). At any time the property owner fails to maintain the opaque nature of the vegetative buffer, the city has the right to take the property owner before the code enforcement board and have the vegetative buffer repaired, replaced, or have a solid masonry wall constructed in its place, at the expense of the property owner. The code enforcement board also has the right to fine the property owner up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for noncompliance with the buffer requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 36, 8-14-96) 
SECTION 82.00. - ANTENNAS AND TOWERS 
(a)  Generally. Radio and television antennas and towers may be installed in all zoning districts. 
(b)  Residential installations and uses: 
(1)  Antennas and towers in residentially zoned districts shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height from mean ground level and no guide wires may be used for support. It is encouraged that the minimum height necessary for reception be used. 
(2)  Radio and television antennas and towers shall not be installed within the required front yard setback or forward of the front building line. 
(3)  Satellite dish antennas shall conform with the regulations of accessory buildings and uses in residential areas [Section 80.00.1] or this section, whichever is more restrictive. This requirement may be reduced by the building official if engineering is provided showing no neighboring property owner will be affected. 
(4)  Satellite dish antennas shall not be roof mounted in residentially zoned districts except for those satellite dishes that have a diameter of twenty-four (24) inches or less. 
(5)  Satellite dish antennas shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in diameter in residentially zoned districts. 
(6)  Interference with commercial reception is prohibited and such acts of interference will be referred to the F.C.C. 
(c)  Commercial, industrial and manufacturing installations and uses: 
(1)  The height of the antennas and towers shall not exceed the maximum height allowable in the applicable zoning district for buildings within that district. A special exception may be applied for to request that the antenna or tower be allowed to exceed the maximum height of the applicable zoning district by making application with the planning commission which application must be approved by the planning commission and the board of adjustment. 
(2)  Radio and television antennas and towers shall not be installed within the required front yard setback or forward of the front building line. 
(3)  Antennas and towers shall be set back from all property lines a perpendicular distance equal to the maximum height of the antenna or tower. Engineering may be submitted for towers and antennas designed to collapse upon themselves. The stated fall zone needed will be increased by ten (10) percent for the establishment of setback purposes (this does not include any necessary guide wires that may be needed). 
(4)  Installation of all antennas and towers shall conform to the regulations in Part V of this Code. 
(5)  Antennas and towers in excess of the allowable height requirements in each zoning district must be separated from existing antennas and towers by a radius of not less than one mile. 
(Ord. No. 1098-95, §§ 12-14, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 1121-96, § 1, 7-17-96) 
SECTION 82.50. - TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNA 
    Purpose. The general purpose of this section is to regulate the placement, construction and modification of towers and telecommunications facilities in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunication marketplace in the City of Rockledge. Specifically, this section will address: 
    The regulation of the location of towers and telecommunications facilities in the city. 
    The protection of residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and telecommunications facilities. 
    How to minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscaping and innovative camouflaging techniques. 
    Promotion of shared use/collocation of towers and antenna support structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers. 
    Protection of adjacent properties by ensuring that telecommunications facilities are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained and removed when no longer used or determined to be structurally unsound. 
    Definitions 
    Antenna support structure means any building or other structure other than a tower which can be used for location of telecommunications facilities. 
    Applicant means any person that applies for a tower development permit. 
    Application means the process by which the owner of a plot of land within the city submits a request to develop, construct, build, modify or erect a tower upon such land. Application includes all written documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the city concerning such a request. 
    Communication antenna shall mean an antenna designed to transmit or receive communications as authorized by the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Communication tower shall mean a tower which does not exceed two hundred (200) feet in height (including antenna), where allowed by this Code, which supports communication (transmission or receiving) equipment. The term communication tower shall not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Design examples of communication towers are described as follows: (a) self-supporting lattice; (b) guyed; and (c) monopole. 
    Engineer means any engineer licensed by the State of Florida. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Monopole means a single self-supporting structure which contains no guy wires and not more than one support column. The maximum height of such monopole shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet, including antenna, relay structures, dishes, etc. This structure includes spin-cast concrete poles, concrete poles, steel poles and similar poles. The maximum width of the base of the monopole shall not exceed eight (8) feet in diameter. 
    Owner means any person with fee title or a long-term (exceeding five (5) years) leasehold to any plot of land with the city who desires to develop, construct, build, modify or erect a tower upon such land. 
    Stealth (camouflaged) telecommunication facilities means any communications antenna or tower which is designed to blend into the surrounding environment. Examples of stealth antenna or tower include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and communications towers designed to look other than a tower such as light poles, power poles, and trees. 
    Telecommunications facilities means any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure. However, the term telecommunications facilities shall not include: 
(1)  Any satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less which is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial. 
(2)  Any satellite earth station antenna one meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning category. 
    Temporary telecommunication towers, also known as "cellular on wheels" (COWS) shall mean mobile wireless communication tower operated temporarily in conjunction with a recognized special event. 
(A)  Location and type of towers allowed: 
    All towers within the city limits shall be limited to the maximum height of two hundred (200) feet and shall be of stealth design and approved through the site plan review process by the planning commission and city council. 
    No communication towers will be allowed to be constructed or placed within any privately owned single-family residentially zoned property. 
(B)  An application to develop a tower shall include: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner and lessee of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated. If the applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated, the written consent of the owner shall be evidenced in the application. 
2.  The legal description of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated. 
3.  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or antenna support structures within a one-quarter (1/4) mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including city-owned property. 
4.  Written affidavit attesting that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful efforts for permission to install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on city-owned structures (i.e.; water towers); on all city owned towers or antenna support structures, or on city property; located within a one-quarter (1/4) mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
5.  Written affidavit attesting that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful efforts to install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on all towers or antenna support structures owned by other persons located within a one-quarter (1/4) mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
6.  Written, technical evidence from an engineer(s) that the proposed tower or telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another person's tower or antenna support structure located within a one-quarter (1/4) mile radius of the proposed tower site and must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system. 
7.  Each application to allow construction of a tower shall include a written statement from an engineer(s) that the construction and placement of the tower will not interfere with public safety communications and the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other communications service enjoyed by adjacent residential and nonresidential properties. 
8.  Written, technical evidence from an engineer(s) that the proposed structure meets the standards set forth in the section referenced as "Structural Requirements" of this Code. 
(C)  Setbacks: 
1.  All towers, except stealth towers, shall be set back one foot for each three (3) feet of height from all property lines, but in no case less than the underlying setback requirement in the applicable zoning district. In zoning districts where a special exception use is required for the construction of a tower, additional setbacks may be increased to satisfy safety and aesthetic concerns, as may be set by the board of adjustment. Stealth towers shall meet the setbacks of the zoning district in which they are located but not less than twenty-five (25) feet and shall meet the minimum setback requirements from single-family residentially zoned property as stated in this Code. 
2.  Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of the parcel on which it is located. All structures included with the tower shall be included in the setback. 
3.  Guy wires shall meet the minimum setbacks for the district in which they are located but not less than ten (10) feet, from the property line or leased area. 
4.  A minimum setback of ten (10) feet from all overhead utility lines shall be required. 
5.  Non-stealth towers shall be located on the site at a distance equal to or in excess of three (3) times the height of the tower (from the base of the tower) from existing off-site residential homes or property zoned primarily for single-family residential use. If the tower is located on the site at a distance equal to or in excess of three (3) times the height of the tower as set forth above, then the tower shall be a permitted use. If the tower to be located on the site will be at a distance less than three (3) times the height of the tower then a special exception must be applied for and a public hearing held before the city planning commission and board of adjustment in order to approve or disapprove of the property location of the tower. Such towers shall meet all rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and all governmental bodies having jurisdiction over such matters. 
6.  Towers and antenna are permitted in any nonresidential zoning districts provided the tower cannot be sited within three hundred (300) feet of any residential zoning district. 
(D)  Structural requirements: All towers and antennas placed on them shall be designed and certified by a Florida registered engineer to be structurally sound and, at minimum, in conformance with the city's building code, and any other standards outlined in this article. All towers in operation shall be fixed to land with the exception of "temporary telecommunications towers". 
(E)  Modification of existing towers: 
1.  Existing towers constructed prior to the effective date of this ordinance which do not meet the requirements of this ordinance may continue as a non-conforming use, but these towers may be replaced or modified for collocation or to improve functionality as long as the height of the tower does not exceed its existing height. 
2.  An existing tower may be modified to accommodate collocation of additional telecommunications facilities as follows: 
a)  The applicant for a development permit may be issued a development permit without further approval by the city council. 
b)  The total height of the modified tower and telecommunications facilities attached thereto shall not exceed the existing maximum height allowed by this ordinance by more than ten (10) percent, provided one additional carrier may be placed on the tower. 
c)  Permission to exceed the existing height shall not require an additional distance separation from designated areas as set forth in this article. The tower's pre-modification height shall be used to calculate such distance separations. 
d)  A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the collocation of additional telecommunications facilities may be moved on site subject to the setback requirements of this article. 
e)  A tower that is relocated on site shall continue to be measured from the original tower location for the purpose of calculating the separation distances between towers as provided herein. 
(F)  Height requirement: 
1.  No communication tower/antenna in the city shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in height from ground level. 
2.  Method of determining communication tower height: Measurement of communication tower height shall include antenna, base pad, and other appurtenances and shall be measured from the average finished grade of the parcel within twenty (20) feet of the base of the tower. 
(G)  Separation requirements: All stealth communication facilities shall be separated from existing facilities by a distance not less than seven hundred-fifty (750) feet, and may be waived to ten (10) feet with a special exception. 
    All non-stealth communication facilities shall be separated from existing facilities by a distance of not less than one mile, except as what may be modified and authorized by city council, during the site plan review process. 
(H)  Illumination requirement: Communication towers shall not be artificially lighted except to assure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration, at which time dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA. 
(I)  Finished color requirement: Communication towers not requiring FAA painting/marking shall have either a galvanized finish or be painted a non-contrasting blue or gray finish. The color should be selected so as to minimize the equipment's visibility. 
(J)  Type of construction: Communications towers shall be monopole construction. Special design features such as stealth construction may be required by the planning and zoning commission upon a finding that the visual impact of the proposed construction is incompatible with the character of the surrounding area. Lattice or guyed construction may be approved by the planning and zoning commission and board of adjustment as a special exception use, only upon showing that use of monopole construction techniques are impracticable. 
(K)  Fencing requirement: A vinyl coated (black or green) chain link fence or masonry wall not less than eight (8) feet in height from finished grade shall be provided around each communication tower. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate. Barbed wire may be permitted through site plan review process and if consistent with code. A solid masonry wall or other wall or fence type may be required through site plan review where required for the purpose of appearance and/or land use compatibility. The fencing requirements contained herein may be adjusted where stealth construction techniques are used. 
(L)  Landscaping requirement: The visual impacts of a communication tower shall be mitigated through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the tower and ancillary structures. The following minimum standards for landscaping and buffering of communication tower shall be required around the perimeter of the tower and accessory structures, except that the standards may be waived by the planning and zoning commission for those sides of the proposed tower that are located adjacent to undevelopable lands and lands not in public view, and for tower using stealth construction techniques. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of fences. Further, the use of existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute of or in supplement towards meeting landscaping requirements. The following landscaping shall be provided: 
1.  A continuous landscape screen consisting of canopy trees a minimum of fourteen (14) feet tall and a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet apart shall be planted around the perimeter of the fence; 
2.  A continuous hedge at least thirty (30) inches high at planting capable of growing to at least thirty-six (36) inches in height within eighteen (18) months shall be planted in front of the tree line referenced above; 
3.  All landscaping shall be of the evergreen variety; 
4.  All landscaping shall be xeriscape compatible or irrigated; 
5.  All landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure good health and viability. 
(M)  Accessory buildings or structures: All accessory buildings or structures shall be set back a minimum distance as required by the zoning district in which they are placed, with a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line. All accessory buildings or structures shall be subject to the principal building setbacks for the zoning district in which they are located. 
(N)  Design to accommodate co-location: 
1.  All communication towers less than one hundred (100) feet in height shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum of one communication service provider. 
2.  All communication towers exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum of one additional communication service providers for each additional twenty (20) feet in height. 
(O)  Communication antennae: Any communication antenna which is not attached to a communication tower, shall be a permitted accessory use to any commercial, industrial, office, or institutional structure; provided: 
1.  The communication antenna does not exceed more than twenty (20) feet above the mean roof height point of the structure or twenty (20) percent of the building height, whichever is least; and 
2.  The communication antenna is mounted so as to not exceed the height of the structure to which it is attached by more than twenty (20) feet, and if visible from surrounding properties, is of a color or design so as to make the antenna as visually unobtrusive as reasonably possible; and 
3.  The communication antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations; and 
4.  The communication antenna complies with all applicable building codes. 
(P)  Abandonment of tower and antennas use: 
1.  Towers which have not had active antennas for a period of six (6) consecutive months shall be removed by the owner. Failure to remove the tower within sixty (60) days after notice from the code enforcement division of the city and the city shall have the right to remove such tower and impose a lien for the cost of removal on the site which was the subject of the application. 
2.  Every second year, the owner of any tower shall submit to the city building official a sealed statement from an engineer that the structure is sound. The certification shall be due by the end of the month upon each anniversary of the issuance of the building permit. If the report is not provided within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice by the special exception holder and property owner, such tower shall be considered dilapidated. Towers which have not been certified shall be considered dilapidated and shall be removed by the property owner. Failure of the property owner to remove the tower within (30) days after receiving notice from the code enforcement division of the city shall allow the city the right to remove such tower and impose a lien on the site which was the subject of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1154-97, § 1, 1-21-98) 
SECTION 83.00. - COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL HOMES AND CARE UNITS, SPECIAL CONDITIONS 
    Every residential social service facility in the City of Rockledge shall at all times meet and comply with each of the following requirements, standards and criteria: 
A.  Dispersal of facilities: 
1.  Minimum distance between facilities. As required by Florida Statutes. Measured from their respective property lines. 
B.  Neighborhood compatibility: In residential districts, the external appearance of residential social service facility structures and building sites shall maintain the general character of this district. Exterior building materials, bulk, landscaping, fences and walls, and general design shall be compatible with those of surrounding dwellings. 
C.  Signs: No signs shall be permitted in any single-family residential or multiple-family residential district. Signs placed in commercial districts shall be in compliance with requirements of Section 86.00 of this Code. 
D.  Off-street parking: Comply with the off-street parking provisions of this Code. 
E.  Conformance with state regulations: All community residential homes and care units shall comply with statutes, rules and regulations of the State of Florida Statutes. 
F.  Registration: The Rockledge Zoning Official shall maintain a register of all active community residential homes and care units as required by Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1530-2009, § 4, 9-23-09) 
SECTION 83.50. - OLDER ADULT LIVING FACILITIES, BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION 
    Older adult living facility (OALF): The purpose of allowing higher density limits and reduced room sizes for older adult living facilities is to reduce the overall construction costs of the project, and thereby reduce the overhead passed on to the elderly residents of the city. An "older adult living facility" (OALF) is intended and shall be operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit. At least eighty (80) percent of the units of any facility must be occupied by at least one person fifty-five (55) years of age or older. The facility, following the requirements stated below, is intended to be specifically built to meet the physical and social needs of older persons. The facility operators shall publish and adhere to policies and regulations which demonstrate an intent by the owner to provide housing solely meeting the needs of persons fifty-five (55) years of age and older. To receive a special exception, an OALF must comply with all the conditions of this section. Each individual dwelling unit of the facility shall have a refrigerator, stove, oven, sink area, handicap accessible toilet, and only showers may be installed. In addition, the facility shall have a central laundry facility, central dining facility, central trash collection/recycling system, elevators (for projects over one story), and central adult day care facility. 
(a)  Site location: Older adult living facilities (OALF), may only be allowed on property which is zoned to accommodate fourteen (14) residential dwelling units per acre under the provisions of R-3 (multifamily dwelling unit) zoning district according to the Rockledge Land Development Regulations and allowed by the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan. All provisions of the R-3 zoning requirements will apply (i.e.: height, setbacks, minimum lot size, etc.), and in addition, to qualify for a special exception the following requirements must be met: 
1.  A property boundary line of the OALF must be within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public park at least ten (10) acres in size. 
2.  Any OALF must be separated from any other OALF by a distance of at least one thousand (1,000) feet, as measured from property line to property line. 
(b)  Density limits: Density shall be limited by the comprehensive plan future land use map, except that, for the purposes of this section, a residential unit in this facility shall be considered the equivalent of 0.50 residential units. This equivalent residential multiplier is provided in recognition of the likelihood of reduced impacts to public facilities inherent in this type of use. Maximum number of residential dwelling units per acre shall not exceed twenty-five (25) units. 
(c)  Traffic concurrency: Traffic concurrency shall be based on the following performance standard: 
1.  Traffic: Traffic concurrency will be based on the 1991 Trip Generation Manual Code 252, which estimates that every dwelling unit of such a facility will generate 2.15 average daily trip ends. 
(d)  Site related improvement requirements: 
1.  Parking: OALF's shall have one parking space per two (2) dwelling units, and level green space to accommodate one-half (1/2) space per two (2) units for future expansion. Staff and managers parking areas shall be required, which must provide not less than two (2) parking spaces per individual with a minimum of ten (10) parking spaces to be provided regardless of the number of dwelling units in the facility. The main entryway of the facility shall provide a canopy to adequately cover and provide clearance for a standard conventional bus. The driveway for this drop off point shall be designed for the turning radius of a conventional bus. 
2.  Laundry facilities: OALF's shall have at least the following laundry facilities on site: one washer and one dryer per every fifteen (15) dwelling units of the facility. A laundry area shall be placed on each floor of a multi-story project. Single story projects may have a centralized area for laundry facilities. Multistory projects may place the trash disposal system and recycle system within this area. 
3.  Central meeting area: OALFs shall provide a central meeting area (which may include a dining room area, but not a kitchen area) of a size not less than ten (10) square feet per each dwelling unit of the facility. The central meeting area shall contain a kitchenette area comprised of at least the following: one residential stove and vent hood, one refrigerator, one three (3) compartment sink, and adequate counter space. 
4.  Adult day care area: Every OALF shall provide an adult day care area of at least three hundred (300) square feet, and provided the appropriate supervision needed as directed by the Consumer Health Department of Brevard County. The adult day care area may be leased to a non-profit community organization (i.e.: Community Service Council of Brevard) for the purpose of operating and complying with Health Department permits and guidelines. 
5.  Fire protection: All enclosed spaces within the property boundaries shall have installed a fire prevention sprinkler system. All sprinkler system designs shall be approved and installed as directed by the Rockledge Fire Department. 
6.  Dwelling unit size: Each residential dwelling unit shall have not less than three hundred seventy-five (375) square feet of living area. No carpet shall be allowed to be installed in the kitchen or bathroom areas. 
7.  Open space/recreation area: Every OALF shall provide an outdoor open space area with partially shaded areas for the purpose of allowing residents to congregate in a central outdoor area. The size of the centralized open space area (which may include pool area) shall be not less than twenty (20) square feet per dwelling unit in the facility. Each OALF shall provide a direct access route to the closest community park recreational facility. 
8.  Bathroom facilities: Each bathroom shall have a shower with grab bars installed, and no bathtubs shall be permitted. Faucets on sinks shall be of a lever type for easier turning movement. No carpeting may be installed by the developer within the bathroom area. 
9.  Trash collection/recycling areas: Each individual floor of a multiple floor facility must have a separate trash chute for the disposal and collection of refuse, isolated by a door from hallways or other residential areas to help prevent odor problems. In addition, recycling containers or recycling chutes must be kept available on each floor and emptied daily to a centralized area for city collection. Single story facilities shall be required to provide and maintain centralized dumpster and recycling locations, with specially designed dumpsters to provide easy access for older adults (i.e.: side door on dumpster or special design of lids of dumpsters. 
10.  Access to building and dwelling units: No raised floor thresholds will be allowed within the residential areas of the facility and all doorknobs will be of a lever latch type. Residential move-in access areas must be placed away from the main reception area. The city will encourage the installation of a double entrance elevator with direct access to outside loading areas. Power operated doors shall be installed at all exterior ingress and egress points where residents have access. 
11.  Plumbing stack inspection/cleanout points: Plumbing stack cleanouts with direct access to the hallways shall be installed on the first floor of a single story or two story facility, and on the first and all alternating floors of a facility having more than two (2) stories. All main plumbing stacks shall have a diameter of four (4) inches or more. 
12.  Electrical outlets: Electrical outlets must be separate as directed by the electrical codes adopted by the city, except the height of the outlet must be installed at three (3) feet above the floor. 
13.  Written policies and regulations for the operation of an older adult living facility: The city recommends that all written policies and regulations that the facility intends to publish and adhere to, be first reviewed and approved by the Community Service Council of Brevard County. All comments and recommendations received from the community service council shall be incorporated into such policies and regulations for the facility. The facility shall furnish the city with its written policies as to what methods or recycling and garbage collection will be used, and such policies must be approved by the city before a development order will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 1049-93, § 7, 4-21-93; Ord. No 1489-2008, §§ 1-4, 4-16-08) 
SECTION 84.00. - EMERGENCY HELISTOPS 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  Emergency helistop means a designated landing area used for the operation of rotorcraft where no basing facilities are provided (Section 14-60-02(e) F.A.C.) and used only for the emergency transportation of patients or supplies at a licensed hospital or ready alert for medical assistance on call, and is not used for routine transportation of any person to or from the hospital (Section 14-60.07(6)(a)(7) F.A.C.). 
(2)  Primary surface means a paved touchdown pad or paved takeoff and landing surface, free of obstructions, of prescribed dimensions. 
(3)  Peripheral area. The peripheral area is intended as an obstacle-free safety area surrounding the takeoff and landing area. It is recommended that the peripheral area width be one-fourth of the overall length of the largest helicopter expected to use the facility, but not less than ten (10) feet (three (3) meters). 
(4)  Approach/departure corridors. Approach/departure corridors are selected to provide the best lines of flight to and from the takeoff and landing area, considering prevailing winds, the location and heights of buildings or other objects in the area, and environmental considerations. 
(5)  FAA means Federal Aviation Administration. 
(6)  DOT means Department of Transportation of the State of Florida. 
(b)  Standards for emergency helistops: No zoning special exception, permit, license or other form of approval of or for the location, construction, use, operation or maintenance of an emergency helistop shall be issued or granted by the city or any officer, agency, board or department thereof unless the owner or lessee of the proposed emergency helistop first submits to the city in writing a binding site plan with supporting documents adequate and sufficient to demonstrate that said helistop and the use thereof will meet and comply with the following standards and criteria: 
(1)  The owner or lessee of the proposed helistop must obtain site approval and be duly licensed by the Florida Department of Transportation to use and operate the proposed helistop prior to and at all times during the use of the helistop by aircraft. 
(2)  The minimum primary surface area of the helistop shall be of length and width dimensions equal to at least one and one-half (11/2) times the overall length of the largest helicopter intended to use the facility; however, a primary surface of 300-foot length and width or larger shall be accepted as sufficient to accommodate all helicopters. 
(3)  That the proposed helistop will meet and be in compliance with all Florida Department of Transportation and United States Federal Aviation Administration rules and regulations applicable thereto. 
(4)  Centered within the primary surface shall be a minimum touchdown area with length and width dimensions equal to the rotor diameter of the largest helicopter intended to use the facility; however, a touchdown area with 100-foot length and width dimensions or larger centered within a 300-foot primary surface shall be sufficient to accommodate all helicopters. 
(5)  There shall be landing strip markings consisting of any FAA-approved design and shall include touchdown area border lines whose dimensions coincide with and, therefore, indicate the rotor diameter of the largest helicopter intended to use the facility. When the load-bearing capacity of the touchdown area located on a structure is limited to less than twenty thousand (20,000) pounds per landing gear, a number shall be displayed in the center of the touchdown area indicating the maximum allowable gross weight of a landing helicopter in thousands of pounds. 
(6)  A wind indicator shall be located so as to be clearly visible to landing helicopters but not within the primary surface and not a hazard to flight. 
[(7)  Reserved.] 
(8)  All aircraft operations, including approach, landing, takeoff and departure, shall be under visual flight rules only. 
(9)  Routine maintenance, fueling, basing or hangaring of aircraft shall not be permitted at the helistop. 
(10)  There shall be a minimum of one 500-foot-wide approach/departure corridor with floor and side planes as follows: The floor plane shall provide an 8:1 obstruction clearance and shall coincide in width with the required primary surface width at the boundary and proceed outward, flaring horizontally at a 10:1 rate on both sides until it reaches five hundred (500) feet wide. Where the floor plane is less than five hundred (500) feet wide, the side planes extending out from the floor plane or the primary surface shall provide a 2:1 obstruction clearance out to the required 500-foot corridor width. Curved approach/departure corridors with a minimum radius of seven hundred (700) feet are permissible, but the curved path shall not commence closer than three hundred (300) feet from the primary surface. 
(11)  Local zoning regulations of the city pertaining to lands beneath the approach/departure corridor of the helistop shall restrict erection of buildings or other structures within the corridor to a height not exceeding the maximum height prescribed by applicable FAA and DOT rules and regulations. 
(12)  The route of the approach/departure corridor or corridors for the helistop shall be located and established to provide optimum safety for the aircraft and its occupants as well as for citizens of the city and properties within the city, also, so as to produce the least noise impact on the community. 
(13)  No part of the primary surface takeoff-landing pad of the helistop shall be within a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from any building, automobile parking space or structure rising above the level of the primary surface. 
(14)  A peripheral area as hereinabove defined shall be maintained around the perimeter of the primary surface takeoff-landing pad. 
(15)  A continuous metal fence of a uniform height of at least three (3) feet above the level of the primary surface shall be erected and maintained as a safety barrier along the outside perimeter of the primary surface. 
(16)  Lighting of the primary surface landing-takeoff pad and peripheral area shall be consistent with applicable FAA and DOT rules and regulations. 
(17)  The hospital to which the helistop is ancillary shall provide the fire prevention and control equipment required for the helistop by applicable FAA and DOT rules and regulations, and in any event such equipment and protective devices shall include the following: 
a.  Adequate water delivery system as established by the fire chief of the City of Rockledge. 
b.  Seventy (70) gallons of foam-Amount needed for the ten (10) minute requirements. Recommend A.F.F.F./A.T.C. 
c.  Two (2) ninety-five (95) gallon per minute foam eductors. 
d.  Two (2) foam nozzles. 
e.  Fire hose of an adequate length prescribed by the fire chief of the city. 
f.  A suitable storage facility to house required safety equipment. 
g.  Sufficient hospital personnel trained to safely operate the required equipment and to ensure safe helicopter landing standby and takeoff. 
(18)  All helicopter operations at the helistop must meet and comply with all FAA and DOT emergency medical service rules, Chapter 10D-66.04 Florida Administrative Code, pertaining to air ambulances. 
(19)  No part of the primary surface area, peripheral area, or lateral lines of the approach/departure corridor shall be within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from any property zoned for residential use. 
(c)  Stricter provisions control: If any provision of this section is in conflict or inconsistent with any standard, criterion, rule or regulation promulgated by DOT or FAA with respect to helistops, the stricter provisions shall govern and control. 
(d)  Revocation of special exception: The board of adjustment may suspend or revoke a special exception permit for an emergency helistop at any time said board determines, consequent upon a hearing affording the owner or lessee of the helistop both procedural and substantive due process, that any standard, criteria, rule or regulation promulgated by FAA, DOT or ordinance of the City of Rockledge has been violated, or is being violated, in the location, design, construction, use, operation or maintenance of an emergency helistop. 

84.10. - Temporary motor vehicle, vehicle or boat sales. 
    Temporary motor vehicle, vehicle or boat sales shall be allowed within the City of Rockledge if the applicant clearly demonstrates to the Rockledge Building Official that the applicant will comply with all of the following requirements: 
(a)  The sales shall be from property that is zoned C2 (General Commercial) with a minimum site size of four (4) acres. 
(b)  The applicant must demonstrate that there is adequate ingress and egress and all parking of vehicles must be on-site and must not impair the visual access of driveways or intersections. 
(c)  The motor vehicles, vehicles, or boats shall be displayed and parked on an improved impervious surface and the use shall be primarily for new motor vehicle, vehicle and boat sales. 
(d)  All signs used on the premises shall be consistent with the city's existing sign requirements. 
(e)  The hours of operation shall be no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 9:00 p.m. 
(f)  The applicant must be licensed to do business in Brevard County, Florida, and must be financially stable and have a good reputation in the Brevard County area. 
(g)  The applicant shall pay an administrative fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each application and also provide a five hundred dollar ($500.00) refundable cash bond for clean up purposes. 
(h)  There shall be only one permit granted for temporary motor vehicle, vehicle or boat sales every thirty (30) days (individual or combined sales shall be considered one sale) and the permit shall allow the applicant to use the property for temporary motor vehicle, vehicle or boat sales for a maximum of five (5) consecutive days. 
(i)  The request for the permit shall be made at least two (2) weeks in advance of the requested date and shall not be made more than thirty (30) days before the requested date. 
(j)  In the event the building official finds any code violations during the time the applicant is utilizing the property that particular business will be precluded from applying for a temporary motor vehicle, vehicle or boat sale permit for a period of one year. 
(k)  The building official when issuing the permit may include other reasonable conditions deemed necessary by the building official based on the particular request submitted by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1098-95, § 15, 5-3-95; Ord. No. 1186-99, § 13, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 1211-2000, § 8, 4-5-00) 
SECTION 85.00. - CONCURRENCY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1, adopted January 7, 2009, repealed the former Section 85.00, §§ 85.03-85.92, and enacted a new Section 85.00 as set out herein. The former Section 85.00 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for history. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

85.01-01. - Intent. 
A.  The city council finds that the safe, convenient, and orderly flow of vehicular traffic; the availability of adequate, convenient and accessible park and recreation facilities; and the availability of safe and adequate supplies of potable water, capacities of wastewater treatment facilities and, solid waste disposal facilities, public schools and stormwater management systems and retention facilities is necessary for the health, safety, welfare, economic order, esthetics, and convenience of the public. It is the intent of this section to ensure that roadways, parks and recreation facilities, wastewater treatment facilities and, solid waste disposal facilities, public schools and potable water supplies are in place and adequate to meet the levels of service set in the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan so as to provide safe, convenient, and orderly services. It is the intent of this section to implement the Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Standards of the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan. The city council finds that the safe, convenient, and orderly furnishing of Public Facilities and Services will be achieved by the standards set forth herein. The city council intends that, by adopting the standards contained in this section, the city is committing to adhere to and implement the requirements of the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the city council or other authority with the responsibility of issuing development orders from considering traffic, roadway, recreational, open space, wastewater, potable water, solid waste disposal, stormwater management system/retention, public schools or project conditions not specifically addressed in this Section 85.00, or which are peculiar to the location, size, configuration, use, or relationship to the area of the proposed project or the proposed project itself. 
B.  The concurrency evaluation system shall measure the potential impact of any proposed project or expansion to an existing project for which a development order is required, upon the established minimum acceptable level of service for roadway, solid waste, potable water, drainage, wastewater treatment or park/recreation public facility, public schools or service. The most current available information and data regarding the above public facilities and services operating levels of service shall when reasonably possible and appropriate be utilized for concurrency evaluations. No final development order shall be approved unless adequate public facilities and services are available as determined by the concurrency evaluation. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.01-02. - Applicability. 
A.  Generally. Unless otherwise provided, this Code shall apply to all development orders. 
B.  Previously approved development orders. 
1.  Existing use. Any application for a development order on a parcel of land which is presently occupied, used, and generating any of the following activities or needs: 
Traffic; 
A need for sewage treatment and disposal; 
A need for potable water supply; 
A need for solid waste disposal; 
A need for recreational and open space; 
A need for additional drainage retention and stormwater management system capacity; 
A need for public school student station capacity; 
shall be subject to this section only to the extent that such activity or need, as planned and projected for the development order, exceeds, expands, or increases the level, intensity, or use of an existing activity or need as stated above. 
2.  Amendments to development order. Any development order amending a development order issued prior to the effective date of this section, or permitting an expansion of any type of an existing project which requires road construction, right-of-way acquisition, design, contribution of money, or other improvements to a link or major intersection; additional wastewater treatment facilities; additional potable water capacity; additional solid waste disposal capacity; additional public school student stations or additional recreational and open space facilities shall have as a condition of said development order as amended, a provision that the requirements of this section shall be satisfied when the additional impacts of the development project occur. 
3.  Development orders. Any application for an amendment to a development order which was issued after the effective date of this section shall be subject to this section for all of the following activities and/or needs of the project: Traffic; sewage; potable water; solid waste disposal; recreation and open space needs; public school student station needs and stormwater runoff generated by the portion of the project, unless the proposed project would result in no increase in said activities and needs of the project. 
C.  Nonapplicability. This Code shall not apply to the extent that any vested right is found to exist, nor to any development order or permit the result, effect, or impact of which will not enhance, expand or increase the level, intensity or use of any one or more of the activities or needs described in subsection 85.01-02(B)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.01-03. - Application for concurrency evaluation. 
A.  Application for concurrency evaluation prior to any application for approval of a zoning or rezoning petition. Any party submitting an application for approval of a zoning or rezoning of a parcel of land shall submit a Concurrency Evaluation application to the development director, together with or prior to submission of the application for zoning or rezoning approval. The application for concurrency evaluation, together with a fee as may be established from time to time by the city council, shall be on a form which contains at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  Name, address, telephone number of the owner of the parcel of land, applicant, and of any attorney or other [agent;] 
2.  Legal description of the project parcel of land; 
3.  Size of the project parcel of land in acres, including fractional acreage rounded to the nearest one-hundredth of an acre, if known; 
4.  Zoning classification or other action requested; and 
5.  Boundary survey. The development director, may waive this requirement; provided, that the development director, shall determine that there is no doubt as to the location of the project parcel of land or its legal description. Any waiver by the developer director, shall be subject always to a later determination by said individual, the local planning agency, or the city council as to need for said survey. 
B.  Any application for a development permit must be consistent with the information on which the concurrency evaluation was based. If the applicant increases the intensity or density of the development project proposed during any stage in the development approval process, a new concurrency evaluation will be required. 
C.  Application for a concurrency evaluation prior to any application for other development order or final development order approval. Any party submitting an application for approval of a final development order or development orders other than a petition for zoning or rezoning approval of a parcel of land shall submit a concurrency evaluation application containing the following information: 
1.  Specific use or uses proposed or proposed to be expanded; 
2.  Square footage or number of units of each use; and 
3.  If a subdivision, number and type of units for each phase; 
4.  An approved on-site stormwater management plan; and 
5.  All information as set forth in subsection (A) above. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.01-04. - Concurrency review. 
A.  Concurrency evaluation finding of nondeficiency. A finding of nondeficiency by a concurrency evaluation for a public facility and service as set forth in this section, shall remain valid until such time as final action is taken by the city council or board of adjustment on the development order application granting, denying or granting with conditions the development permit for which the concurrency evaluation was conducted; provided that application for the development permit is submitted within forty-five (45) calendar days after the date of rendition of the results of the concurrency evaluation. Once a development permit has been issued, the concurrency evaluation finding of nondeficiency shall remain valid and in force for the following prescribed timeframes: 
1.  For a rezoning or zoning action approval or for a conditional use submitted without a site plan, the finding shall remain valid only for a period not to exceed the time of final action by the city council with regard to the application, and the finding shall be applicable only to the petition for zoning, rezoning or conditional use and to no other application for a development permit. An applicant shall not be permitted to claim any vested right to a concurrency evaluation finding of nondeficiency obtained simultaneous with an application for a zoning or rezoning petition, unless the finding of nondeficiency was obtained pursuant to a concurrency evaluation application as set forth in Section 85.01-03(B) hereof and complete evaluation as set forth in Articles II through VII of this section. 
2.  For a site plan approval, conditional use approved with appurtenant site plan, or preliminary subdivision plan approval, the finding shall remain valid for a period not be exceed the period for which the site plan or preliminary plat shall remain active and unexpired, except where the intensity of density as depicted on the proposed preliminary plat or site plan is increased from that considered as part of the concurrency evaluation for said site plan or preliminary plat approval, which increase in intensity or density shall require a new concurrency evaluation for the proposed project. For a conditional use, the finding shall remain valid for a period concurrent with the effectiveness of the appurtenant site plan. In the latter instances, another concurrency evaluation shall be required. 
3.  For a development order granting final subdivision approval, or for a phase or unit thereof, including but not limited to residential subdivision phases of planned unit developments consisting of twenty (20) or more lots or units; and commercial or industrial subdivisions consisting of three (3) or more lots, the finding shall remain valid for a period not to exceed thirty-six (36) months from the date of the approval of the final plat; provided, however, that final development orders shall, at a minimum, be based on the following schedule: structures to be built on ten (10) percent of the lots or units in the project within the first twelve (12) months, structures to be built on an additional forty (40) percent of the lots or units in the project within the first twenty-four (24) months after approval of the final plat approval; and structures on one hundred (100) percent of the lots or units in the project within the thirty-six-month period; that the construction authorized by each of the final development orders is diligently pursued to issuance of a certificate of occupancy; and that the final development orders are not permitted to expire. 
4.  For final development orders issued for an individual single-family residential unit or lots or individual commercial or industrial lots, the finding shall remain valid for six (6) months. 
5.  If a development agreement with the city as provided in Article VIII of this section is utilized, a concurrency evaluation may be conducted as a component of the development agreement, and if concurrency is found or guaranteed, the timeframe for the finding's validity shall be set forth in the agreement. 
B.  Expiration of concurrency evaluation finding of nondeficiency. Where any of the applicable timeframes, as set forth in (A) above, for a particular project expire, a new concurrency evaluation shall be required prior to application for the next development permit. Any vesting period relating to concurrency may be considered void, if the applicant fails to timely perform all requirements to keep the vesting current, including the payment of all fees pursuant to a capacity reservation for a particular public facility or service. If the applicant maintains a capacity reservation on a first come, first serve basis for a particular public facility or service, as set forth in subsection (F) below, the expiration of the concurrency evaluation finding of nondeficiency shall not necessarily nullify said capacity reservations. 
C.  Cumulative records of level of service. The concurrency evaluation system shall require maintenance of a cumulative record, informally sometimes referred to "paper trips" or "paper capacity," of the traffic determined to be generated by a proposed project, and potable water, sanitary sewage, solid waste, stormwater management system, and stormwater retention capacity, and parks and recreation capacity, and public school student stations all determined to be necessary to support all proposed projects. These capacity figures, the need for which has been generated by the approval of a development order, or effectiveness of a finding of nondeficiency of capacity in subsection (A) above, shall be added to the existing capacity of each public facility and service. Upon the expiration of a concurrency evaluation finding of nondeficiency for a proposed project which project is unconstructed or deemed by the development director to have been abandoned by the applicant, the capacity allocated to that proposed project or portion thereof in a public facility and service in overall existing capacity shall be deleted or "backed-out" of the particular public facility or service's [allocated capacity and] used, reserved, [or] allocated to other proposed projects on a first come, first service basis. 
D.  Operating procedures, systems and tasks. 
1.  Procedure for monitoring. The city shall maintain written or computerized records of all capacity or volumes which are committed for projects as a result of development orders issued by the city. Where another jurisdiction provides services, excluding transportation, to a project, the city will require that the appropriate information regarding those services shall be provided to the city prior to completing a concurrency evaluation. When another governmental jurisdiction provides services to a project, written evidence of an ability to provide capacity in a public facility and service from another governmental jurisdiction, as required herein, shall be provided by the applicant to the city prior to or simultaneous with the issuance of a final development order. Said written evidence must represent any active and unexpired ability to supply sufficient capacity in a public facility and service to serve a proposed project or phase thereof, as applicable, at the time of issuance of each applicable final development order. 
2.  Measuring potential impacts. For purposes of measuring the potential impact of a proposed project, all previously committed volumes and capacities shall be taken into account cumulatively and compared to the level of service and total available capacity or volume, as appropriate. 
3.  Extra-territorial effects. Projects occurring outside the city's corporate limits and having an impact on public facilities or services within the city, or projects occurring within the city and having an impact on public facilities or services in a jurisdiction outside the city, shall be subject to review and comment procedures as outlined in the appropriate Comprehensive Plan and/or Interlocal Agreement. 
E.  Conditional approval of development orders. If the concurrency evaluation indicates that the potential impact of issuances of a proposed rezoning or zoning, site development plan, conditional use subdivision, development of regional impact, or Florida Quality Development, development permit will cause a deficiency to occur to an established minimum acceptable level of service or temporarily acceptable minimum level of service, the city may conditionally approve the development order upon the availability of adequate capacity to serve the impacts of the proposed projects. 
1.  Nonfinal development orders. Development orders other than final development orders may be approved if a deficient public facility or service improvement based on the established acceptable levels of service will have available sufficient capacity to accommodate the impact of the proposed project and is contained in the city capital improvement element or capital improvements programs of other governmental agencies, and said improvement will provide a level of service sufficient to accommodate the potential impact of the proposed project. This section shall not be deemed to bar disapproval of a nonfinal development order because of the lack of currently existing capacity of any public facility or service. 
2.  Final development order. For the purpose of concurrency evaluation and unless otherwise provided herein, a final development order may be approved if the necessary public facilities and services are available so as to maintain minimum acceptable levels of service. In all other cases, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3202, a final development order shall not be issued. 
F.  First come, first serve rule. If the development director shall determine that the grant of a development order for a project would violate this section, because: 
1.  An affected roadway or link is operating below the level of service set by the comprehensive plan and the transportation impacts generated by the project would not be handled by the link(s) or roadway(s) affected by the project concurrent with the generation of transportation impacts by said project; 
2.  Wastewater treatment facility, park and recreation, drainage retention and stormwater management system, solid waste disposal facility, public school student stations or portable water public facility and services capacity is not available to adequately serve the proposed project such that said public facilities and services will operate at or above the level of service set by the comprehensive plan after impacts generated by the project occur; 
3.  The development director's determination is not overturned on an appeal pursuant to Section 85.01-06 hereof; 
4.  No other provision in this Code is applicable to permit the proposed project to receive a nonfinal development order, the applicant may request that the project application be placed on a waiting list for reservation of capacity for all public facilities and services deemed by the city to be affected by the project. Simultaneous with the applicant's request to be placed on a reservation list as specified in this subparagraph, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee, fixed by the city council to receive priority over subsequent applications which are served by the same public facilities and services. Said reservation shall be valid from the date that the application is filed and the fee paid until December 31st of the year in which the application is filed and the fee paid. To keep a reservation of capacity for a project current, a request for renewal of the reservation must be filed by no later than January 31st of the year for which the reservation is being renewed. The request for renewal shall be accompanied by a fee fixed adopted by the city council, and the project reservation of capacity may be renewed in like fashion for each succeeding year thereafter, until such time as a letter determination of concurrency nondeficiency can be issued for all affected public facilities and services. The failure to renew the reservation of capacity by January 31st of any one year shall immediately and automatically invalidate the reservation and the project's reservation of capacity shall be immediately removed from the waiting list. All applications for reservation of capacity shall then advance forward. The reservation of capacity shall run with the parcel of land and shall be transferable from original applicant to subsequent parcel of land owners and developers of the same parcel of land. 
Under no circumstances may a reservation of capacity be transferred from one parcel of land to another or be amended to include a different parcel of land, or portion thereof, not originally subject to the capacity reservation. Upon filing for an application for capacity reservation, capacity on all nondeficient public facilities and services pursuant to subsection (C) hereof, shall be allocated or reserved to the proposed project until such time as the deficient public facility and service for which an applicant is on a reservation list pursuant hereto shall be nondeficient as to the proposed project. Thereafter, the finding of nondeficiency for all affected public facilities and services shall remain valid for the time provided in and to the extent provided in subsection (A) hereof. 
G.  Conditions. All development orders shall contain such conditions as are necessary to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.01-05. - Procedure. 
A.  Application. Unless otherwise requested by the applicant or otherwise required by this section, the development director shall routinely evaluate an application for compliance with this section. At the time of application, an applicant may elect to submit simultaneous with said application, additional data and studies prepared and signed by a professional planner or engineer using accepted engineering principles. 
B.  Review by development director. The development director shall review the application and any information submitted to determine whether the proposed project complies with this section. 
(1)  [Generally.] Determinations of the development director, made pursuant hereto must be in writing and any denial shall state the reasons therefore. Within sixty (60) working days of receipt of the study, the development director, shall issue a written determination concluding one of the following: 
(a)  The proposed project does not violate the level of service and concurrency standards of this section; or 
(b)  The proposed project does not meet the requirements of this section, including the detailed reasons for this conclusion; or 
(c)  The information submitted is insufficient for the development director to determine the proposed project's compliance with this section. Such a conclusion shall include a request for the specific information needed to enable the development director to determine the proposed project's compliance with this section. This type of finding shall not be a final determination of an application for concurrency evaluation. 
(2)  Additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of any letter from the development director requesting additional information, the person submitting the concurrency evaluation and any traffic study or other data shall either: (a) Submit the additional information; or (b) notify the development director in writing that the requested additional information will not be submitted. Within thirty (30) working days of receipt of any additional information or notification that no additional information will be submitted, the development director shall issue a written determination pursuant to subsection (B)(1) above. Any subsequent request for additional information shall be limited only to information needed to clarify the additional information or answer new questions raised by, or directly related to, the additional information. 
(3)  Determination of noncompliance. Within twenty (20) days of rendition of a letter containing a final determination and stating the proposed project does not meet the requirements of this Code, the person submitting the study may submit additional information addressing the reasons listed in the development director's letter of determination, or may appeal the development director's determination pursuant to Section 85.01-06. If additional information is provided, the development director shall, within thirty (30) working days of receipt of the additional information, issue a new determination stating that the proposed project meets the requirements of this article or detailing the reasons why the proposed project does not meet the requirements of this Code. This new determination letter is appealable within twenty (20) calendar days of the date of rendition pursuant to Section 85.01-06. 
(4)  Determination where insufficient information. If the person submitting the study has notified the development director that no additional information will be provided pursuant hereto, and the development director then issues a written determination that the information submitted is insufficient for the development director to determine the proposed project's compliance with this section of [or] that [the] proposed project does not meet the requirements of this section, the person submitting the study may within twenty (20) days of the rendition of the development director's determination, appeal said determination pursuant to Section 85.01-06 of this section. 
(5)  Extension of time. Excepting the limits for appeal, the time limits contained herein may be extended for good cause shown by the applicant with the mutual consent in writing of the development director, and the person submitting the request for determination. 
(6)  Professional services. Any study, data, or other information, determined by the development director to be of a technical nature, submitted by an applicant or person other than the city, must be prepared and signed by a qualified professional planner or registered professional civil engineer. 
C.  De minimus project review. Any de minimus project may be reviewed by filing an application meeting the requirements of Section 85.01-03(A) hereof. The application, if completed in proper form, shall be approved by the development director as nothing [noting] that all public facilities and services would be nondeficient, unless the development director determines that such a determination would be contrary to the public health, safety, and welfare, would be inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan, and would violate the standards of this Code. The reasons for such finding must be set forth in detail, and the applicant shall have a right of appeal pursuant to Section 85.01-06 hereof. For all de minimus projects, the development director shall administratively allocate or reserve capacity to affected public facilities and services pursuant to Section 85.01-04(C), (D), and the finding of nondeficiency made pursuant to this subsection shall remain valid and in force for the time periods as provided in subsection 85.01-04(A). 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.01-06. - Appeals. 
A.  Board. Except as specifically provided in this Code, appeals from the decisions of the development director making determinations hereunder, including but not limited to a finding that a proposed project is a significant project, issuing final letter determinations, or other final determinations hereunder, shall be taken to the local planning agency. The appeal shall be requested in writing within twenty (20) calendar days of the rendition of the decision of the development director. Upon rendition, said determination shall be promptly mailed postage prepaid by first class, U.S. Mail to the person seeking the determination and to the applicant, as appropriate. The written request for the appeal shall state fully the reasons therefor. The appellant shall be given written notice of the date, time, and place of the local planning agency's consideration of the appeal. 
B.  Hearing. 
1.  Burden of proof. The appellant shall present all relevant information to the local planning agency. The appellant shall have the burden of affirmatively demonstrating that the decision of the development director was in error. The development director shall be entitled to present argument and information in opposition. 
2.  Decision. The local planning agency shall base its decision on the requirements of this section and accepted engineering principles. It shall make its decision by an affirmative majority vote of those members present and voting and shall state the reasons for the decision. A decision shall be rendered within sixty (60) calendar days of the close of the hearing before the local planning agency. 
C.  Appeal from local planning agency. The decision of the local planning agency shall be final but may be appealed in writing to the city council by either the appellant or the development director by filing notice of the appeal with the city clerk, together with a narrative discussing the basis for the appeal, all within twenty (20) calendar days of the rendition of the local planning agency's decision. Consideration shall be limited to the record established before the local planning agency and argument of the appellant and appellee. The city council may overturn, modify or uphold the decision of the local planning agency or remand the matter for further review. The city council may overturn or modify the decision of the local planning agency only by a (majority) vote of the members of the city council present at the meeting at which the decision is voted upon. the decision of the city council shall be based on this section and accepted engineering principles and shall be rendered within sixty (60) calendar days after the close of the city council's hearing on the appeal. 
D.  Judicial relief. Judicial relief shall be by filing a Petition for Writ of Certiorari in the Circuit Court, Appellate Division, within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of rendition of the city council's decision. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.01-07. - Government services. 
A.  State, or federal facilities. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this section to the contrary, upon determination that all public facilities and services are nondeficient, the finding of nondeficiency shall be valid for a period not to exceed five (5) years. If a first come, first serve reservation application for capacity pursuant to Section 85.01-04(F), must be filed due to a deficient public facility and service, no reservation fees shall be assessed. The first come, first serve capacity reservation must be updated annually as set forth in Section 85.01-04(F) but without payment of fees. 
ARTICLE II. - TRANSPORTATION CONCURRENCY 

85.02-01. - Standard. 
A.  Generally. There is hereby established a transportation concurrency standard for all local roads that are not major thoroughfares and for all major thoroughfares and major intersections within the city. Except as specifically provided in this Code, no development order shall be issued for a proposed project which would violate this standard. Establishment of concurrency shall be ascertained by determining the amount of traffic a proposed project would generate together with existing, and background traffic, as set forth herein, and comparing it to the level of service established by the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan, which level of service is computed by use of the generalized daily level of service maximum volumes for Florida's Urban/Urbanized Areas on Page 3.1-3 and 3.1-4 in the Department of Transportation Guidelines on Links. Traffic impact studies shall be prepared as set forth herein. The traffic volume map(s) shall be revised by the development director, at least once each calendar year to reflect the most current traffic conditions. For state and county roadways, the development director may utilize data generated by the governmental entity having operational and maintenance responsibilities for said roadways. 
B.  Significant project standard. 
1.  Link standard. Except as specifically provided in this Code, no development order shall be issued which would, during the buildout period of the project, result in project traffic of more than three (3) percent of the threshold level of service, as set forth in the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan, and as computed by use of department of transportation guidelines, if the total traffic on that link would result in an average annual daily traffic volume that exceeds the threshold level of service during the buildout period of the project. For purposes of this analysis, assured construction shall be considered. 
2.  Intersection standard. A methodology shall be developed by October 1, 1990, for concurrency evaluation of the traffic impacts of the proposed project on major thoroughfare intersections within the proposed project's radius of development influence. 
3.  Phasing. Phasing may be utilized by the applicant to establish compliance with the transportation level of service if the following conditions are met. 
(a)  The proposed phasing results in the links and intersections of the proposed project complying with the link and intersection standards set forth in Section 85.02-01 during the buildout period of the project. 
(b)  The proposed phasing comports with the extent and timing of the assured construction. 
(c)  The development director confirms that construction is in fact assured construction. 
(d)  For any assured construction which is to be completed by the applicant, a condition of approval of an appropriate development order must be imposed, a developer's agreement executed or sufficient performance security in favor of the city presented to the city, all as determined to be appropriate by the city. 
C.  Insignificant project standard. 
1.  Conditions. An application for an insignificant project may be accepted and a development order may be issued provided that the level of service and the volume to capacity ratio (v/c) on the directly accessed link(s) as shown on the traffic volume map(s) does not exceed the level of service and the volume to capacity ratio, if any, specified for said link by the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Phasing. A specified development order for an insignificant project may be issued and based upon assured road construction provided the standards in this section are met. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.02-02. - Traffic impact studies. 
A.  Generally. In order to demonstrate that an application for a development order complies with this Code, the applicant shall be required by the city at the applicant's expense to submit a significant impact traffic study, unless the proposed project is an insignificant project. The determination that a proposed project is a significant project shall be made by the development director by use of the Florida Department of Transportation Guidelines and Trip Generation Standards, or a traffic analysis prepared using generally accepted traffic engineering standards and satisfying the standards in subsection (B)(2). The development director's determination that a proposed project is or is not a significant project is appealable by a substantially affected person pursuant to Section 85.01-06 hereof. 
B.  Significant impact traffic study. 
1.  Scope. A significant impact traffic study shall be required for any proposed significant project. It shall address the requirements and standards of this Code; shall be presented concisely using maps whenever practicable; and shall state all assumptions and sources of information. The form and level of detail required shall be established by the development director, in accordance with accepted engineering principles for traffic and transportation. 
2.  Methodology. Unless the applicant can, to the satisfaction of the development director, affirmatively demonstrate that, because of circumstances peculiar to the proposed project or major thoroughfare system impacted by the proposed project, or because other methods or standards provide a more accurate means to evaluate the links, intersections, and traffic impact of the proposed project, the following methods of evaluation, standards, and information shall be addressed. 
(a)  Level of service. The level of service standard as defined in Florida Department of Transportation Guidelines for all levels of service on major thoroughfares as set by the Rockledge Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Traffic assignment. The total traffic shall be computed, and traffic assignments of the total project traffic made, for each link, and upon development of a concurrency evaluation methodology for intersection, for each major intersection in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan and accepted engineering principles for traffic and transportation. The assignments shall be projected for and cover the buildout period of the project. 
(c)  Projected buildout period. The projected buildout period of the project shall be set forth in the study. 
(d)  Existing traffic (AADT). Average annual daily traffic shall be used as defined in this Code. Where current data are not available to establish existing AADT, the applicant shall elect one of the following methods to establish average annual daily traffic. 
(1)  Counts. The applicant may provide traffic counts if approved by the development director, in accordance with accepted engineering principles for traffic and transportation. Counts shall be made during any continuous twenty-four-hour period from six (6) o'clock a.m., Monday to eight (8) o'clock p.m. Friday, except legal holidays, unless otherwise authorized or required by the development director, in accordance with accepted engineering principles for traffic and transportation. All data are subject to review and acceptance by the development director, based upon accepted engineering principles for traffic and transportation. 
(2)  Factors. where a peak season or off-peak season traffic count is not readily available, the following shall be used to obtain the average annual daily traffic using daily traffic counts (DT) taken at the closest or most appropriate count station to the subject link in accordance with accepted engineering principles: 
DTP = Daily traffic count taken in peak season 
DTO = Daily traffic count taken in off-peak season 
F = Peaking Factor - DTP - DTO 
DTP: 
Average annual daily traffic = Off-peak volume × [(1 - (F/2)] 
Average annual daily traffic = Peak volume × [(1 - (F/2)] 
If F is negative, use zero 
(e)  Traffic generation. Traffic generated by the project shall be computed in the following manner: 
(1)  ITE. The rates published in the trip generation standards shall be used, unless the development director accepts that other standards provide a more accurate means to evaluate the rates of generation based upon documentation supplied by the applicant which affirmatively demonstrates such based on accepted engineering principles. 
(2)  Local conditions. The development director may publish and update from time to time, trip generation rates for local condition and, if applicable, these rates shall be used instead of the trip generation standards. 
(3)  Similar developments. Actual traffic counts which establish the generation rate at three (3) similar existing projects located in similar areas as the one proposed may be used, if approved by the development director, in accordance with accepted engineering principles for traffic and transportation. These counts shall be made for the weekdays (excluding legal holidays) as set forth in paragraph (5) for each site and averaged. 
(f)  Captured trips. It is acknowledged that some trips generated by a proposed nonresidential project are from existing traffic passing the proposed project and are not newly generated trips. Credit against the trip generation of the proposed project may be taken for these trips up to the percentage shown in Table 1. The study must detail: (i) all traffic generated from the project and the turning movements, and (ii) the number of captured trips subtracted from the traffic generated by the project, during the buildout period of the project. Uses other than those listed below, and any percentage credit proposed to be taken in excess of that shown in Table 1, must be justified based on accepted engineering principles for traffic and transportation to the satisfaction of the development director as part of the required traffic study, based upon the peculiar characteristics and location of the proposed project. Factors which should be considered in determining a different capture rate include type and size of land use, location with respect to service population, location with respect to competing uses, location with respect to the surrounding major thoroughfare system, and existing and projected traffic volume. 
TABLE 1. PERCENT OF CAPTURED TRIPS FROM PASSING TRAFFIC 
Uses Percent Shopping centers:  More than 400,000 square feet 25  100,000-400,000 square feet 25  Less than 100,000 square feet 34 Supermarkets 25 Hardware stores 5 Convenience stores 40 Fast food restaurants 35 Cocktail lounges/bars 30 Restaurants 15 Banks and savings & loans 46 Day care centers 10 Service stations and car washes 58 Offices 0 Industrial uses and warehouses 0  
(g)  Background traffic. 
(1)  Generally. Existing traffic volume will likely increase or decrease during the buildout period of the proposed project. The traffic study must account for this increase or decrease in traffic based on background traffic during the buildout period of the proposed project. The projection of background traffic shall be based upon the information set forth on the historical traffic growth rate map and the map of major projects, and shall be established in accordance with the requirements set forth in this Code, and accepted engineering principles. This change in traffic shall be shown as it relates to the proposed phasing. 
(2)  Historical growth maps. Using the historical traffic growths maps of the development director, the study shall project the increase or decrease in traffic volumes based on background traffic during the buildout period of the proposed project. The effect of major projects shall be considered in projecting the increase or decrease in traffic volumes. 
(3)  Major project maps. Using the major project maps, all traffic from the unbuilt portion of major projects approved prior to the proposed project's traffic study which will add more trips than ten (10) percent of the threshold level of service on each significant link during the buildout period of the proposed project shall be specifically accounted for in projecting background traffic. No double counting of trips shall occur, and the historically derived projections shall be adjusted based upon the impact of major projects. Only the traffic generated from the unbuilt portions of the major projects as set forth above which are projected to be built during the buildout period of the proposed project shall be considered. 
(4)  Background traffic. The projection of background traffic during the buildout period of the proposed project shall be based upon, and subject to the review and approval of the development director, using the following criteria: (i) historical growth shown on maps maintained by the development director; (ii) characteristics of growth; (iii) extent of existing, approved, and likely development which may occur; (iv) types and sizes of development in the area; (v) traffic circulation in the area; (vi) major projects impact; and (vii) new and assured construction. 
(h)  Assured construction. Assured construction shall be considered completed as scheduled for the purpose of preparation of the study. Whether it is in fact assured construction and the timing of the assured construction shall be subject to the confirmation of the development director. 
(i)  Project phasing. The traffic study may reflect a proposed phasing schedule for the development of the proposed project. This schedule shall address the time at which each phase will place traffic impacts on the major thoroughfares, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Generation. Project traffic figures and assignments for each proposed phase; and 
(2)  Assured construction. Where the evaluation of phased traffic impact includes the effect of assured construction, sufficient information regarding the proposed construction to ensure that the roadways realistically will be constructed at the time stated. 
(j)  Intersection analysis. Upon development of a methodology for intersection concurrency evaluation, all major intersections within the proposed projects radius of development influence to which the proposed project would, if approved, add more than ten (10) percent of total traffic on an AADT basis for any link adjacent to the major intersection during the buildout period of the project shall be analyzed as follows: 
(1)  1985 Highway Capacity Manual. The analysis shall be based on the Intersection Analysis (Signalized or Unsignalized, as appropriate) Transportation Research Board Special Report 209, as revised, updated, or superseded from time to time. 
(2)  Assured construction. The intersection analysis shall include only existing or assured construction as it relates to intersections. 
(3)  Peak hours. Generally, the study shall address both the AM and PM peak hours, unless traffic characteristics dictate that only one of the peak hours be analyzed. In those cases, the development director may still require analysis of other peak hours where indicated by accepted traffic engineering principles. The total peak hours analyzed shall not exceed two (2) in number. 
(k)  Compliance. The analysis must demonstrate compliance with the standards contained in Section 85.02-01(B)(1). 
(l)  Professional services. The traffic study for significant projects shall be prepared and signed by a qualified professional traffic planner or engineer. 
C.  Insignificant impact link study. Submittal of a traffic study by an applicant for a proposed insignificant project shall not be required, although an applicant may in its discretion submit a traffic study. The traffic study of an insignificant project shall consist of an examination of only the directly accessed links. Such study shall comply with these standards and requirements for a significant impact traffic study set forth in subsection (B) above, to the extent necessary to establish the project's trip generation and the volume to capacity ratio on the directory [directly] accessed links. 
D.  Site related improvements. In addition to the link and intersection standards and studies, the peak hour(s) turning movements shall be shown and analyzed using all points where the project's traffic meets the directly accessed links or other roads. No credit shall be taken for captured trips in this analysis. Recommendations shall be made concerning signalization and turn lanes, and the city may require such to ensure the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.02-03. - Procedure. 
A.  Required submission of impact study. 
1.  Simultaneous with application. Simultaneous with the submittal of any application for a development order, the applicant must provide one of the following: 
(a)  Documentation sufficient to establish that the application is an insignificant project; 
(b)  A significant impact traffic study; or 
(c)  An insignificant impact link study, if the proposed project is an insignificant project. 
Note: An application for a development order shall not be deemed to be complete until accomplishment by the applicant of one of the requirements of this section. 
2.  Review by development director. The development director shall review the information submitted pursuant to subsection (A)(1) above, and determine whether the application is complete for review. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY SEWER CONCURRENCY 

85.03-01. - Standard. 
A.  Generally. There is hereby established a Sanitary Sewer Concurrency Standard for all wastewater treatment facilities serving development projects within the city. Except as specifically provided in this article, no development order shall be issued for a proposed project which would violate this standard. 
Establishment of concurrency shall be ascertained by determining the capacity of the wastewater treatment facilities which shall be determined by utilizing the existing capacity[. The existing capacity] shall be determined by computing the total of the committed flow to other proposed projects plus present average daily flow of the wastewater treatment facility to be impacted by a proposed project, as reasonably determined by the development director using accepted engineering principles. This gallonage figure shall be subtracted from the design capacity of the wastewater treatment facilities, thereby yielding the wastewater treatment facility capacity that can be supplied to the proposed project updated quarterly to show seasonal change. The capacity needed by the proposed project shall be determined by utilizing the level of service standard of 212 gallons per day, per single-family residential unit (78 gallons per day per person × 2.72 persons per single-family residential unit) and for other than single-family residential use a gallonage per day as set forth in Table 2, below. 
TABLE 2. CAPACITY DEMAND CHANGES 
WASTEWATER LEVEL OF SERVICE FOR NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES 
Type of Establishment Gallons per Day (GPD) Commercial: Barber and beauty shops (per chair) 100 Bowling alleys (toilet wastes only) per lane 150 Country Club:  a. Per resident member 150  b. Per nonresident member 25 Dentist Office:  a. Per dentist 250  b. Per wet chair 200 Doctor offices (per doctor) 250 Food service operations:  a. Ordinary restaurant (per seat) 50  b. 24-hour restaurant (per seat) 75  c. Bar and cocktail lounges (per seat) 30  d. Drive-in restaurant (per car space) 50 Hotel and motels (per bed) 100 Laundries, self-service (per machine) 400 Office building (per worker) 20 Resort camps, cottages (per person) 75 Service stations:  a. For first bay 1,000  b. For each additional bay 500 Shopping centers (without food or laundry) per sq. ft. of floor space 0.6 Stadium, race tracks, ball parks (per seat) 3 Stores, without food service:  a. Private toilets, for employees only (per employee) 20  b. Public toilets (per toilet room) 400 Theaters:  a. Indoor, auditoriums (per seat) 5  b. Outdoor, drive-ins (per seat) 5 Trailer park:  a. Travel park (overnight), w/o water and sewer hookup (per trailer space) 50  b. Add for water and sewer hookups, (per trailer space) 100 Factories, exclusive of industrial wastes (gallons per person per shift):  a. No showers provided 15  b. Showers provided 35 Work or construction camps, semi-permanent (per worker) 50 Institutions: Airports:  a. Per passenger 5  b. Per employee 20 Churches (per seat) 5 Hospital (per bed) 200 Nursing, rest homes (per person) 100 Parks, public picnic:  a. With toilets only (per person) 5  b. With bathhouse, showers and toilets (per person) 10 Public institutions other than schools and hospitals (per person) 100 School (per student):  a. Day-type 15  b. Add for showers 5  c. Add for cafeteria 5  d. Add for day school workers 15  e. Boarding-type 75 Swimming and bathing facilities, public (per person) 10  
Source: "Table of Flow Determination" F.C.A. Vol. 5, P. 718, Table XX. 
Unless a development order is issued pursuant to subsection (B) hereof, no development order shall be granted, unless conditioned upon the availability to the proposed project of a sufficient capacity in a wastewater treatment facilities to provide service to the project. No final development order shall be granted unless, using the standards set forth herein, wastewater treatment facility capacity can be supplied to serve the proposed project concurrent with the impacts of the project. 
B.  On-site sewage disposal system. Where septic tanks are permitted by applicable city regulations and are to be utilized, the Brevard County Consumer Health Services Division shall utilize the standards of Chapter 10-6, Florida Administrative Code, to determine that on-site sewage disposal systems are permitted and under what conditions, if any. Unless a development order is issued pursuant to subsection (A) hereof, no development order shall be issued, unless conditioned upon hook-up to an on-site disposal system operated in compliance with Chapter 10D-6, Florida Administrative Code. No final development order shall be granted until the applicant shall submit to the development director, a certificate from the Brevard County Health Department that certifies that the site is or will be made suitable for the use of an on-site sewage disposal system. 
C.  Determination of capacity. In order to demonstrate that an application for a development order complies with this article, the city shall compute the capacity available to serve a particular proposed project. The applicant may submit additional data or information pursuant to Section 85.01-05(B). Any additional information shall be based on accepted engineering principles. 
1.  Projected buildout period. The evaluation shall consider reserved capacity or any capacity to which another proposed project shall have a prior and superior claim during the proposed project's projected buildout period. 
The projected building period of the proposed project shall be set forth in the evaluation and shall be determined by the development director based on the following criteria: (i) The size, type and location of the proposed project; (ii) customary buildout periods for projects of similar size, type, and location; and (iii) any other factors or conditions relevant to the specific project, including special market conditions and schedules of assured construction. Existing available capacity will likely increase or decrease during the buildout period of the proposed project. The study must account for this increase or decrease in available treatment capacity based on conditions during the buildout period of the project. The projection of available treatment capacity shall be based upon the difference between the permitted design of the wastewater treatment facilities less the cumulative sum of average daily flow and committed flow at the time of submission and shall be established in accordance with the requirements set forth in this article and accepted engineering principles. This change in treatment capacity shall be shown as it relates to any proposed phasing. 
2.  Assured construction. Assured construction shall be considered completed as scheduled for the purpose of preparation of the evaluation. Whether it is in fact assured construction and the timing of the assured construction shall be subject to the confirmation of the development director. 
3.  Project phasing. The study may reflect a proposed phasing schedule for the development of the proposed project. This schedule shall address the time at which each phase will place impacts on the wastewater treatment facility to be impacted at the time of submission of each phase. Wastewater treatment capacity will not be taken into consideration unless the project is permitted by the State of Florida, Department of Environmental Regulation during initial application. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
ARTICLE IV. - POTABLE WATER FACILITY CONCURRENCY 

85.04-01. - Standard. 
A.  Generally. There is hereby established a potable water concurrency standard for all potable water supply facilities serving properties with the city. Except as specifically provided in this article, no development order shall be issued for a proposed project which would violate this standard. Establishment of concurrency shall be ascertained by determining the capacity for potable water supply facilities which shall be determined by utilizing the existing capacity. The existing capacity shall be determined by computing the total of the committed flow to other proposed projects plus present average daily flow of the potable water supply facility to be impacted by a proposed project, as reasonably determined by the development director using accepted engineering principles. This gallonage figure shall be subtracted from the design capacity of the potable water supply facilities, thereby yielding the available potable water supply facilities capacity that can be supplied to the proposed project. The capacity needed by the proposed project shall be determined utilizing the potable water level of service standard of three hundred fifty-nine (359) gallons per day per single-family residential unit (132 gallons per day per person × 2.72 persons per single-family residential use) [or] a gallonage per day calculated by the City of Cocoa, or from the department of environmental regulation calculation submitted or as submitted by standard engineering practices with site plan. Unless a development order is issued pursuant to subsection (B) hereof, no development order shall be granted, unless conditioned upon the availability to the proposed project of a sufficient capacity in a potable water treatment facility to provide service to the project. No final development order shall be granted unless, using the standards set forth herein, potable water treatment facility capacity can be supplied to serve the proposed project concurrent with the impacts of the project. 
B.  Private wells. Where private wells are to be utilized, the standards of the St. Johns River Water Management District and other applicable state regulations shall be utilized. 
C.  Determination of capacity. In order to demonstrate that an application for a development order complies with this article, the city shall compute the capacity available to serve a particular proposed project. The applicant may submit additional data or information pursuant to Section 85.01-05(B). Any additional information shall be based on accepted engineering principles. 
1.  Projected buildout period. The evaluation shall consider reserved capacity or any capacity to which another proposed project shall have a prior and superior claim during the proposed project's projected buildout period. The projected buildout period of the proposed project shall be set forth in the evaluation and shall be determined by the development director based on the following criteria: (i) The size, type and location of the proposed project; (ii) Customary buildout periods for projects of similar size, type, and location; and (iii) Any other factors or conditions relevant to the specific project, including special market conditions and schedules of assured construction. Existing available capacity will likely increase or decrease during the buildout period of the proposed project. The evaluation should account for this increase or decrease in available treatment capacity based on conditions during the buildout period of the proposed project. The projection of available treatment capacity shall be based upon the difference between the permitted design of the potable water supply facilities less the cumulative sum of average daily flow and committed flow at the time of submission and shall be established in accordance with the requirements set forth in this article and accepted engineering principles. This change in treatment capacity shall be shown as it relates to any proposed phasing. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
ARTICLE V. - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL CONCURRENCY 

85.05-01. - Standard. 
A.  Generally. There is hereby established a solid waste disposal concurrency standard for all solid waste disposal facilities serving properties within the city. Except as specifically provided in this article, no development order shall be issued for a proposed project which would violate this standard. Establishment of concurrency shall be ascertained by determining the capacity for solid waste disposal facilities which shall be determined by utilizing the existing capacity. the existing capacity shall be determined by computing the total of the committed capacity to other proposed projects plus the existing amount of solid waste generated. This figure shall be subtracted from the design capacity of the solid waste disposal facility impacted, thereby yielding the solid waste disposal facilities capacity that can be used by a proposed project. The amount of solid waste generated by the proposed project and impacting a solid waste disposal facility shall be determined utilizing the existing applicable solid waste disposal facility level of service of 1.2 tons of solid waste per capita per year. No development order shall be granted unless conditioned upon the availability of the project of a sufficient capacity of solid waste disposal facilities to provide service to the project. No final development order shall be granted unless, using the standards set forth herein, solid waste disposal facility capacity can be supplied to serve the proposed project concurrent with the impacts of the project. 
B.  Determination of capacity. In order to demonstrate that an application for a development order complies with this article, the city shall compute the capacity available to serve a particular proposed project. The applicant may submit additional data or information pursuant to Section 85.01-05(B). 
Any additional information shall be based on accepted engineering principles. If the capacity availability being analyzed is from a solid waste disposal facility operated by a person other than the city, as including but not limited to Brevard County, prior to the issuance of a final development order, a certificate from said person operating the solid waste disposal facility may be submitted to the development director. The certificate must affirm the existence of sufficient capacity, considering design capacity of the solid waste disposal facility, present and committed capacity, and the comprehensive plan level of service standards in this Code, all in the solid waste disposal facility that will serve the proposed project. Further, the certificate must affirmatively indicate that said capacity has been reserved for the proposed project and the duration of the reservation. Upon expiration of said reservation, notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the applicant will be required to undergo a new concurrency evaluation. 
1.  Projected buildout period. The concurrency evaluation shall consider reserved capacity of any capacity to which another proposed project shall have a prior and superior claim during the proposed project's projected buildout period. The projected buildout period of the proposed project shall be set forth in the evaluation and shall be determined by the development director based on the following criteria: (i) The size, type and location of the proposed project; (ii) customary buildout periods for projects of similar size, type, and location; and (iii) any other factors or conditions relevant to the specific project, including special market conditions and schedules of assured construction. Existing available capacity will likely increase or decrease during the buildout period of the proposed project. The study must account for this increase or decrease in available treatment capacity based on conditions during the buildout period of the proposed project. The difference between the permitted design of the wastewater treatment facilities less the cumulative sum of average tonnage of solid waste disposed of at the solid waste disposal facility and committed capacity at the time of submission and shall be established in accordance with the requirements set forth in this article and accepted engineering principles. This change in available capacity shall be shown as it relates to any proposed phasing. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
ARTICLE VI. - PARKS/RECREATION CONCURRENCY 

85.06-01. - Standards. 
A.  Adequacy of public parks and recreation facilities shall be based on Rockledge's Level of Service Standards of 1.25 total developed acres of neighborhood, community, and urban district parks per 1,000 people within each planning area. 
B.  The impact of proposed development shall be determined by a comparison of the projected population of the applicable planning area, including the potential increase in population due to the proposed development, to the total number of acres developed for neighborhood, community and urban district parks within Brevard County. The average household size as maintained by the Brevard County Research and Cartography Division shall be used to determine a residential project's potential population. 
C.  If a development proposal provides for active recreational facilities as described in Table 3, "Recreational Site Development and Operational Guidelines" for neighborhood, community or urban district parks adopted as part of the Recreation and Open Space Element, the land area devoted to these facilities shall be utilized to determine the availability of Parks and Recreation Facilities for the development pursuant to the acceptable Level of Service of 1.25 developed per acre per 1,000 population. 
TABLE 3. SITE GUIDELINES FOR COMMUNITY OUTDOOR RECREATION RESOURCES AND FACILITIES 
Park Facility Location Service Area/Population Served Area per 1,000 Population Park Adjoining School Separate Park Facilities Equipped Play Area and Tot Lot Neighborhood area adjacent to elementary school when feasible 2-3 block area/up to 2,500 1/2 acre Minimum of 1/4 acre Minimum of 1 acre Play apparatus areas, benches and open space landscaping, picnic tables optional Neighborhood Park Neighborhood area adjacent to elementary school when feasible 1/4-1/2 mile up to 5,000 2 acres Minimum of 2 acres Minimum of 5 acres Play apparatus areas, recreation buildings, sports fields, paved multipurpose courts, senior citizen's area, picnic area, open or free play area, landscaping Community Park Designed to serve residents of a group of neighborhoods adjacent to junior or senior high school when feasible 1/2-3 miles up to 5,000 2 acres Minimum of 5 acres Minimum of 20 acres All the facilities found in a neighborhood park plus facilities to service the entire family. Pools, softball/baseball fields, tennis courts, play areas, picnic areas, passive and active recreation areas and recreation building Urban Open Space Urban areas 1/4-1/2 mile 1 acre - Minimum of 1/10 acre Passive recreation area, trails, and commemorative structures optional Urban District Park In a large urban area or on its periphery 30-40 minutes driving time/one for each 50,000 5 acres - Minimum of 100 acres, 200 acres or more desirable Play apparatus areas, restrooms, hiking and riding trails, nature center, boating, swimming, picnic areas, and sports fields Regional Park On the periphery of an urban area 30 minutes to 1 hour driving time/over 100,000 20 acres - Minimum of 250 acres, upward to several thousand acres Camping, nature and bridle paths, picnicking, and other facilities not requiring intensive development Beach Access with Parking Within 1/4 mile of coastal beach in an urban area or on its periphery, 1 access/1/2 mile of shoreline - 1/2 acre - Minimum of 1 acre Walkways, parking and restrooms optional  
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
ARTICLE VII. - DRAINAGE CONCURRENCY 

85.07-01. - Standards. 
A.  Generally. There is hereby established a drainage retention and stormwater management system concurrency standard for all parcels of land within the city. Except as specifically provided in this article, no development order shall be issued for a proposed project which would violate this standard. All development orders shall be conditioned upon satisfaction of the level of service standards in this section. Establishment of satisfaction of the concurrency standard herein shall be ascertained through submission of a stormwater management plan as provided in this Code. The level of service standard for concurrency evaluation herein shall require the retention of the first inch of runoff from a twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm event in a proposed project and for the proposed project's impact on the stormwater management system, the level of service standard is the capacity to convey runoff from a twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm event. Single-family residential platted lots within a subdivision which were platted after June 20, 1979, are exempt from this requirement. All other single-family residential platted lots or parcels shall demonstrate adherence to this minimum acceptable levels of service standard. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.07-02. - Stormwater management plan. 
A.  Generally. In order to demonstrate that an application for a development order complied with this article, the applicant shall be required by the city to submit a stormwater management plan at the time of engineering review but in no event later than the time of application for the earlier of site plan development order. The stormwater management plan shall address the requirements and standards of this article and Section 42, of this Code, and shall assure that the proposed project will have drainage retention capacity and that there is stormwater management system capacity sufficient to meet or exceed the level of service set forth herein and in the Comprehensive Plan. The form and level of detail required in the stormwater management plan shall be established by the development director in accordance with accepted engineering principles, but in no event shall such form and detail be less than as set forth in Section 42, of this Code. 
B.  Professional services. The stormwater management plan shall be prepared, sealed and signed by a qualified professional engineer, licensed to practice in the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC SCHOOL CONCURRENCY 

85.08-01. - Definitions. 
A.  Concurrency service area (CSA): For the purpose of measuring school concurrency, the specific geographic unit within a school district in which school concurrency is applied and measured. 
B.  Concurrency service area level-of-service standard: For the purpose of determining school concurrency, the maximum acceptable percentage of school utilization, calculated by dividing the total number of students for all schools of each type in each CSA by the total number of permanent student stations for that type of school in each CSA. 
C.  Florida Inventory of School Houses (FISH): An official inventory report of all facilities owned by the school district. 
D.  Permanent student capacity: The estimated number of students that can attend an educational facility at any given time based upon the percentage of permanent student stations. 
E.  Permanent student station: The net square footage necessary to be provided for each student based on the instructional program of a particular educational facility. 
F.  School board: The governing body of the school district, a body corporate pursuant to F.S. § 230.21, which operates, controls and supervises all free public schools within the school district and determines the rate of school district taxes within the limits prescribed of state law. 
G.  School district: The geographic unit created and existing pursuant to Section 4, Article IX of the State Constitution, for the control, organization, and administration of schools in Brevard County. 
H.  School district five-year facilities work program: The School District of Brevard County Five-Year Work Plan and Capital Budget, as authorized by F.S. § 1013.35, detailing how the school district shall achieve and maintain the level-of-service for public school facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.08-02. - Standards. 
A.  Generally. There is hereby established a public school concurrency standard for all residential projects within the City of Rockledge. Except as specifically provided in this article, no development order for a residential project shall be issued which would violate this standard. All development orders shall be conditioned upon satisfaction of the level of service standard of this section. establishment of satisfaction of the concurrency standard shall follow the uniform, district-wide level of service standard for permanent capacity, based on the Florida Inventory of School Houses (FISH) capacity, as follows: 
TABLE 4. TIERED LEVEL OF SERVICE BY SCHOOL YEAR 
Facility Type 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 Elementary 127% 130% 115% 105% 100% Middle Schools 122% 120% 100% 100% 100% Jr. High 133% 135% 110% 105% 100% High 139% 130% 115% 100% 100%  
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.08-03. - Process for review. 
A.  All development applications subject to school concurrency review as required by this section shall include a completed school planning and concurrency application to be submitted to the school by the applicant/property owner on a form approved by the school board. 
B.  School district staff shall review the development application information submitted and shall evaluate the impact of the proposed development on the school capacity provided in the school district's five-year facilities work program, the impact on the adopted level-of-service standards for public schools, and the projected timing and delivery of public school facilities to serve the proposed development. 
C.  School district staff shall provide a concurrency report to the city. The report shall detail whether or not school capacity will be available to serve the proposed development. The report shall include a certificate of reservation of school student stations capacity, if sufficient capacity exists for the proposed development. The school board may set forth conditions required to satisfy the requirements of school concurrency, including proportionate fair-share mitigation. School district staff will include this information in concurrency assessments and recommending conditions of approval to the city council for development applications. If the projected student growth from the development causes the adopted LOS to be exceeded in the particular CSA and that type of school and capacity exists in one or more adjoining contiguous CSAs, the development shall receive an approved certificate of reservation. The certificate shall be valid for the duration of the final development order issued by the city, but no longer than two (2) years. A certificate of reservation issued to an applicant/property owner shall be site specific and not be transferable to other sites without the approval of the school board and the city. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.08-04. - Proportionate fair-share mitigation. 
A.  In the event it is determined that there is not sufficient capacity available to serve the proposed development, the applicant/property owner, the school district and City of Rockledge may enter into negotiations in an effort to mitigate the impacts from the development. If the negotiation results in an executed mitigation agreement, a certificate of reservation shall be issued and shall be conditioned upon those mitigation measures agreed to by the applicant/property owner, city and school board. The school board will start mitigation negotiations with the applicant/property owner. Mitigation options may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Contribution of land or payment for land acquisition in conjunction with the provision of additional school capacity; or 
2.  Mitigation banking based on the construction of a public school facility in exchange for the right to sell capacity credits; or 
3.  Donation of buildings for use as a primary or alternative learning facility; or 
4.  Renovation of existing buildings for use as learning facilities; or 
5.  Construction or expansion of permanent student stations or core capacity; or 
6.  Construction of a public school facility in advance of the time set forth in the school district's five-year capital facilities work program. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
ARTICLE IX. - STATUTORY DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 

85.09-01. - General intent. 
A.  The city council, in its sole and exclusive discretion, may enter into development agreements with the legal and equitable owners of parcels of land within the city limits of Rockledge, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220 et seq., or otherwise; provided, the requirements set forth under the terms of this article are complied with. The entry into a development agreement by the city shall in no way whatsoever limit or modify any legislative power by the city to adopt ordinances, resolutions, regulations or to make executive, administrative or legislative decisions of any kind which it had the power to make prior to the entry of such development agreement, except to the degree that the development agreement, by its express terms and not by implication, gives vested rights to the said parcel of land owner, said owner's successor and assigns as to certain development permissions, required improvements and similar matters. No development agreement shall, by its express terms or by implication limit the right of the city council to adopt ordinances, regulations or to adopt policies that are of general application or specific as to the parcel of land subject to the development agreement in the city, except as is expressly provided by F.S. ch. 163, or said development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.09-02. - Application. 
A.  An applicant desiring to enter into a development agreement with the city shall make a written request to enter into said development agreement by filing an application with the development director, which application shall contain: 
1.  A concise and complete recital of the proposed contents of the development agreement, including but not limited to development uses permitted on the parcel of land (including densities and/or intensities of use and heights of structures on site), description of the public facilities which will provide services to the parcel of land (including, who shall provide such public facilities and services, the date that new public facilities, if needed, will be constructed, and a schedule to assure that the public facilities and services will be available concurrent with the impacts of development), a description of any reservation or dedication of land or public facilities to occur, and a statement demonstrating consistency of the proposed development agreement with the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  A legal description of the parcel of land and survey thereof, which the applicant wishes to be subject to the development agreement; 
3.  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and any attorney or agent who is or will be representing the applicant; 
4.  A title opinion from a Florida attorney (which opinion is in a form acceptable to and in favor of the city), abstract of title, or other evidence of title which shall identify all legal and equitable owners having interest in such parcel of land, as well as all mortgage or lien holders, holders of easement interest, and other encumbrances, all upon the parcel of land. In the event that any partnerships, corporations, joint ventures or other entities, other than the applicant for a development agreement, might own a legal or equitable interest in such parcel of land, all such principles in and other such partnerships, corporation, and joint ventures shall be revealed. As of the date of recordation of any development agreement, the applicant may be required by the city to update the foregoing information in this subparagraph to the date of recording of the development agreement. 
5.  An affidavit under penalty of perjury verified by a notary public by the applicant attesting to the truth, accuracy and veracity of the application and all attachments thereto; or alternatively, an application executed subject to the following statement: "Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have read the foregoing Application for the Development Agreement and all attachments thereto and that the facts stated in it are true"; 
6.  Payment of any required application fee as may from time to time be set by resolution of the city council; 
7.  The desired duration of the development agreement not to exceed three (3) years. an extension may be approved by the city council for up to two (2) years; 
8.  Identification of zoning district modifications or land use plan district amendments that will be required if the proposed development project proposal were to be approved; 
9.  A survey of the parcel of land showing the location of all environmentally sensitive lands, or lands subject to the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, State Department of Environmental Regulation, or the St. Johns River Water Management District; 
10.  A description of all existing and proposed utilities and the manner in which existing utilities will be extended to the site and/or expanded for the use of the development, including water, sewer, gas, electricity, cable television, and other utilities; 
11.  A master drainage plan for the proposed project indicating thereon the existing drainage features and land topography along with superimposed thereon the proposed drainage features indicating clearly the means by which the final developed parcel of land will collect, regulate and conduct the drainage runoff from the parcel of land developed and tributary thereto; 
12.  The location, type, size and height of fencing or masonry wall, earthberms, retaining wall or screen planting to buffer properties or as is otherwise required by City regulations; 
13.  A grading plan and included therewith the elevation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as applicable to the city; 
14.  A landscape plan and existing tree survey; 
15.  Any deed restrictions existing or being imposed upon the parcel of lands for development; 
16.  A list of all federal, state and local permit requirements; and 
17.  Any further information that the city may require because of the particular nature or location of the development. 
B.  The applicant shall attach to the application an original or photographically reproduced copies of all documents or other relevant evidence. Said attachments shall be deemed to be a part of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.09-03. - Development agreement review procedure. 
A.  Staff negotiation. The development director shall review the proposed project and shall meet and negotiate with the applicant regarding the appropriate terms and conditions on which said parcel of land should be developed. At such time as the applicant and the development director have reached a tentative agreement as to the terms and conditions of a development agreement, or the development director deems that no further negotiations would be useful because of the unlikely possibility of reaching a concurrence on the terms and conditions of a development agreement, the proposal shall be reduced to writing. Such tentative agreement, whether oral or written, shall not give rise to any development rights or equitably or legally vest any development rights in the owner of the parcel of land or other substantially affected person. 
B.  Reduction of proposal to writing. 
1.  In the event that the development director and the applicant have negotiated the terms of a mutually acceptable development agreement, the terms of that development agreement shall be reduced to writing by the city attorney in a contractual form for further consideration as provided herein. 
2.  In the event that the development director, and the applicant have been unable to negotiate a mutually satisfactory development agreement, within thirty (30) days of said determination by the development director, the applicant may prepare a proposed development agreement consistent with all requirements hereof for review by the local planning agency. 
C.  Local planning agency public hearing. 
1.  At such time as the city attorney has reduced the terms of the proposed development agreement to written contractual form, or the applicant has prepared a development agreement as set forth above in subsection (B)(2), the development director shall transmit such development agreement to the local planning agency with the development director's written recommendation regarding adoption of the development agreement. A public hearing shall be held by the local planning agency on said application. At the public hearing, the local planning agency shall accept any public comment, oral or written, regarding the terms of the development agreement. At the public hearing, oral notice shall be given of the intention to hold a second public hearing by the city council, together with the proposed date, time, and place of the public hearing. Thereafter, the local planning agency shall forward its written recommendation to the city council. Said recommendation shall be advisory in nature. 
2.  Notice of intent to consider a development agreement pursuant hereto shall be advertised approximately seven (7) days before the local planning agency's public hearing thereon in a newspaper of general circulation in Brevard County, and said notice shall be mailed to all owners of the affected parcel of land. Said advertisement and notice of the public hearing shall include: (i) location of the parcel of land proposed to be considered subject to the development agreement; (ii) proposed development's project land use, building intensities, building densities, and building heights; (iii) location where a copy of the proposed development agreement may be reviewed by interested parties; (iv) date, time, and place of the public hearing; (v) advise that the public hearing may be continued from time to time; and (vi) advise that an individual desiring to appeal a determination of the local planning agency may be required to furnish a reviewing authority with a transcript of the proceeding, which transcript must be prepared at the expense of the individual appealing the determination. 
D.  City council public hearings. 
1.  Upon receipt of the recommendation of the local planning agency, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the application for approval of the development agreement. At the public hearing, the city council shall accept any public comment on the terms of the development agreement. The city council shall vote on the proposed development agreement, and the city clerk shall immediately dispatch postage prepaid by regular, first class, U.S. Mail and in writing a copy of the determination of the city council to the applicant or [other persons] who have requested a copy of the determination, advising them of the city council's decision. A copy of the determination shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning administrator. The determination shall state that a substantially affected party shall have thirty (30) days in which to file a petition for writ of certiorari contesting the determination. 
2.  Notice of intent to consider a development agreement pursuant hereto shall be advertised approximately seven (7) days before the city council's public hearing thereon in a newspaper of general circulation in Brevard County, and said notice shall be mailed to all affected parcel of land owners. Said advertisement and notice of the public hearing shall include: (i) Location of the parcel of land proposed to be considered subject to the development agreement; (ii) proposed development's project land uses, building intensities, building densities, and building heights; (iii) location where a copy of the proposed development agreement may be reviewed by interested parties; (iv) date, time, and place of the public hearing; (v) advise that the public hearing may be continued from time to time; and (vi) advise that an individual desiring to appeal a determination of the city council may be required to furnish a reviewing authority with a transcript of the proceedings, which transcript must be prepared at the expense of the individual appealing the determination. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.09-04. - Contents of development agreement. 
A.  Any development agreement approved under the provisions hereof shall contain not less than the following requirements: 
1.  A legal description of the land subject to the agreement and the identification of all persons having legal or equitable ownership thereon; 
2.  The duration of the development agreement, which duration shall not exceed three (3) years, together with a potential extension of up to two (2) years, if granted by the city council, said extension being subject to the public hearing process necessary for the initial approval of the said development agreement as set forth in Section 85.09-03 hereof; 
3.  The development project uses permitted on the land including population densities, building intensities, and building height(s); 
4.  A conceptual site plan containing such information as may be required by the city to property consider the development project proposal; 
5.  A description of the public facilities and services, including on-site improvement, that will serve the proposed project, including designation of the entity or agency that shall be providing such facilities. Additionally, if new facilities are needed to serve the project, the date by which such facilities will be constructed and a schedule to assure that public facilities and services shall be available concurrent with the impact of the development project will be provided. The development agreement may provide for a letter of credit, escrow agreement, tri-party agreement obligating the owner of the parcel of land, as well as any lender thereon, or any other performance security, to be deposited with the city to secure the construction or expansion of and new public facilities. Alternatively, such construction may be a condition precedent to the issuance of any final development orders, other development permit, or certificate of occupancy. In the event that the new public facilities and services, including on-site improvements, are in place and operating at the time development permits are requested, no such letter of credit or other performance securities shall be necessary unless such facilities are not adequate to serve the proposed project; 
6.  A description of any reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. The development agreement shall provide specifically how the land dedication obligation for the project, if any, is to be met. In the event that land or any interest therein is to be conveyed to the city or other entity in discharge of the foregoing, the development agreement will provide that such conveyance will be by warranty deed or other instrument in form and substance acceptable to the city attorney, together with evidence of title in form acceptable to the city attorney prepared by an attorney who is a member of the Florida Bar, a title company, or an abstract company, all depicting who is the owner in fee simple of the parcel of land subject to the development agreement and the holders of any other interest or liens affecting said parcel of land; 
7.  A description of all local development orders approved or needed to be approved for the development of the parcel of land, specifically to include at least the following: Any required zoning amendments, any required land use plan amendments, any required submission of the State of Florida, Department of Environmental Regulation, the U.S. Corps of Army Engineers, the St. Johns River Water Management District, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and any other governmental permission that is required for the project. The development agreement shall specifically provide, that said development permission will be obtained at the sole cost of the owner of the parcel of land, and that any approvals previously given, including the development agreement, shall not in any manner obligate the city or any other governmental agency to grant other permit approvals. Under these conditions, action in reliance on the development agreement or expenditures in pursuance of its terms or any rights accruing to the project owner there under, shall not vest any development rights in the owner of the project, nor shall it constitute partial performance entitling the owner of the project to a continuation of the development agreement; 
8.  A specific finding in the development agreement that the proposed project permitted or proposed is consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and the land development regulations of the city or that, if amendments are necessary to the zoning district designations or land use plan designations on the subject parcel of land, that such development agreement is contingent upon those amendments being made and approved by the appropriate governmental agencies; 
9.  The city council may provide for any conditions, terms, restrictions, or other requirements determined to be necessary for the public health, safety, aesthetics, or welfare of its citizens and such conditions, terms or restrictions may be more onerous or demanding that those otherwise specifically required by the land development standards then existing in the city and may provide for off-site improvements, screening, buffering, setbacks, building height restrictions, land coverage restrictions and similar types of matters that would not otherwise be required of the development under the existing city ordinances and regulations; 
10.  A statement indicating that failure of the development agreement to address a particular permit condition, term or restriction shall not relieve the parcel of land owner of the necessity of complying with the laws governing said permitting requirements, conditions, terms or restrictions and that any matter or thing required to be done under existing ordinances of the city shall not be otherwise amended, modified, or waived, unless such modification, amendment, or waiver is expressly provided for in the said development agreement with specific reference to the Code provision so waived, modified, or amended. 
11.  At the city council's discretion, the development agreement may provide that the entire proposed project or any phase thereof, shall be commenced or be completed within any specific period of time and may provide for penalties in the nature of monetary penalties, the denial of future final development orders, the termination of the development agreement, or the withholding of certificate of occupancy for the failure of the parcel of land owner to comply with any such requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.09-05.. - Applicability of ordinances and resolutions of city to development agreement. 
A.  The ordinances and regulations of the city governing the development of the land at the time of the execution of any development agreement provided for hereunder shall continue to govern the development of the parcel of land subject to the development agreement for the duration of the development agreement, except as otherwise provided herein. At the termination of the duration of the development agreement, all then existing codes shall become applicable to the development regardless of the terms of the development agreement, and as appropriate, the said development agreement shall be modified accordingly. The application of such laws and policies governing the development of the parcel of land shall not provide for any vesting as to any fees or fee structure, including any impact fees, then in existence or thereafter imposed. 
B.  The city may apply ordinances and policies adopted subsequently to the execution of the development agreement to the parcel of land subject to the development agreement, only if the city has held a public hearing and determined that: (i) Such new ordinances or policies are not in conflict with the laws and policies governing the development agreement and do not prevent development of the land uses, intensities or densities as allowed under the terms of the development agreement; (ii) such new ordinances or policies are essential to the public health, safety, or welfare and the new ordinance or policies expressly state that they shall apply to a development that is subject to a development agreement; (iii) such new ordinances or policies are specifically anticipated and provided for in the development agreement; (iv) the city has demonstrated that substantial changes have occurred in pertinent conditions existing at the time of the approval of the development agreement; or (v) the development agreement is based on substantially inaccurate information supplied by the developer. All development agreements shall specifically provide that subsequently adopted ordinances and policies of general application in the city, specifically including but not limited to impact fees shall be applicable to the parcel of land subject to the development agreement and that such modifications are specifically anticipated in the development agreement. 
C.  In the event that state and federal laws are enacted after the execution of a development agreement which are applicable to and preclude the parties' compliance with the terms of the development agreement, such agreement shall be modified or revoked as is necessary to comply with the relevant state or federal laws, [and] such modification or revocation shall take place only after the notice provisions provided for the adoption of a development agreement have been complied with. Such persons as defined by state law shall have standing to enforce the development agreement. 
D.  The city shall review all parcel(s) of land within the city subject to a development agreement not less than once every twelve (12) calendar months to determine if there has been demonstrated good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. The development director shall report his findings to the city council. In the event that the city finds, on the basis of substantial competent evidence, that there has been a failure to comply with the terms of the development agreement, the agreement may be revoked or modified by the city upon thirty (30) days' notice to the parcel of land owner as shown on the records of the Property Appraiser for Brevard County. Such termination or amendment shall be accomplished only after a public hearing and notice as is herein required for the adoption of a development agreement. Amendment or cancellation of the development agreement by mutual consent of the city and the owner of the parcel of land may be accomplished by following the notice requirements required for initial adoption of the development agreement as is above set forth. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.09-06. - Recordation of development agreement. 
    Not later than fourteen (14) days after the execution of a development agreement, the city shall record the said agreement with the Clerk of the Circuit Court in Brevard County, and a copy of the recorded development agreement shall be submitted at the state land planning agency within fourteen (14) days after the agreement is recorded. The burden of the development agreement shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the agreement shall inure to all successors in interest to the parties to the agreement. The cost of recordation of the development agreement shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
85.09-07. - Execution of development agreement. 
    All development agreements shall be executed by all persons having legal or equitable title in the parcel of land subject to the agreement, including the fee simple owner and any mortgagees, unless the city attorney approves the execution of the development agreement without the necessity of such joinder or subordination in that the substantial interests of the city will not be adversely affected thereby. Adoption or modification of a development agreement is determined to be a legislative act of the city in the furtherance of its power to zone, comprehensively plan, and regulate development within its boundaries and, as such, shall be superior to the rights of existing mortgagees, lien holders or other persons with a legal or equitable interest in the parcel of land subject to the development agreement. The development agreement and the obligations and responsibilities arising there under on the owner of the parcel of land subject thereto shall be superior to the rights of said mortgagees or lien holders and shall not be subject to foreclosure under the terms of mortgages or liens entered into or recorded prior to the execution and recordation of agreement the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1516-2009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-7-09) 
SECTION 86.00. - SIGNS OR STREET GRAPHICS 

86.01. - Objective. 
(a)  General objective. The objective of this section is to establish requirements for the placement, installation and maintenance of signs, or street graphics, in order to preserve and protect the health, safety, welfare and general well-being of the community's citizens. As the regulation of the placement, construction and maintenance of buildings and structures through zoning is a valid use of the police power, so too is the regulation of the placement, installation and maintenance of street graphics since such graphics in the literal sense must ordinarily be considered structures, and in a practical sense are capable of producing many of the same nuisances as are produced by buildings. 
(b)  Controlling interference with motorists. The regulation of the placement, installation and maintenance of street graphics is further justified by their innate scheme and primary purpose to draw mental attention to them, potentially to the detriment of sound driving practices and the safety of the motoring public to which a majority of signs is oriented. Therefore, it is the intent of this section to regulate the size and location of street graphics so that their purpose can be served without unduly interfering with motorists and causing unsafe conditions. 
(c)  Aesthetic. Finally, it is the objective of this section to protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the community by regulating the placement, installation and maintenance of street graphics. The fact that such graphics are intended to command visual contact grants to graphics a proportionately greater role than other structures in determining the overall aesthetic quality of the community. 
    The aesthetic impact of street graphics is an economic fact which may bear heavily upon the enjoyment and value of property; therefore, the regulation of signs is validly justified on the basis of conserving the value of property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the municipality. It is contended that it is not irrational for a community's citizens to plan their physical surroundings in such a way that unsightliness if minimized. 
    With this purpose in mind, it is the intention of this section to authorize the use of street graphics which are: 
(1)  Compatible with their surroundings. 
(2)  Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain; 
(3)  Expressive of the identity of the individual proprietors or of the community as a whole; 
(4)  Large enough to sufficiently convey a message about the owner or occupants of a particular property, or the business activities conducted on such property, yet small enough to preserve and protect the natural beauty of the city and limit distractions to motorists. 
86.02. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms, when used in this section shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Animated street graphic. Any sign or other street graphic which involves motion or rotation of any part by any means, or is illuminated by flashing, intermittent or color-changing light or lighting. 
    Awning street graphic. See "Marquee Street Graphic." 
    Banner street graphic: Any sign made of paper, cloth, or fabric of any kind having only such material for a backing. Banners may or may not have characters, letters, logos, illustrations, or ornamentation applied thereto. Banners shall include any animated, rotating, or fluttering device designed to attract attention. 
    Canopy street graphic. See "Marquee Street Graphic." 
    Changing message device. Any device visible from a public right-of-way across the face of which a verbal message appears to move or containing a verbal message which changes mechanically or electronically. 
    Eaves. Lowest horizontal line of a sloping roof. 
    Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix or paint a wall sign or other street graphic. 
    Garage sale graphic. A sign which advertises the sale, display or availability of new or used tangible personal property at or in the vicinity of a private residence indicated on the sign, when the location of the sale is in an RCE, R1, R2, R2A, R3 or TH zoning district of the City of Rockledge. 
    Ground-mounted street graphic. Any sign or other street graphic which is mounted on or supported by an upright, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground, any street graphic structure, or a fence or a wall of an accessory building or structure. 
    Illuminated street graphic. Any sign or other street graphic which is illuminated by artificial light, either from an interior or exterior source, including reflective or phosphorescent light. 
    Maintain. To preserve from decline, keep in an existing state or retain in possession or control. 
    Marquee street graphic. Any sign or other street graphic attached to or hung from a marquee, canopy or awning, each of which shall be defined as a covered structure projecting from and supported by a building. 
    Monument street graphic. Any ground-mounted street graphic the support structure (base) and sign face area of which is of a single uniform shape, such as a monument or monolith, and having an appearance that is compatible and harmonious with the principal occupancy structure to be served by the street graphic. 
    Multiple occupancy. A parcel of property under one ownership or singular control, or developed as a unified or coordinated project, with a building or buildings housing more than one occupant conducting a business operation of any kind. 
    Occupant (occupancy). A legal occupant of a building or premises licensed to engage in a business, occupation or profession, or exempt from license due to governmental, educational, religious or other privileged status. 
    Off-premises street graphics. Any street graphic (other than a vehicle street graphic, a public service street graphic, and a permanent development identification street graphic for an office, business or industrial subdivision) which advertises business, goods, products, services or facilities which are not manufactured, produced, sold, provided or located on the premises on which the street graphic is erected or maintained, or a street graphic which directs persons to a different location than the one upon which the street graphic is erected or maintained. 
    Owner or property owner. The owner of property, the tenant, or other user of any property in the city. 
    Pennant. Any flag-like piece of cloth, plastic or paper attached to any staff, cord, building or other structure at only one or two (2) edges, the remainder hanging loosely. 
    Portable LED sign: Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported by trailer, or on its own wheels, or other means including such signs even though the wheels may be removed and the remaining chassis or support structure converted to an A or T frame sign and attached temporarily or permanently to the ground. The light emitting diode (LED) sign utilizes technology of diodes arranged in pixels to create messages changeable by electronic means. Said signs are sometimes referred to as electronic message centers and shall include other similar signs such as liquid crystal display signs, fiber optic signs, plasma display screen signs, incandescent signs, time-temperature-date signs or any other such sign using similar technologies. 
    Portable street graphic. Any sign or other street graphic, except a vehicle street graphic, which is manifestly designed to be transported from one place to another, whether on a trailer, on its own trailer, on wheels, or otherwise. 
    Projecting street graphic. Any sign or other street graphic which is affixed to any building wall or structure and extends more than twelve (12) inches horizontally from the plane of the building wall. 
    Public service street graphic. A street graphic the advertising message of which relates only to the nonprofit activities of any church, school, governmental agency, or nonprofit corporations of a religious, educational or charitable nature. 
    Revolving street graphic. Any sign or other street graphic so erected or constructed as to periodically change the direction toward which any plans [plane] containing part of the sign area is orientated. 
    Roof line. Highest continuous horizontal line of a roof. On a sloping roof, the roof line is the principal ridge line, or the highest line common to one or more principal slopes of the roof. On a flat roof, the roof line is the highest continuous line of the roof or parapet, whichever is higher. 
    Roof street graphic. Any sign or other street graphic erected or constructed, and maintained above the eaves and under the roof line of any building. 
    Sign area. The total surface area contained within any common geometric figure (e.g., parallelogram, circle, triangle, trapezoid, hexagon, ellipse, etc.) which encloses all names, letters, numbers, symbols, pictures, trademarks, logos, or other commercial messages or identifications contained in a street graphic. 
    Special advertising events. Any grand openings, going out of business sales days and special prearranged sales and promotional events. 
    Spinner. Any device designed to attract attention to the premises upon which it is displayed through mechanical movement or through movement caused by the movement of the atmosphere. 
    Street graphic structure. Any accessory structure or device the primary purpose of which is to be or to display a street graphic. 
    Vehicle street graphic. Any street graphic on or affixed to a motorized vehicle other than a registered logo, trademark or service mark. 
    Wall-mounted street graphic. Any sign or other street graphic mounted on and approximately parallel to the face of a principal building wall and projecting not more than twelve (12) inches from the plane of the wall. Street graphics on the outside of a window and window street graphics are considered wall-mounted street graphics. 
    Window street graphics. A graphic mounted and/or attached to the inside or outside of a window for display to the public passerby outside the window. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 37, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1272-2002, § 18, 6-19-02; Ord. No. 1517-2009, § 1, 1-21-09) 
86.03. - General restrictions, prohibitions and exemptions. 
(a)  General prohibitions. It shall be unlawful to erect, cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be maintained anywhere in the city a sign or street graphic which violates the following general restrictions: 
(1)  Ingress and egress to buildings. No sign or other street graphic shall be attached to or placed against a building in such a manner as to prevent ingress and egress through any door or window required or designed for access to any building, nor shall any sign or other street graphic obstruct or be attached to a fire escape. 
(2)  Banner street graphic. No banner graphics or other street graphic of any type whatever may be erected, constructed or maintained along or across any right-of-way of the city, except for such banner graphics or other street graphic as the city council may itself determine to erect for the general benefit of the city as a whole or for the public convenience, necessity or welfare. 
(3)  Street graphics on public property and rights-of-way, schools and churches. No signs or other street graphic other than a city sign or other sign of a public nature will be allowed to be erected, placed, replaced, installed or maintained in or on any city property or public right-of-way; nor shall any street graphic be permitted on the grounds of any church or school or on property owned by any public agency, except as specifically authorized herein. 
(b)  Prohibited street graphics. It shall be unlawful to erect, cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be maintained any of the following street graphics: 
(1)  Traffic or pedestrian hazard. No street graphic shall be erected in such a manner as to obstruct the vision of pedestrians. No street graphic shall obstruct vision at any street intersection. Any street graphic over two (2) feet in height and located within twenty-five (25) feet of a driveway shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the right-of-way of any street to which such driveway provides access. This section, however, shall not prohibit the erection of a street graphic which is located at least eight (8) feet above the highest crown of any adjacent street when such street graphic is mounted upon a street graphic support structure which does not exceed eight (8) inches in diameter. Any sign or other street graphic which by glare or method of illumination constitutes a hazard to traffic is prohibited. No sign or other street graphic may use the words, "Stop," "Look," "Drive-in" or any similar word, phrase, symbol or character within ten (10) feet of a public right-of-way or two hundred (200) feet of a traffic-control device. 
(2)  Immoral nature. Signs or other street graphics displaying any statement, word, character or illustration of an obscene, indecent or immoral nature and that is not within the accepted standards or is contrary to the moral code of the community. 
(3)  Pennants or spinners. Pennants or spinners are prohibited. 
(4)  Red and green lights. Red or green lights, except traffic-control signals, within ten (10) feet of public right-of-way or two hundred (200) feet of traffic-control lights. 
(5)  Snipe sign. Any small sign, generally of a temporary nature, made of any material when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes or fences, or to other objects, when the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the present use of the premises upon which sign is located. 
(6)  Revolving street graphics. Revolving street graphics are prohibited. 
(7)  Animated street graphics. Animated street graphics are prohibited. 
(8)  Vehicle street graphics. Vehicle street graphics with a total sign area of any vehicle in excess of ten (10) feet, when parked on a business premises for more than one consecutive hour and located more than one hundred (100) feet from the entrance of any business or business location advertised or named on the vehicle street graphic. 
(9)  Tethered inflatable street graphics. Tethered inflatable street graphics, either on or off the premises, are prohibited. 
(10)  Banners. Other than those allowed by Sections 86.04(g) and 86.03(a)(2). 
(11)  Roof graphics. Roof graphics are prohibited. 
(12)  Projecting graphics. Projecting graphics are prohibited. 
(c)  Street graphics exempt from this section. The following street graphics or signs are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Street graphics with a total size of six (6) square feet or less per building which bear only property numbers, street addresses, telephone numbers, post box numbers or names of occupants of the premises, with characters not exceeding eight (8) inches in height for nonresidential uses or of any height for residential uses. 
(2)  Governmental flags or insignia except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion. 
(3)  Legal notices and other signs or graphics of six (6) square feet of sign area or less, either publicly or privately owned, directing and guiding traffic and parking, which may include the business identification which shall not exceed one-third of the sign area of such graphic, but bearing no advertising matter. Example: Parking, entrance, exit, one-way, service, etc. 
(4)  Christmas trees, other holiday displays, and window displays of merchandise except as specifically prohibited herein. 
(5)  Street graphics reproduced on the body of coin-operated vending machines, gasoline pumps, telephone booths, and ice vending equipment, and not including off-premises street graphics. 
(6)  Nonilluminated graphics of not over four (4) square feet of sign area for safety or caution or to prohibit trespassing. 
(7)  Murals, statues, paintings, designs or other decorative features or structures designed to attract attention to any occupancy but containing no names of occupants, business or product identification, trademark, logo, address, or other commercial message, provided a special permit therefore is obtained from the city council. 
(8)  Street graphics, other than off-premises street graphics, of up to eighteen (18) square feet of sign area on any church, school, or public agency property. An additional sixteen (16) square feet may be added for a reader board. 
(9)  Vehicle street graphics with less than ten (10) square feet of total sign area on any vehicle. 
(10)  Nonilluminated public service street graphics of not over four (4) square feet of sign area when located on a window or inside all [hall] of any nonresidential use or when located not closer than five (5) feet to a public right-of-way and not closer than ten (10) feet to the city limits. 
(11)  Signs necessary to promote health, safety and welfare and other regulatory, statutory, traffic control or directional signs erected on public property with permission as appropriate from the United States Government, State of Florida, Brevard County or the City of Rockledge. 
(12)  Decorative flags and bunting for celebration, convention or commemoration of significance for the entire community when authorized by city council for a prescribed period of time. 
(13)  Neon lighting of less than one hundred (100) linear feet as accent lighting and shall not be used as signage. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 38, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1174-98, § 9, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 1186-99, §§ 15, 16, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 1268-2002, § 25, 4-3-02; Ord. No. 1548-2010, §§ 1, 2, 5-5-10) 
86.04. - Temporary street graphics. 
    Temporary street graphics are those indicating the sale or development of property or those displayed in conjunction with new businesses and are permitted prior to the use of the permanent street graphics otherwise allowed in this section. Such temporary street graphics are permitted in all districts according to the following regulations, except that it shall be unlawful to erect, cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be maintained any temporary street graphic which fails to conform to the following regulations: 
(a)  Subdivision development street graphics. These graphics shall be permitted to identify subdivision of ten (10) or more lots, where an active building and development program is under way. Such graphics shall be nonilluminated wall or ground-mounted and shall be permitted for a maximum legal effective period of not more than two (2) years. Such graphics shall be removed when the permit becomes void, or when seventy-five (75) percent of the lots in the subdivision have been conveyed or had principal buildings erected on them. Subdivisions development graphics shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area, and the street graphic structure shall not exceed in size such sign area plus an allowable border of not more than six (6) inches in width. Such graphics shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from any property line and shall be no greater than ten (10) feet in height. In such case where the subdivision abuts more than one street, one such graphic may be erected on each street frontage. 
A subdivision may have one graphic erected near each major intersection to the subdivision with a maximum of two (2) such graphics on a major thoroughfare. The content of such graphics shall be restricted to the name of the developer and/or agent or identification emblem and a directional arrow. 
(b)  On-site development street graphics. These signs or graphics shall be permitted on property on which there is an active building program underway to identify the developer, architect, contractor, realtor, etc. Such on-site development signs shall be permitted on a temporary basis and shall not be erected more than sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of actual construction of the project and shall be removed when construction is completed. If a sign is erected as permitted in this section and if construction is not initiated within sixty (60) days after the sign is erected, or if such construction is not continuously and actively prosecuted to completion, said sign shall be removed. No on-site development sign shall be permitted to be erected closer than fifteen (15) feet to any property lines or public rights-of-way. 
(1)  RCE, R1, R2, and MH zoning districts, one nonilluminated wall or ground-mounted graphic not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in sign area and six (6) feet in height, including supports, may be erected. 
(2)  R2A, R3, and TH districts and a C2 district where residential construction is occurring, one nonilluminated wall or ground-mounted graphic not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area or ten (10) feet in overall height may be erected. In cases where development in excess of fifty (50) dwelling units abuts more than one street, one wall or ground-mounted street graphic may be erected on each street frontage, provided the total aggregate sign area of the two (2) graphics does not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet and height [neither] exceeds forty-eight (48) square feet in sign area. 
(3)  In all zoning districts where nonresidential development is under way, one nonilluminated wall or ground-mounted street graphic not exceeding sixty-four (64) square feet in sign area or fifteen (15) feet in height including supports may be erected. In cases where development in excess of five (5) acres abuts more than one street, one wall or ground-mounted street graphic may be erected on each street frontage, provided the total aggregate sign area of the two (2) graphics does not exceed ninety-six (96) square feet and neither exceeds sixty-four (64) square feet in sign area. 
(4)  The size of any street graphic structure upon which an on-site development street graphic is located shall not exceed the permitted sign area and a six-inch border. 
(c)  Temporary real estate street graphic. These graphics shall be permitted on properties where an owner is actively attempting to sell, rent or lease such property, either personally or through an agent. No sign permitted by this subsection shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to any side property line. Such signs shall be removed when ownership has changed or the property is no longer for sale, rent or lease. A sign advertising that a property has been sold shall not be displayed for more than thirty (30) days after it is first put up. 
(1)  In the RCE, R1, R2, R2A, R3, TH and MH districts and in a C2 zoning district where residential property is being sold there shall be permitted one on-site, non-illuminated ground-mounted graphic not exceeding six (6) square feet in sign area and three (3) feet in overall height. Property fronting two (2) public streets (not to include corner lots) may have one additional graphic allowing a sign for each public street. 
(2)  In all other districts, one on-site nonilluminated wall or ground-mounted graphic not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area, plus a border of not more than six (6) inches in width, and not exceeding eight (8) feet in overall height, shall be permitted. 
(3)  The size of any street graphic structure upon which a temporary real estate graphic is located shall not exceed the permitted sign area and border. 
(d)  New businesses. A new business, or a business in a new location with no permanent graphics, may obtain a permit for a temporary street graphic of up to sixteen (16) square feet in sign area for a period of not more than sixty (60) days or until installation of permanent street graphics, whichever shall occur first. Such a temporary street graphic structure shall not exceed in size the maximum sign area plus a border of six (6) inches in width and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in overall height. 
(e)  Signs destroyed. Any business which has its permanent signs destroyed may obtain a permit for a temporary street graphic of up to sixteen (16) square feet in sign area for a period of not more than sixty (60) days, or until installation of permanent street graphics, whichever occurs earlier. 
(f)  Garage sale graphics. No person shall erect, post or display any garage sale graphic, as defined in section 86.02 of this section, except in compliance with the following specific regulations pertaining to garage sale graphics and garage sales: 
(1)  Size: No garage sale graphic larger than three (3) square feet in total area shall be placed or displayed on any property. 
(2)  Time of display: No garage sale graphic shall be posted or displayed on any property for more than three (3) consecutive days and the owners shall remove any posted or displayed garage sale graphics by 6:00 p.m. on the final day of the sale. 
(3)  Place of posting: No garage sale graphic shall be placed or displayed: 
a.  On any part of the right-of-way of Fiske Boulevard, Barton Boulevard, U.S. # 1, Eyster Boulevard, Barnes Boulevard, Murrell Road or Florida Avenue. 
b.  On any tree, utility pole, street light, street signage, public signage or on other existing sign. 
c.  On or near any corner lot so as to interfere with the visibility of the operator of a motor vehicle at or approaching the intersection. 
d.  At an elevation higher than three (3) feet above the surface level of the part of any public street nearest to the graphic. 
(4)  Number of signs: Not more than three (3) garage sale graphics shall be posted or displayed with respect to the same garage sale. 
(5)  Number of sales per annum: No person shall post or display any garage sale graphic with respect to more than four (4) different garage sales in any consecutive twelve-month period of time, nor conduct more than four (4) different garage sales on the same parcel of property within a twelve-month period of time, and not more than one garage sale within any thirty-day period. 
(g)  Banner graphics. These graphics shall be permitted on commercial properties under the following circumstances: grand openings; signs pending placement of permanent signs; or special events. Banner graphics shall comply with the following specific regulations: 
(1)  Size: No banner shall be larger than eighteen (18) square feet. 
(2)  Time of display: No more than one banner at a time may be displayed on a property at one time; no banner shall be displayed longer than fourteen (14) continuous days from the date a permit is issued; no location may have more than four (4) banner permits issued to the site in any twelve-month period. 
(3)  Place of posting: Banners must be attached to the principal structure, and may not block the view of windows in the establishment where being posted or in an area approved by the building official. 
(4)  Permits: Permits will be issued by the building department at no charge. 
(5)  Each property receiving a permit to display a banner shall abide by the rules and regulations or it will forfeit the ability to apply for another permit for a minimum of one year from the time of compliance. Repeat violations by any applicant shall subject the offender to possible code enforcement action. 
(h)  One-family and two-family residences: A parcel of land on which is located a one-family or two-family residence may display not more than two (2) temporary decorative flags with an aggregate display area of not more than twelve (12) feet, excluding temporary embellishments (i.e.: real estate sign riders). No individual decorative flag shall exceed six (6) feet, excluding temporary embellishments (i.e.: real estate riders), nor exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(i)  Multi-family residences: A parcel on which is located a multifamily residence may display not more than four (4) temporary decorative flags with an aggregate display area of not more than twenty-four (24) square feet. No individual decorative flag shall exceed six (6) square feet, excluding temporary embellishments (i.e., real estate riders), nor exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(j)  [Special advertising events signage:] Special advertising events signage may include balloons, twirling signs, flags, pennants, pennant ropes and inflatable air signs securely attached to the ground. Each allowed special advertising events shall not exceed ten (10) days, except for going out of business sales, which can be allowed for up to thirty (30) days and all shall be permitted by the building department. 
(k)  Portable LED signs. Portable signs using light emitting diodes, or LED signs, are permitted under the following conditions: 
(1)  Portable LED signs may only be permitted in commercial or manufacturing districts or as allowed by a special event permit. 
(2)  Messages displayed through a portable LED sign may scroll, but shall not blink, flicker, flash, or be otherwise animated. 
(3)  Advertising, sale or special event; maximum four (4) seven-day periods for any business establishment within each calendar year. No portable LED sign shall be placed closer than fifteen (15) feet to any property line on the premises on which it is located. The electrical extension cable shall be sized in accordance with the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70) but in no case shall the cable exceed one hundred (100) feet in length or be placed in such a manner as to be subject to vehicular traffic. No such portable LED sign shall have a total sign area of more than thirty-two (32) square feet per side. If such sign is not removed within three (3) days after expiration of a permit, the city shall remove the sign in accordance with the provisions outlined in Section 86.14 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1121-96, § 2, 7-17-96; Ord. No. 1174-98, § 10, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 1268-2002, § 26, 4-3-02; Ord. No. 1272-2002, §§ 19-24, 6-19-02; Ord. No. 1313-2003, § 1, 8-20-03; Ord. No. 1517-2009, § 2, 1-21-09) 
86.05. - Permanent street graphics. 
    It shall be unlawful to erect, cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be maintained, display or cause to be displayed, or substantially alter or reconstruct, or cause to be substantially altered or reconstructed any street graphic, other than temporary street graphics specifically permitted by this section and street graphics specifically exempted from this section, which does not conform to the following provisions: 
(A)  Areas in which permitted. Except where otherwise specifically provided, street graphics shall be permitted only in areas other than residential districts. For purposes of this section, residential districts include all land zoned RCE, R1, R2, R2A, R3, TH and MH as well as that zoned C2 when used solely for residential purposes. 
(B)  Building Standards. 
(1)  Permanent street graphics must be constructed of essentially maintenance free material. 
(2)  Wall graphics shall not be constructed of paper, cloth, or cloth like material. 
(3)  Ground mounted graphics shall not be constructed of cloth, wood, or wood derivative products. Supports for ground mounted signs must be constructed of concrete masonry or veneered to enhance the appearance of the sign. 
(4)  All ground mounted signs must have the street address displayed with contrasting numerals not less than 6" inches in height. These numbers will not be contiguous to or be considered sign area. 
(5)  All signs must be designed by a design professional to withstand the working stress and wind pressures specified by the Standard Building Code. 
(C)  Ground-mounted street graphics: 
(1)  Permissible number of street graphics and permissible sign area. Supports for ground mounted signs must be of a type of construction other than exposed wood or metal. They shall be covered or veneered to enhance the appearance of the sign. Ground-mounted street graphics shall be permitted in all areas other than residential areas in accordance with the following limitations and restrictions. 
(a)  Each multiple-occupancy complex, and each occupant not located in a multiple-occupancy complex, with a frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet on a public right-of-way may display up to one ground-mounted street graphic having a graphic display area of not more than thirty-two (32) square feet on each side of the sign, or if a monument street graphic, a graphic display area of not more than forty-eight (48) square feet on each side of the sign; provided, that no such street graphic may be located closer than ten (10) feet to any side property line. 
(b)  Each multiple-occupancy complex, and each occupant not located in a multiple-occupancy complex, with a frontage of at least one hundred (100) feet but less than two hundred (200) feet on a public right-of-way may display up to one ground-mounted street graphic having a graphic display area of not more than sixty-four (64) square feet on each side of the sign, or if a monument street graphic, a graphic display area of not more than ninety-six (96) square feet on each side of the sign; provided, that no such street graphic may be located closer than twenty (20) feet of any side property line. 
(c)  Each multiple-occupancy complex, and each occupant not located in a multiple-occupancy complex, with a frontage of at least two hundred (200) feet but less than three hundred (300) feet on a public right-of-way may display one ground-mounted street graphic having a sign area of no more than ninety-six (96) square feet; or, if a monument street graphic, a graphic display area of not more than one hundred twenty (120) square feet on each side of the sign; provided at least sixteen (16) square feet must be a reader board; provided that no such street graphic may be closer than thirty-five (35) feet to any side property line or closer than thirty-five (35) feet to any other street graphic permitted under this subsection. 
(d)  Each multiple-occupancy complex, and each occupant not located in a multiple-occupancy complex, with a frontage of at least three hundred (300) feet or more, including out-parcels on a public right-of-way may display only monument style street graphics having a total combined sign area of not more than one square foot of sign area for each four (4) feet of street frontage, or one hundred twenty (120) square feet of sign area, whichever is greater; provided that no such street graphic may be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any side property line, or closer than three hundred (300) feet to any other street graphic permitted under this subsection, the sign may be expanded another sixteen (16) square feet for additional reader board space, if the multi-occupancy complex has over 20 tenants and built as part of the monument graphic sign, in no event shall any street graphic have a sign area in excess of two hundred (200) square feet. Those properties meeting the spacing requirements to three hundred (300) feet, may place additional entryway signs at each access point, provided each additional sign must be a monument graphic sign and may not exceed ninety-six (96) square feet in area (including reader board space of sixteen (16) square feet). 
(e)  Interstate highway graphics. The owner, lessee or other party in possession of property constituting a multiple occupancy complex, or of property not located in a multiple occupancy complex, which property is within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from any right-of-way line of Florida Interstate I-95 shall be permitted to erect and maintain on said property a ground-mounted street graphic or graphics, hereinafter referred to as an "interstate highway graphic," only upon the following terms, limitations and conditions: 
1.  No interstate highway graphic shall be erected, placed or maintained on property lying in any of the following single-family residential zoning districts of the City of Rockledge, viz: R1 (Single-Family Dwelling) District, R2 (Single-Family Dwelling) District, or R2A (Multifamily Dwelling, Low Density) District. 
2.  No interstate highway graphic on such property shall have a greater area than two hundred (200) square feet including embellishments. 
3.  No interstate highway graphic on such property shall have a height exceeding one hundred twenty (120) feet, measured from mean ground grade level of all land within a radius of one hundred (100) feet from the base of the sign. The applicant must provide clear and convincing evidence to the building official that signage is needed beyond twenty (20) feet in height to allow their sign to be visual to motorists traveling along Interstate 95, before reaching the on-ramps. The applicant will provide a site plan and engineering showing additional height is needed based upon: orientation of the sign to the property; topography; vegetation; or the built environment. The building official will approve the minimum height needed, but in no case exceed the one hundred twenty-foot height limit. 
4.  An interstate highway graphic may only be erected and maintained within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the closest right-of-way line of Florida Interstate Highway I-95. 
5.  No interstate highway graphic shall be erected or maintained closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from any other interstate highway graphic. 
6.  No interstate highway graphic shall be erected or maintained closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any public right-of-way nor closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line. 
7.  Interstate highway graphics can contain or consist of any electronic reader board, rotating message board or exterior lighting. 
8.  No interstate highway graphic shall have more than two (2) signs facing the same direction and mounted on the same base or supports. 
(2)  Occupants having frontage on more than one right-of-way. Each multiple-occupancy complex, and each occupant not located in a multiple-occupancy complex, with a frontage on more than one right-of-way may display on each secondary frontage one ground-mounted street graphic having a sign area of no more than twenty-four (24) square feet; provided, that no such street graphic may be located closer than ten (10) feet to any side property line. 
(a)  The maximum allowable height of ground-mounted street graphics within ten (10) feet of a building shall be the roof line or eighteen (18) feet, whichever is lower. The maximum allowable height of a ground-mounted street graphic having a clear horizontal distance of at least ten (10) feet from any building shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  The height of a ground mounted street graphic shall be measured vertically from the established average grade directly below the graphic to the elevation of the highest point of the graphic. 
(c)  A ground-mounted street graphic under which a pedestrian walkway passes must have at least a nine-foot vertical clearance. 
(d)  Projection over a right-of-way is prohibited for all ground-mounted street graphics. 
(e)  Any ground-mounted street graphic may have a border of up to six (6) inches in width surrounding the permitted sign area. 
(f)  No street graphic permitted by this subsection shall contain any advertising message concerning any business, goods, products, services or facilities which are not manufactured, produced, sold, provided or located on the premises upon which the street graphic is erected or maintained. 
(g)  Street graphics shall, to the extent feasible, be located so as to avoid the unnecessary removal of mature trees. 
(h)  The minimum front yard setback shall be five (5) feet to the leading edge of the sign except for property in the IP zoning district, which shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(i)  Monument street graphics shall be no less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) feet in width, and not more than twenty (20) feet in height. 
(D)  Wall-mounted and marquee street graphics. 
(1)  Permissible sign area. Wall-mounted and marquee street graphics shall be permitted in all areas other than residential areas in accordance with the following limitations and restrictions: 
(a)  Each occupant not located in a multiple-occupancy complex may display up to two (2) such street graphics on any one side of the principal building in which such occupancy is located, with a total combined sign area of up to twenty (20) percent of the surface area of such building side or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is smaller. One additional such street graphic, with a maximum sign area of fifty (50) square feet, may be displayed on any other side of such building which faces a public street abutting such occupancy. 
(b)  Each multiple-occupancy complex may display one (1) such street graphic on one side of the principal building(s) in which such occupancy is located, with a sign area of up to twenty (20) percent of the surface area of such building side or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is smaller. When the multiple occupancy consists of only one (1) principal building, one additional such street graphic, with a maximum sign area of fifty (50) square feet, may be displayed on any one other side of such building which faces a public street abutting the multiple-occupancy complex. Wall-mounted street graphics for a multiple-occupancy complex shall only include identification of the multiple-occupancy complex itself. 
(c)  Each occupant of a multiple-occupancy complex may display such street graphics on the principal building in which such occupant is located, with the following limitations: 
1.  On each side of such principal building on which part of the exterior wall is included in the occupant's individually leased or owned premises (not including a common or jointly owned area), such occupant may display street graphics as follows: 
a. If such side of the principal building includes the primary entrance/exit to such occupant/s premises, the occupant may display in the leased or owned area as may [many] as two (2) such street graphics, with a total combined sign area of no more than ten (10) percent of the surface area of the exterior wall included in such occupant's individually leased or owned premises up to a maximum sign area of one hundred (100) square feet. Only one (1) building side will be considered as including any occupant's primary entrance/exit. If the occupant has an entrance/exit on a corner, or on more than one side, the occupant may choose which building side shall count as having the primary entrance/exit. 
b. On any other such building side, an occupant may display within the leased or owned area one such street graphic not exceeding twenty-four (24) feet in sign area. 
(2)  General restrictions. All street graphics permitted pursuant to this subsection shall comply with the following general restrictions: 
a.  The maximum height for wall-mounted street graphics shall be the roof line or eaves, whichever is lower; for roof graphics, the roof line; and for marquee and projecting graphics, the roof line or eighteen (18) feet; whichever is lower. 
b.  The height of a marquee or projecting street graphic shall be measured vertically from the established average grade directly below the graphic to the highest point of the graphic. 
c.  Where a wall supporting a wall graphic is less than twelve (12) inches back from a right-of-way line, the wall graphic may project over the right-of-way, provided it does not project more than twelve (12) inches from the wall. 
d.  Marquee graphics under which a pedestrian walkway passes must have at least a nine-foot vertical clearance. 
e.  Projection over a right-of-way is prohibited for all projecting graphics. Projecting graphics may project no more than four (4) feet horizontally from the wall and must be pinned away from the wall at least six (6) inches. 
f.  Marquee street graphics are permitted only on marquees, canopies or awnings otherwise lawfully permitted or in existence. Marquee street graphics shall not exceed horizontally beyond the edges of the canopy, marquee or awning to which they are attached or from which they are suspended. 
g.  All roof and projecting street graphics may have a border of up to six (6) inches in width surrounding the permitted sign area. 
h.  No street graphic permitted by this subsection shall contain any advertising message concerning any business, goods, products, services or facilities which are not manufactured, produced, sold, provided or located on the premises upon which the street graphic is erected or maintained. 
(3)  Marquee or canopy street graphics can display up to fifty (50) percent of each side of the facade area of a conforming marquee or canopy not to exceed twelve (12) square feet of sign area on each side of the marquee or canopy facade. 
(E)  Permanent development identification graphics and structures: 
(1)  Subdivision developments. Street graphics of a permanent nature, designed only to identify a subdivision development and including accessory entrance structural features, may be erected upon application to and approval by the planning commission and in accordance with the following regulations: 
(a)  Permanent identification graphics and structures shall be permitted only for a total development as approved in a final plat. When considering such graphics, the planning commission shall consider the location of public utilities, sidewalks and future street widenings. 
(b)  Graphics and entrance structures shall be for identification purposes only, giving only the name of the subdivision and, for office, business and industrial subdivisions, the name and location of each occupant located therein on individual sign areas of no more than six (6) square feet each. 
(c)  Only one identification graphic and structure will be permitted at one entrance into such development or subdivision from each abutting street. Such graphic may be a single graphic with two (2) faces equal in size or may be two (2) single-faced structures equal in size located on each side of such entrance way. Each face of such subdivision development graphics shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size. 
(d)  Such street graphics may be illuminated with a steady light, but not animated. 
(2)  Mobile home parks. Street graphics of a permanent nature designed only to identify the development and indicate availability of dwelling units or mobile home sites and including structural features may be erected only upon application to and approval by the planning commission in accord with established procedures for site plan approval and the following regulations: 
(a)  Permanent identification graphics and structures shall be permitted only for a total development as originally or subsequently approved as shown on the latest approved site plan for developments that require site plan approval. Such graphics and structures shall be erected entirely on private property. These developments not requiring site plan approval shall conform to the requirements of the following subsections (E)(2)(b) and (c). 
(b)  Such graphics and structures shall be permitted at one entrance into such development from an abutting street. Any street graphic structures for such permitted graphics shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in size, excluding structural elements and decorative features. Such graphics may be wall- or ground-mounted and may be a single graphic unit with two (2) faces or a single-faced graphic mounted on each side of such entrance way. Where more than one entrance way is approved, one additional graphic, designed for identification only, on a structure not exceeding four (4) square feet in size, shall be permitted at each entrance way. 
(c)  Such street graphics may be illuminated with a steady light but shall not be animated. 
(3)  Multifamily development. 
(a)  Freestanding signs. 
1.  Area. One (1) freestanding sign for each street frontage shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  Uses of fifty (50) units or less: Twenty-four (24) square feet. 
b.  Uses of fifty-one (51) units to one hundred (100) units: Forty-eight (48) square feet. 
c.  Uses of over one hundred (100) units: Ninety-six (96) square feet. 
d.  Corner lots must have their primary entrance on the lower classified roadway entrance and the maximum square footage for entrance signs shall be no greater than half of the allowable square footage noted above (subsections a.-c.). A second sign is allowed on the higher classified roadway, which size shall be no greater than shown above (subsections a.-c.). 
2.  Location. The sign may be a single sign with two (2) faces of equal size if located within an entrance median within a private roadway or drive, or two (2) single-faced structures of equal size located on each side of the entrance. 
3.  Height and front setback. Maximum height of any part of the sign shall be ten (10) feet, with a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any property lines. 
4.  Side setback. Minimum setback from side lot lines shall be ten (10) feet. 
(b)  Wall signs. One (1) wall sign may be utilized in lieu of a freestanding sign of a maximum size as specified in subsection (3)a.1. above and following the provisions of section 81.31 of the land development regulations. No projecting or roof signs shall be permitted. 
(4)  Ingress and egress signs. 
(a)  Maximum number. Two (2) signs, for directional purposes only, shall be permitted at each point of ingress and egress to a parking area as approved on the site plan or plat. 
(b)  Size. The maximum allowable sign surface area for each ingress and egress sign shall be four (4) square feet. The sign surface area of ingress and egress signs shall not be included in the maximum allowable sign surface area. 
(c)  Maximum height. Ingress and egress signs shall not exceed four (4) feet in height as measured from the top of the sign to the grade of the road nearest to the base of the sign. 
(F)  Determination of sign area, size of street graphic structure, and distance between street graphics. 
(1)  Distance between street graphics. The minimum required distance between street graphics shall be measured from the closest parts of any two (2) sign areas. 
(2)  Sign area. The sign area of any street graphic shall be determined by considering all adjoining or contiguous surfaces upon which any part of such street graphic appears as being one continuous surface. Street graphics contained on noncontinuous surfaces shall be considered as separate graphics. Street graphics contained on different parts of a contiguous surface, except for the surface of a street graphic structure, may be considered as separate street graphics, and the intervening surface area not counted as part of the sign area, of more than one street graphic is permitted and if the distance between the street graphics is sufficient. The sign area of an irregularly shaped surface shall be determined by using an imaginary surface with the shape of a common geometric figure approximating the actual surface as closely as possible. 
For all street graphics except wall-mounted graphics, roof graphics which are applied to the roof surface, ground-mounted graphics applied to the surface of a fence or accessory building and marquee, canopy, or awning, the sign area shall be determined by the largest surface area viewable at one time from any one direction parallel to the ground; and any street graphic which appears on the remaining surface area shall not count against the sign areas permitted hereunder. An additional 10% may be added to the allowable sign area of a monument street graphic if the sign base is surrounded by a permanent raised or defined irrigated landscape area larger than the graphic area. 
(3)  Size of street graphic structure. The size of any street graphic structure shall be limited so as to appear, from any direction from which any part of the sign area is viewable, to have borders no greater than six (6) inches in width. Larger borders, or larger apparent borders, are allowed only if that part greater than six (6) inches in width is counted as part of the sign area. 
(G)  Off-premise street graphics. The following types of off-premise street graphics are permitted only at the locations hereinafter indicated, subject to the conditions, restrictions, and limitations set forth below; and no off-premise street graphic shall be erected, used, operated, or maintained at any location other than as hereinbelow expressly authorized, nor in violation of any of the following regulations: 
(1)  Single-faced off-premise street graphic. An off-premise street graphic which is designed to be viewed from one direction only. 
(2)  Double-faced off-premise street graphic. An off-premise street graphic designed to be viewed from two (2) directions. For the purpose of this section, the following shall be considered double-faced off-premise street graphics: 
(a)  A structure having two (2) faces placed back-to-back, provided the backs of the signs are not separated by more than forty-eight (48) inches. 
(b)  A structure constructed in the form of a "V" when viewed from above provided the internal angle at the apex is not greater than forty-five (45) degrees and the two (2) faces of the structure are not separated by more than thirty-six (36) inches at the apex of the "V." 
(3)  Tri-faced off-premises street graphics. An off-premise street graphic designed to be viewed from three (3) directions. The separation of the faces of the graphic at the apex of each corner of the triangle shall not be more than thirty-six (36) inches. 
(4)  Off-premise street graphics are permitted only in the C2 (General Commercial), M1 (Light Industrial) or M2 (Planned Industrial) zoning districts of the City of Rockledge, and only on property fronting on a highway which is part of the federal-aid primary highway system. 
(5)  No off-premise street graphics shall have more than one face from one direction. 
(6)  Maximum height, including supports and face: thirty (30) feet. 
(7)  Any off-premise street graphic, the face of which extends over a vehicular travel way, shall have a minimum ground clearance of fourteen (14) feet. 
(8)  No portion of the supporting structure shall be visible above the advertising display area. 
(9)  Flashing beacon or running lights are prohibited on off-premise street graphics. 
(10)  Lights shall be directed to prevent glare of direct illumination onto rights-of-way, vehicular travel ways or nearby residential districts. 
(11)  Each graphic face must be completely covered when an advertising message is posted. If the message is smaller than the graphic dimensions, skirting or screening shall be used to achieve conformity. 
(12)  Maximum copy area, including embellishments, for graphics on limited access highways shall be three hundred (300) square feet. 
(13)  On all other highways, off-premise street graphics shall be a maximum of three hundred (300) square feet, exclusive of embellishments. Embellishments shall not project more than five (5) feet over the top of the graphic and two (2) feet from the sides of the graphic. The total size of any graphic, including embellishments, shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet. Skirting on a graphic shall not exceed two (2) feet in height and shall contain no advertising other than the graphic owner's name and identification. 
(14)  No off-premise street graphic shall be permitted within twenty-five hundred feet (2500) of any other off-premise street graphic located on the same side of the highway. An off-premise street graphic visible to traffic in one direction only, the back of which street graphic is completely hidden by a building or other permanent obstruction not readily removable from the property, shall not be considered when applying the spacing requirements to graphics visible to traffic approaching in the opposite direction. 
(15)  No off-premise street graphic shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet from any front or rear property line or fifty (50) feet from any side property line. No off-premise graphic shall be located within the triangular area formed by measuring twenty-five (25) feet from the point of the intersection along the right-of-way lines and connecting the points by a line. No graphic shall be located within a one hundred-foot radius from the intersection of the center line of road right-of-way and the nearest railroad track. Off-premise sign graphics shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any interchange, intersection at grade or toll plaza on a limited access highway. The five hundred (500) feet shall be measured along the right-of-way line from the beginning or ending of pavement widening at the exit from or entrance to the main traveled way. 
(16)  The wiring supplying electrical power to an off-premise street graphic shall be installed underground. 
(17)  Off-premise street graphics shall be allowed only on a property site where there is at least a clear, unobstructed and unimproved area of not less than fifty (50) feet on all sides of the sign. A building permit will not be issued for the construction, placement or installation of any building or structure if any part of such building or structure is to be located within fifty (50) feet of any part of an existing sign. A public road shall not be deemed to be an obstruction, or a structure, within the meaning of this paragraph. 
(H)  City franchise signs are those illuminated street identification signs and commercial signs constructed, erected, maintained and operated by an exclusive franchisee, who has entered into a Franchise Sign Agreement with the City of Rockledge. The Rockledge City Council may, by resolution, designate other city agencies to negotiate and execute franchise sign agreements with or without the need for further city council review of the terms as directed in the enabling resolution. A petition for a franchise sign agreement requiring city council approval shall be accomplished by a separate resolution. City franchise signs may be erected subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The sign shall be designed and installed by the franchisee who has been approved in accordance with city council ordinances. 
2.  The sign shall include the street name identification and a portion for commercial/public information purposes. 
3.  The sign shall not project into the Florida Department of Transportation right-of-way, without specific consent from the Florida Department of Transportation. 
4.  The sign shall not project into the city's right-of-way more than five (5) feet, unless approved by the city manager. 
5.  The sign shall not be located closer than nineteen (19) feet to the paved surface of the right-of-way, unless approved by the city manager. 
6.  The commercial user must be (1) a business located in the City of Rockledge with a current occupational license or (2) a business located outside the city boundaries and not otherwise competing with a City of Rockledge business existing or established in the future. 
7.  Signs bearing public information as designated by the city manager may be located anywhere within the city and may exclude the street name identifications. 
8.  A minimum of nine (9) feet from ground elevation to the bottom of the sign is required with a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet, unless authorized by the city manager. 
9.  Fees associated with the franchise signs shall be specified in the current "City of Rockledge Land Development Regulations, Schedule of Fees" which is available at the office of the city clerk. 
10.  Electrical service installation and billing charges for usage, if any, shall be the franchisee's responsibility. 
11.  The franchisee shall provide a sealed survey identifying the right-of-way boundary and the paved surface as part of the application for the sign permit. 
12.  Signs including a commercial portion shall be located on named street intersections. 
13.  A commercial user must, as a part of the application for a sign permit, provide the city with a signed agreement including the following: 
a.  The total sign area in use at the commercial user's business location based on the requirements established in this Code. 
b.  The commercial portion of the city franchise sign shall be included in the computation of the maximum allowable signage at the business location. The commercial user shall not display more than the maximum permitted signage allowed by code. The commercial user must agree to reduce the signage displayed at the business location to an amount not exceeding the maximum permitted when (1) the business requests a permit for a new/replacement of a ground/pole mounted sign; (2) the business requests a permit for reconditioning an existing ground/pole sign; (3) the business requests a change of copy permit for a ground/pole sign or (4) upon expiration of four (4) years from the date of the permit application, whichever shall occur first. Failure of a business to comply with signage reduction requirement shall constitute grounds for non-renewal of the business' occupational license. 
14.  The franchisee shall be responsible for providing the information required for a sign permit application. 
15.  The materials used by the franchisee in the making of the signs shall be approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 990-91, §§ 1-3, 1-9-91; Ord. No. 1037-92, §§ 1-3, 9-16-92; Ord. No. 1120-96, § 40, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1186-99, §§ 17-23, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 1211-2000, § 9, 4-5-00; Ord. No. 1268-2002, 27, 4-3-02; Ord. No. 1315-2003, § 1, 9-3-03; Ord. No. 1342-2004, §§ 1-4, 3-10-04; Ord. No. 1417-2006, § 1, 8-16-06; Ord. No. 1551-2010, §§ 1, 2, 6-16-10) 
86.06. - Portable street graphics. 
    As of June 19, 2002, portable street graphics will be prohibited in the City of Rockledge, except for advertising non-profit events and city functions. 
(Ord. No. 1120-96, § 41, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1186-99, §§ 24-26, 7-21-99; Ord. No. 1272-2002, § 25, 6-19-02) 
86.07. - Political and campaign signs. 
(a)  Political or campaign signs advertising on behalf of candidates for public officers or issues or referenda are permitted in all zone districts except R1, R2, R2A, R3, TH, MH and residential areas of PUD's, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Such signs shall be erected by a bona fide candidate or campaign committee upon qualifying for said election and shall be removed within five (5) days following the election. 
(2)  Before such signs are erected, the candidate or political action committee placing the political sign, or their representatives, shall pay a cash bond of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and register a permanent address and phone number to the city clerk. Such bond shall be returned to the candidate or political action committee after their signs are removed. If the candidate or political action committee fails to remove said sign within the required five (5) days after the election, the candidate or political action committee will be notified in writing of the violation. If said signs are not removed within five (5) days of such written notice, the bond shall be forfeited and the city may remove said signs. Such removed signs shall be held by the city for a period of thirty (30) days. During this period, and during regular city business hours, the candidate or political action committee may claim their signs, but shall pay a five dollar ($5.00) service charge to the city for each sign claimed. Any signs not claimed within thirty (30) days shall become the property of the city. 
(3)  Only one stationary sign per candidate or referendum issue on any one parcel of land. 
(4)  No political sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in aggregate area and if detached shall not be erected in such a manner as to constitute a roof sign. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, a sign may be placed upon any legally existing sign structure but not so as to cover an existing sign. 
(5)  No sign shall be located in, on, or over the public right-of-way and no sign shall obstruct, impede or otherwise create a hazardous condition for the safe and normal flow of pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic. No sign shall be erected on private property without the consent of the property owner. In case of violation, any illegal signs will be removed by the city. Such removed signs shall be held by the city for a period of thirty (30) days following election day. During this period, and during regular city business hours, the candidates may claim their signs, but shall pay the city a five dollar ($5.00) service charge for each sign claimed. Any signs not claimed within thirty (30) days following election day shall become the property of the city. 
(6)  No political, referendum issue or campaign sign shall be placed on any tree, utility pole or fence post. In case of violation, the candidate or political action committee will be notified in writing to remove said signs. If the signs are not removed within twenty-four (24) hours of such written notice, any signs so placed will be removed by the city. Such removed signs shall be held by the city for a period of thirty (30) days following election day. During this period, and during regular city business hours, the candidates may claim their signs, but shall pay the city a five dollar ($5.00) service charge for each sign claimed. Any signs not claimed within thirty (30) days following election day shall become the property of the city. 
(b)  Political or campaign signs advertising on behalf of candidates for public office or issues or referenda are permitted in R1, R2, R2A, R3, TH, MH and residential areas of PUD's subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Such signs shall be erected by the property owner or tenant for a bona fide candidate or campaign committee upon qualifying for said election and shall be removed within five (5) days following the election. 
(2)  Only one stationary sign per candidate or referendum issue with a maximum of three (3) signs on any one parcel of land or lot. 
(3)  No political sign shall exceed three (3) square feet in aggregate area nor be constructed in such a manner as to constitute a roof sign. If the sign is detached from the building it shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet above the existing grade and shall be placed within three (3) feet or less of the front building line. 
(4)  No sign shall be located in, on, or over the public right-of-way and no sign shall obstruct, impede or otherwise create a hazardous condition for the safe and normal flow of pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic. In case of violation, the property owner or tenant will be notified in writing to remove said sign(s). If the signs are not removed within twenty-four (24) hours of such written notice, any signs will be removed by the city. Such removed signs will be held by the city for a period of thirty (30) days following election day. During this period, and during regular city business hours, the candidates, property owner or tenant may claim their signs, but shall pay the city a five dollar ($5.00) service charge for each sign claimed. Any signs not claimed within thirty (30) days following election day shall become the property of the city. 
(5)  No political, referendum issue or campaign sign shall be placed on any tree, utility pole or fence post. In case of violation, the candidate or political action committee will be notified in writing to remove said signs. If the signs are not removed within twenty-four (24) hours of such written notice, any signs so placed will be removed by the city. Such removed signs shall be held by the city for a period of thirty (30) days following election day. During this period, and during regular city business hours, the candidate may claim his signs, but shall pay the city a five dollar ($5.00) service charge for each sign claimed. Any signs not claimed within thirty (30) days following election day shall become the property of the city. 
86.08. - Changing message devices. 
    Changing message devices are permitted in business, office and industrial districts. They may be ground-mounted, projecting or attached to the wall, and are subject to the regulations applicable to the ground-mounted, projecting and wall-mounted graphics. A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of message time shall be dedicated to public service messages. 
86.09. - Illumination of graphics. 
(a)  Colored light in graphics: 
(1)  White and yellow are the only colors of lights permitted for graphics in areas zoned residential or zoned P1 district, except for Christmas or seasonal lighting. 
(2)  Colored lights in other areas shall be designed to prevent confusion with traffic lights. 
(b)  Floodlight illumination of graphics. Floodlight illumination of graphics is permitted; provided, that the floodlight or spotlight is positioned so that none of the lights shine onto an adjoining property or in the eyes of motorists or pedestrians. 
(c)  Bare bulb illumination of graphics. Bare bulb illumination of graphics is permitted only in districts zoned C1, C1A, C2, M1, M2 and IP. 
(d)  Flame. Flame as a source of light for graphics is permitted if adequate fire safety standards [are complied with] as prescribed by applicable city ordinances. 
86.10. - Permit required; inspection, fees. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful to erect, cause to be erected, maintain, cause to be maintained, alter or extend any new or existing street graphic without first obtaining a permit indicating compliance with the provisions and regulations of this section, except as hereinafter provided. No permit shall be required for the following graphics; provided, that such graphics are in compliance with the terms and provisions of this section; and provided further, that such graphics have no electrical parts or usage: 
(1)  Graphics exempt from the provisions of this section; 
(2)  Temporary real estate graphics; 
(3)  Graphics which are a permanent architectural feature of the building or structure, such as a cornerstone or other identifying letters carved into or embossed on the building, provided such letters are not illuminated apart from the building, are not made of a reflective material, and do not contrast in color with the building. 
(4)  Graphics with a sign area of six (6) square feet or less; 
(5)  Panels or letters incorporated in a larger graphic identifying the tenants or occupants of a premises which is identified by the larger graphic provided a permit has been issued for the larger graphic; and, 
(6)  Any change in the advertising content of a graphic, provided a permit has been issued for the graphic and the advertising content does not violate any provisions of this section. 
(b)  Inspection. It shall be unlawful to erect, cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be maintained any street graphic which has not been inspected at the time of initial installation. 
(c)  Fees. Applications for a permit to erect, construct, alter or extend a graphic shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by the building code as set out in Part V of this Code. 
(d)  Expiration of permit. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire six (6) months after its date of issuance unless the permitted street graphic is erected or unless its erection is substantially under way. 
(e)  Penalty. In addition to other penalties provided by this section, a fee of double the amount specified for a permit shall be charged for any work commenced before a permit therefor has been issued or renewed after the expiration date. 
86.11. - Applications for permits. 
    All applications for street graphics permits required by this section shall be filed by the owner, or his agent, in the office of the building official, upon forms furnished by the city. Said applications shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The type of street graphic as defined in this section. 
(2)  The actual cost of the street graphic. 
(3)  The street address of the property upon which said street graphic is to be located and the proposed location thereof on said property. In the absence of a street address, a method of location acceptable to the building official shall be used. 
(4)  The height, shape and dimensions of the street graphic structure, if any, and the dimensions and shape of the sign area. 
(5)  The name and address of the owner or other person in control or possession of the real property upon which said street graphic is to be located. 
(6)  Written consent of such owner, his lessee or his agent granting permission for the construction, operation, maintenance or display of the street graphic. 
(7)  A plan, sketch, blueprint, blue line print or similar presentation drawn to scale, showing all pertinent structural details, wind pressure requirements, and display materials in accordance with the requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
(8)  A map showing the location of the proposed street graphic. 
(9)  The name of the sign contractor, if any. 
(10)  Any other information reasonably required by the building official to determine whether such street graphic is in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
86.12. - Compliance required. 
(a)  Any street graphic not allowed by this section but for which a permit has previously been issued by the City of Rockledge shall automatically become a lawful nonconforming street graphic. The owner of any other street graphic not allowed by this section, or the owner of any property upon which such street graphic is located, shall have a period of six (6) months from the effective date of this section to establish to the satisfaction of the building official that such street graphic was in compliance with the laws and ordinances of the City of Rockledge when it was constructed. The building official shall maintain the list of such street graphics, which shall continue to be lawful nonconforming street graphics. At the expiration of said six-month period, all other street graphics which are not in compliance with the terms of this section shall immediately be removed or brought into compliance with this section. 
(b)  All nonconforming street graphics shall be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses with the following limitations: 
(1)  Street graphics not conforming to the requirements of this section shall be removed or made to conform when the structure housing the occupancy is demolished or requires renovations the cost of which exceeds fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the structure. 
(2)  All nonconforming street graphics shall be removed or made to conform when the street graphic is substantially demolished. 
(3)  Neither the overall size nor the sign area of a nonconforming street graphic may be increased, nor may the height be increased, nor may the location be changed, nor may the use of the property on which it is located be changed, unless said street graphic is made to conform to the requirements of this section. 
(4)  A street graphic, or at least any advertising message of a street graphic, now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, or a product sold, on the premises shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the building, structure or land upon which such street graphic shall be found within thirty (30) days after written notice by the enforcing official. 
(5)  A street graphic which on July 18, 1984, became nonconforming as an off-premise street graphic shall be removed or made to conform to the requirements of this section within five (5) years from July 18, 1984. 
86.13. - Maintenance. 
    It shall be unlawful to own, maintain or cause to be maintained any sign or street graphic without full compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  All signs and faces, sign graphics supports, braces, guys, anchors, and trim shall be kept in good repair. 
(2)  Weeds shall be kept cut in front of, underneath, and around the base of the ground mounted and other street graphics, and no rubbish, or debris shall be permitted. 
(3)  The Building Official may upon inspection of any street graphic require proof of compliance with Section 86.05(B)(5) of this section for any conforming, or lawful non-conforming street graphic allowed by this section. 
(4)  Signs and other street graphics shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from all hazards, such as, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose fastenings and must be maintained at all times in such safe conditions so as not to be detrimental to the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1186-99, § 27, 7-21-99) 
86.14. - Enforcement. 
(A)  Enforcing official. The building official, or any official designated by the building official, shall be the enforcing official. The enforcing official is charged with the duty of administering the provisions of this section and securing compliance therewith. In furtherance of this responsibility, the enforcing official shall: 
(1)  Make such inspections as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes and intent of this section and to initiate appropriate action to bring about compliance with this section if such inspection discloses any instance of noncompliance. 
(2)  Investigate thoroughly any complaints of alleged violations of this section, and indicate clearly in writing as a public record in his office the disposition made of such complaints. 
(3)  Order in writing as set out below the remedy of all conditions or all violations of this section found to exist in or on any premises. 
(4)  State in the violation order a time limit for compliance herewith as hereinafter set out. 
(5)  Take appropriate legal action or enforcement measures through the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board upon the failure of the responsible party to comply with such violation order by the time specified therein. 
(B)  Entry authorized. The enforcing official or his agent is authorized and directed to lawfully enter in and upon all premises at reasonable times to determine their condition insofar as the provisions of this section are applicable, and to obtain search warrants when necessary to do so. 
(C)  Action upon determination of violation. Whenever the enforcing official determines that a violation of this section exists, he shall take action as follows: 
(1)  Give written notice of the violation to the occupant and the owner shown on the most-recent tax roll of the city, and to the holder of the certificate of occupancy, if different from both the occupant and owner. 
(2)  The notice shall include: 
(a)  A description of the location of the property involved, either by street address or by legal description. 
(b)  A statement indicating the nature of the violation and reason or reasons why the notice of violation is issued. 
(c)  A specification of the subsection or subsections of this section upon which the notice of violation is based. 
(d)  A general description of the things that are required to be done in order to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(e)  A statement showing the time within which the work must be accomplished in order to comply with the provisions of this section as follows: 
1.  Nonpermanent graphics. For all unlawful and prohibited street graphics as specified in section 86.03(a) and (b), temporary street graphics as defined in section 86.04, and all other signs of a nonpermanent nature, violation shall be corrected or abated immediately. Changing the location or copy of a nonpermanent graphic upon the premises shall not constitute compliance with this section. 
2.  All other graphics. For all graphics not specified in (C)(2)(e)1 above, the time may not be less than ten (10) days nor more than ninety (90) days from the date of such written notice; provided, however, that any condition found to exist in violation of this section which constitutes a hazard to the public safety shall be required to be abated immediately. 
(f)  The name or names of the persons upon whom the notice of violation of this section is served. 
(g)  A statement advising that upon the failure to comply with the requirements of the notice, the city shall take such enforcement procedures as may be permitted by the City of Rockledge Code of Ordinances in order to secure compliance and to punish for continued violation. 
(h)  A statement advising of the procedures for review of the action of the enforcing official, when available, as set out in this section. 
(D)  Service of notice: 
(1)  Service of written notice required by this section shall be deemed complete if the notice is personally delivered to the persons or persons required under the provisions of this section to be served with such notice, and if the same cannot reasonably be personally delivered within the city, then service shall be deemed complete upon sending same by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such person or persons and by posting a copy of such notice in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(2)  The enforcing official shall endorse on a retained copy of the written notice the manner of service of the notice or notices as are hereby required. 
(E)  Effect of notice. When a notice served in accordance with this section is not appealed within the time limit prescribed hereinafter, or when such a notice is appealed and the decision of the enforcing official is not reserved, or when no appeal is provided for herein, the notice becomes an order. If the notice is appealed and modified, the modified notice becomes an order. Such an order shall be effective as to every day the violation continues, from the first day of the violation until the date the order is complied with. 
(F)  Enforcement procedures. When a notice of violation becomes an order, the enforcing official shall take such steps as are necessary to enforce compliance with the order, which steps may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Prosecution before the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board for each day [of] the violation, from the first date of the violation until the order is complied with; 
(2)  Requesting the assistance of the city attorney to seek injunctive or other relief; or 
(3)  Initiating proceedings for revoking the certificate of occupancy for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(G)  Removal and disposition of snipe signs, garage sale signs, and street graphics unlawfully placed in public rights-of-way. Any prohibited snipe sign, garage sale sign, or street graphic described in Section 86.03 of these regulations, herein referred to as " sign," unlawfully placed, erected, affixed or existing in any public street, road, highway, alley or right-of-way in the City of Rockledge in contravention of any provision of these regulations shall be removed and confiscated by the Rockledge Code Enforcement Officer immediately upon discovery, in furtherance of the intent and purpose of this part as stated in Section 86.01 (b) of these regulations, and any such sign shall be dealt with in the following manner: 
(1)  If the sign is designed and constructed for temporary use only, and is made, fabricated or constructed of a material or materials having a minimal and negligible durability and value, such as paper, cardboard, plywood, plastic, or like material, the code enforcement officer shall summarily destroy or dispose of such sign at a sanitary landfill or by other means of permanent disposition without prior investigation as to the ownership or origin thereof, or notice to the owner. 
(2)  If the sign is designed and constructed for extended and protracted use and is made, fabricated or constructed of a material or materials having more substantial durability and significant value than that described in the preceding subsection (1), the code enforcement officer shall as soon as practicable after removal of the sign make a reasonable investigative effort to ascertain the identity of the owner of the sign. If the identity of the owner is ascertained, the code enforcement officer shall promptly notify such owner in writing that the sign has been confiscated and may be redeemed by the owner within ten (10) days after the owner's receipt of such notice and payment by the owner to the city of a five-dollar per sign administrative fee. In such event, if the owner of the sign requests possession of the sign in writing and pays the five-dollar per sign administrative fee within the ten-day period immediately following such owner's receipt of the aforesaid notice, the code enforcement officer shall surrender possession of the sign to the owner. If the owner fails to request possession of the sign in writing, pay the five-dollar per sign administrative fee, and collect the sign at the Rockledge City Hall, all within the ten-day period immediately following the owner's receipt of the aforesaid notice, the code enforcement officer shall, upon the expiration of said ten-day period, destroy or dispose of such sign at a sanitary landfill or by other means of permanent disposition without further notice to the owner. If the code enforcement officer has conducted a reasonably thorough investigative effort to determine the identity of the owner of the sign and has been unable to ascertain the identity of the owner and furnish such owner with written notice of the confiscation of the sign as above provided within a period of fifteen (15) days immediately following the confiscation of the sign, the code enforcement officer shall, at the expiration of said fifteen-day period, destroy or dispose of such sign at a sanitary landfill or by other means of permanent disposition without further effort to locate or notify the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1001-91, § 1, 6-19-91) 
86.15. - Appeals. 
    There is hereby established an appeals board for violations of this section. The board of adjustment shall serve and perform the duties of such appeals board under the provisions set forth herein. Appeals may be heard and decided by the board of adjustment when it is alleged that there is an error in any notice, order, requirement, decision or determination made by the enforcing official or any other administrative official of the city in the enforcement of this section, except for notices of violations regarding unlawful and prohibited street graphics as specified in section 86.03(a) and (b). Such appeals must be filed with the board of adjustment within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, order, requirement, decision or determination sought to be reviewed. The authority of the board of adjustment shall be limited to: 
(1)  Upholding or reversing the enforcing official or other administrative officer in such official's determination of facts and interpretation of the provisions of this section. 
(2)  In case of a notice of violation, modifying such notice if the actions required by such notice to be done to correct the violation are not the minimum necessary to comply with the requirements of this section. A fee established by the city council shall be paid to the city clerk at the time any notice of appeal is filed with the board of adjustment. 
86.16. - Violation and penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be maintained any street graphic in the City of Rockledge without full compliance with the restrictions, requirements and provisions of this section and no person shall violate any provision of this section. Any person unlawfully violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of an offense against the City of Rockledge and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to the punishment hereinabove authorized, the provisions of this section and the zoning regulations adopted hereby may also be enforced through the powers and authority of the Rockledge Code Enforcement Board, as authorized by Florida Statutes and Rockledge city ordinances, or by suit for prohibitory or mandatory injunctive relief, or by any other lawful remedy existing at law or in equity for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
SECTION 87.00. - ADULT BUSINESSES 

87.01. - Purpose. 
    The intent of the city council in adopting this section is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations that will reduce the adverse effects adult entertainment businesses would have upon the City of Rockledge and to protect the health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the City of Rockledge. 
87.02. - Reference to Rockledge City Code. 
    Chapter 2.1 [(Adult Businesses)] of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances will be referenced in this section of the Land Development Regulations. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  Refer to section 2.1-59 through 2.1-61 of the Rockledge Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Locational requirements. 
1.  Prohibited in certain zoning districts. 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit the establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or an adult dancing establishment in any C1, C1A, TTP, M1, M2, IP, P1, or PUD zoning district of the City of Rockledge. 
(b)  Minimum distance from certain other adult business establishments, religious institutions, schools, public parks, residentially zoned property, or establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(1)  No person shall cause or permit the establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or an adult dancing establishment within one thousand (1,000) feet of another such establishment; within one thousand (1,000) feet of any pre-existing religious institution, school or public park; within one thousand (1,000) feet of an area zoned for residential use within or outside the City of Rockledge, Florida; or within one thousand (1,000) feet of an establishment that in any manner sells or dispenses alcohol. 
2.  Measurement of distance. 
(a)  Distance from a proposed adult entertainment establishment to an existing adult entertainment establishment, a church, an establishment that sells or dispenses alcohol, a public park or a school shall be measured at the points where the lot lines of the property upon which the subject buildings or activity is located are closest. The distance from a proposed adult entertainment establishment to an area zoned for residential use shall be measured at the points where the lot line of the property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is situate and the residentially zoned area boundary are closest. 
SECTION 88.00. - PETS, PET CLINICS, PET KENNELS, ANIMAL HOSPITALS 
(a)  Limitation on keeping of dogs or cats in residential land use classifications and vacant property. No person shall keep or maintain in, on or upon any building, premises or property located in any land use classification in which residential uses are permitted, or in any residential unit in a multiple-family, travel trailer or mobile home land use classification four (4) or more dogs or cats, or combination thereof, six (6) months [in age] or older. No person shall keep or maintain on vacant property or in connection with any building used for business, commercial or industrial purposes more than one dog. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to permit the use of land or building as a dog kennel unless said land or building is located in a land use classification in which a dog kennel is a permitted use or where a conditional use is granted for a dog kennel. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated: 
(1)  Pet kennels. Any lands, structure or facility where any pet or pets, regardless of number, are kept for sale, or for breeding, boarding, or treatment purposes, except where allowed in an animal hospital or grooming parlor or pet shop. Any premises used for residential purposes where four (4) or more pets, excluding fish, six (6) months or older are kept, harbored or maintained shall be deemed to be a pet kennel. 
(2)  Pets. Those animals and fowl normally domesticated in the United States, obtained at pet shops and kept in or around the home for pleasure rather than utility; e.g. dogs, cats, canaries, mynahs, parrots, parakeets, monkeys, fish and rodents. Pets are permitted in any residential land use classification unless otherwise prohibited in this section. 
(3)  Wild animals and poisonous reptiles. Animals of a species not usually domesticated in the United States and such phrase does not refer to the comparative docility or familiarity with man of a particular animal. Nor does this phrase refer to pets customarily found in and about homes. 
(c)  Wild animals and poisonous reptiles. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep, harbor, breed, sell or maintain any wild animal, poisonous reptile, or other species which is poisonous or dangerous and harmful to human safety in the judgment of the zoning official, in any zoning classification in the City of Rockledge. This restriction does not include parks, zoos, animal shelters, medical or scientific institutions or other places under applicable land use restrictions or otherwise having a license for keeping or showing wild animals or poisonous reptiles. 
(d)  Farm animals, fowls and other species. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, breed, sell or maintain upon any premises in any zoning district in the city, except as specifically permitted in a zoning district by the express terms of the Zoning Ordinance, any of the following, to wit: Bees, roosters, peacocks, horses, ponies, cattle, goats, rabbits, chickens, ducks or other livestock, or other species customarily utilized in farming operations. 
(e)  Pet kennels, animal hospitals and animal clinics. No person, firm, corporation or agent shall place, keep, operate or maintain any pet kennel, animal hospital or animal clinic in any zoning classification in the city except as specifically permitted in a zoning district by the express terms of the Zoning Ordinance. No pet kennel, animal hospital or animal clinic shall be situate upon a tract, piece or parcel of land located less than one thousand (1,000) feet distant from any tract, piece or parcel of land zoned for residential use, said distance to be measured in a straight line between the closest points of the lot lines of the respective premises; provided, however, that an animal hospital or animal clinic equipped with interior quarters adequate for overnight or extended accommodation of animals, and at which all animals being examined, treated or kept remain within the interior of the facility at all times, may be situate upon a piece, parcel or track of land located not less than three hundred (300) feet distant from a piece, parcel or tract of land zoned for residential use, said distance to be measured as above described, if all walls of the area of the facility wherein animals are examined, treated or kept are soundproofed so as to prevent the elimination of animal noises from said facility. 
(f)  Prohibiting animals other than pets near residences. 
(1)  Except as may be otherwise provided in applicable Zoning Ordinances, no person shall keep any mule, horse, ass, sheep, goat, hog, pig, cow or other animal belonging to the bovine family, turkeys, chickens or any other domestic animal, except for household pets, as defined in section 88.00(b)(2), within three hundred (300) feet of the residence of another within the city. In no event and regardless of where same may be kept, none of the animals or types of animals specifically named and designated in this section, shall be deemed a household pet. 
(Ord. No. 1268-2002, § 28, 4-3-02) 
SECTION 89.00. - ARCADE AMUSEMENT CENTERS 
(a)  Arcade amusement center shall mean a place of business having amusement games or machines on the premises that operate by means of the insertion of a coin and which by application of skill may entitle the person playing or operating the game or machine to receive points or coupons which may be exchanged for merchandise only, excluding cash and alcoholic beverages, provided the cost value of the merchandise or prize awarded in exchange for such points or coupons does not exceed seventy-five cents ($0.75) on any game played, and being in compliance with F.S. ch. 849.161, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  No person shall cause or permit the establishment, enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of an arcade amusement center in any zoning category in the City of Rockledge, except in the RMU zoning district and with a special exception in the C2 zoning district. 
(c)  No person shall cause or permit the establishment, enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of an arcade amusement center within one thousand (1,000) feet of a house of worship, or a primary or secondary school facility. 
(d)  No person shall cause or permit the establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of an arcade amusement center within twenty-five hundred (2,500) feet of another such establishment, within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Rockledge. 
(e)  Measurement of distance. The distance from an arcade amusement center to another arcade amusement center or a school shall be measured from property line to property line. 
(f)  Parking spaces per machine. There shall be 0.75 parking spaces per machine (or three (3) spaces for every four (4) machines). Cross parking agreements will be allowed if the establishment is located within a shopping center complex. 
(g)  Any use of this type in existence within the city at the time of enactment of this ordinance shall be a non-conforming, pre-existing use. Once that use ceases, for any reason or cause, this grandfathered exception shall terminate. 
(Ord. No. 1444-2007, § 1, 4-4-07) 
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS 
    This table contains a chronological listing of ordinances amending the Land Development Regulations, together with their disposition herein. 
Ordinance Number Date Section Disposition 980-90 10- 3-90 1 59.41.2 2, 3 81.20(a)(8), (9) 985-90 12-19-90 1 23.20(c)(3) 989-91  1- 9-91 1 57.41 2 57.52-57.57 3 57.60 4 57.62 5 57.63-57.66 990-91  1- 9-91 1 86.05(F) 2 86.05(F)(4) 3 86.05(F)(14) 991-91  2- 6-91 1 62.122(a)(14) 2 62.173(A)(3)(e) 3 62.176(B)(4) 992-91  2- 6-91 1 80.00.1(g) 2 62.22(b)(6) 3 62.32(b)(6) 4 62.42(b)(7) 5 62.52(b)(7) 6 62.62(b)(5) 994-91  4- 3-91 1 62.25(c) 2 62.35(c) 3 62.15(c) 995-91  4-17-91 1 80.20(d)(1), (2) 2 80.20(d)(4) 3 80.20(f)(7) 1001-91  6-19-91 1 86.14(G) 1002-91  6-19-91 1 62.64(b) 1005-91  7-17-91 1, 2 62.166 1008-91  9- 4-91 1 60.05 1013-91 10- 2-91 1 39.17 2 39.17.1 1014-91 10-16-91 1 58.15 2 58.17 3 58.86 4 59.43 5 59.61 6       Rpld 58.89-58.100 7       Added 58.89-58.94 8 39.06, 39.07 9 58.69, 59.33, 59.62 10 59.05 1016-91 11-20-91 1 1.95 2 55.13 3 55.14 1017-91 11-20-91 1, 2 80.03 3, 4 62.12 5, 6 62.22 7, 8 62.42 9, 10 62.52 11, 12 62.62 13, 14 62.72 15, 16 62.78 1018-91 11-20-91 1 52.23 2, 3 81.30 4 40.30 1022-91 12-18-91 1 42.12 2 42.16, 42.17 3-8 50.52 9 50.60 10 57.12 11, 12 51.15 631-92  2-19-92 1 44.00 1028-92  2-19-92 1 80.10(B)(3) 2 80.10(C)(2) 1029-92  2-19-92 1 57.66(b) 1030-92  2-19-92 1, 2 25.00 1032-92  2-19-92 1 80.07, 80.07.1 2 80.07.2 1037-92  9-16-92 1 86.05(B)(1)(e)2. 2 86.05(B)(1)(e)5. 3       Rpld 86.05(B)(1)(e)9. 1038-92  9-16-92 1 80-09(c)(1), (5), (7) 1039-92  9-16-92 1 57.15 1042-92 12- 2-92 1 57.66(a), (b) 1047-93  4-21-93 1 40.30(1)(b) 2 40.30(2)(a)2.a. 3 40.30(2)(a)2.c. 4 40.30(2)(a)5.a.i., ii. 5 40.30(2)(a)5.a.v.(a) 6 40.30(2)(a)5.b.i., ii. 7 40.30(4)(c) 8 1.95(269.1) 1048-93  4-21-93 1 58.02 2 58.15 3       Rnbd 58.17(103.2.6-103.2.8)       as 58.17(103.2.7-103.2.9) 4 58.17 5 58.21 6 59.04 7 59.25 8 59.43 9 59.43.1 10       Rpld 59.45 11 59.52 12 59.53 13 59.61 14 39.06(A)-(C) 1049-93  4-21-93 1 62.52(c)(10) 2 60.50 2. 3 60.60 2. 4 60.60 5. 5 60.60 14. 6 1.95(239.1) 7 83.50 1054-93  6-16-93 1, 2 42.15 3 50.51(j) 4 50.52(A)(1), (2) 5 50.52(A)(6) 6 50.52(B)(1), (2) 7 50.52(B)(4) 1058-93  8- 4-93 1 58.17(3202.3), (3204.1) (3204.2.1-3204.2.3) 1059-93  8-18-93 1 55.15(A), (B) 2 55.15(D)(1), (2) 3       Rnbd 55.15(D)(3), (4)       as 55.15(D)(4), (5)       Added 55.15(D)(3) 1066-93 10- 6-93 1 52.12 2 70.67 1069-94  3- 2-94 1 58.17(3204.2.2) 1075-94  6-15-94 1 80.08 1076-94  6-15-94 1 62.122(c)(15) 2 62.122(d)(17) 1077-94  6-15-94 1 62.122(c)(12) 1078-94  6-15-94 1 62.166(i) 1079-94  6-15-94 1 30.35 1080-94  7- 6-94 1 57.15 2 1.95(95.1) 3 81.30(a)(5) 1081-94  6-15-94 1 62.122(c)(16) 2 62.122(d)(9) 1082-94  6-15-94 1 62.90, 62.91 62.91.1-62.91.3 62.92, 62.93 62.94, 62.94.1 62.95, 62.96 62.97, 62.98 1098-95  5- 3-95 1 39.17.C(a) 2 39.17.C(b)(5), (6) 3 39.17.C(b) 4 39.17.C(c) 5 39.17.1(h)(6) 6 52.23(A)(3) 7 56.10 8 62.122(a)(19) 9 62.142(a)(20) 10 62.152(c)(4) 11 80.00.1(c) 12 82.00(b) 13 82.00(f) 14 82.00(i) 15 84.10 1102-95  6-21-95 2 62.82(c) 1120-96  8-14-96 1 1.95(197.1)-(197.3) 2 39.06(C), (D) 3 39.07 4 39.14 5 39.17(C)(b)(6), (c) 6 39.18 7 51.14(B)(4) 8 51.16A(D) 9 51.20 10 55.10 11 55.14(a) 12 57.12(A), (B) 13 57.12(C)(3) 14 57.12(E)(1) 15 57.12(H), (I) 16 57.87 17 57.89 18 58.01, 58.02 19 58.04-58.06 20 58.15 21 58.17 22 58.22 23       Rpld 58.24 24 58.31-58.36 25       Rpld 58.37-58.42, 58.57-58.61, 58.80, 58.81 26 59.04, 59.05 27       Rpld 59.10-59.14 28 59.25 29       Rpld 59.24 30 59.61 31 60.03(h) 32 62.174(d) 33 70.63 34       Rnbd 81.30(c)       as 81.30(d) Added 81.30(c) 35 81.31 36 81.50 37 86.02 38 86.03(a)(2) 40 86.05(B)(1) 41 86.06 1121-96  7-17-96 1 82.00 2 86.04(f) 1129-96 10- 2-96 57.70(note) 1144-97  8-20-97 1 39.06(C), (D) 2 57.23 3 57.26 4 57.32, 57.33 5 58.17 6 61.00 7 62.57(a) 8 62.104(d)(2) 9 62.106(a) 10 62.113(b)(1) 11 62.117(d) 12 62.122(b)(1) 13 62.124(d)(2) 14 62.126(b) 15 62.136(a) 16 62.142(b)(5) 17 62.146(a) 18 62.152(b)(5) 19 62.152(c)(2) 20 62.156(a) 21 62.162(c)(3) 22 62.164(e)(1) 23       Rpld 62.164(e)(4) 24 62.166(b) 25 62.166(d)(4) 26 62.166(e) 27 80.01 28 80.09 29 80.06.1 30 81.30(b)(1) 30A 81.31(A)(1)(b), (c) 31 81.35, 81.36 1153-97 12-17-97 1 58.02 2 58.15 3 58.21(a), (b) 4 58.23 5 59.25 6 59.43 7 59.61 8 62.164(e)(1) 9       Rpld 62.164(e)(4) 10 62.166(b) 11 62.166(d)(4) 12 80.03(C)(2)-(4) 1154-97  1-21-98 1 82.50 1174-98 11- 4-98 1 (B)(2)(p) 2       Rnbd 55.12(b)-(w)       as 55.12(c)-(x)       Added 55.12(b) 3 55.14(c)(4) 4 58.31.1 5 60.05(a)(1), (c), (d) 6 62.42(a)(8) 7 62.175(A), (B) 8 80.09(a)(1) 9 86.03(b)(10) 10 86.04(g) 1176-98 12-16-98 1 62.122(c)(17) 1186-99  7-21-99 1 30.35(B) 2       Added 30.35(B)(5) 3 39.06(C) 4 39.06(D) 5 55.12(g) 6 56.20(b)       Added 56.20(c) 7       Rpld 57.22 8       Rpld 58.91, 58.92, 58.93 9       Added 58.102 10 59.43.1 11       Rpld 62.152(d)(2),       rnbd 62.152(3)-(7)       as 62.152(2)-(6) 12       Added 80.25, 80.30 13       Rpld 81.20(a)(4),       rnbd 81.20(a)(5)-(9)       as 81.20(a)(4)-(8) 14 84.10(a) 15       Added 86.03(b)(11), (12) 16 86.03(c)(8) 17       rnbd 86.05(B)-(F)       as 86.05(C)-(G)       Added 86.05(B) 18 86.05(c)(1)(c), (d) 19 86.05(D)(1) 20 86.05(D)(2)d. 21       Added 86.05(D)(3) 22 86.05(e)(2)(a) 23 86.05(F)(2) 24 86.06(a) 25 86.06(d) 26 86.06(k) 27 86.13 1188-99  8- 4-99 1 62.02 1211-2000  4- 5-00 1       Added 1.95(17)       Rnbd 1.95(17)-(384)       as 1.95(18)-(392) 2 1.95(242) 3 1.95(293) 4       Added 55.12(l)       Rnbd 55.12(l)-(x)       as 55.12(m)-(y) 5 62.122(a)(20) 6 62.122(c)(4) 7 80.30 8 84.10 9 86.05(C)(1)(e)2., 3. 1240-2000 10-18-00 1 36.01 2 39.12(a) 3 55.15(D)(5)(a) 4       Added 56.20(d) 5 57.12(E)(2) 6, 7 58.17 8       Rpld 62.22(c)(2)       Rnbd 62.22(c)(3)-(6)       as 62.22(c)(2)-(5) 9       Added 62.142(c)(14) 10       Rpld 62.142(d)(8) 11 81.20(a)(7) 12 81.30(b)(1) 13 81.30(d)(2) 14 81.36 1242-2001  2- 7-01 2(A)       Added 22.30(e) 2(B)       Added 23.10(e) 2(C)       Added 24.40(g) 1251-2001  9- 5-01 1 57.66 1268-2002  4- 3-02 1 1.95(102) 2 36.01 3 39.17.A. 4       Rpld 55.13 5       Rpld 58.11 6 58.15 7-17 58.17 18       Rpld 58.85-58-102       Added 58.85 19       Rpld 59.00-59.10       Added 59.00 20       Rpld 59.20-59.34       Added 59.20 21       Rpld 59.40-59.46 22       Rpld 59.60--59.62       Added 59.60 23       Rpld 59.70, 59.71 24       Rpld 81.20 25       Added 86.03(11), (12) 26       Added 86.04(h)-(j) 27       Added 86.05(H) 28 88.00(c), (f) 1272-2002  6-19-02 1 40.30(1)(a) 2 40.30(1)(b)3. 3 40.30(2)(a)1.a. 4 40.30(2)(a)1.b. 5 40.30(2)(a)2.b. 6, 7 40.30(2)(a)3.a., b. 8 40.30(2)(a)3.d. 9 40.30(2)(a)5.a.i. 10, 11 40.30(2)(a)5.a.v.(a), (b) 12 40.30(2)(a)5.b.ii. 13 40.30(3)(a) 14 40.30(3)(c) 15       Added 40.30(3)(d)1. 16       Added 40.30(4)(d) 17       Added 40.30(8) 18 86.02 19 86.04(f)(4) 20 86.04(g)(2) 21, 22 86.04(g)(4), (5) 23       Rpld 86.04(g)(6) 24 86.04(j) 25 86.06 1274-2002  7- 3-02 1 80.10(B)-(D) 1275-2002  7- 3-02 1 57.58(a) 1276-2002  7- 3-02 1       Added 31.51 1278-2002  7-17-02 1 70.26 1281-2002  8-21-02 1 57.66 1294-2002 11- 6-02 1 1.95(349) 1295-2002 11-20-02 1 81.30 1297-2002 11-20-02 1 62.102(b)(4) 2 62.122(b)(3) 1298-2002 12-18-02 1 80.25 1299-2002 11-20-02 1 81.35 1301-2003  2- 5-03 1       Rpld 61.00(F) 1302-2003  2- 5-03 1       Added 80.00.2 1308-2003  6-18-03 1 30.35(A) 1313-2003  8-20-03 1 86.02(c)(1) 1315-2003  9- 3-03 1 86.05(H) 1321-2003  9-17-03 1-3 39.06(B)-(D) 1322-2003  9-17-03 1       Added 42.14(i) 2, 3 42.15 4       Added 42.34(i) 5 50.52(A)(6) 6       Added 50.52(A)(8) 7       Rpld 50.52(B)       Rnbd 50.52(C)       as 50.52(B) 8 50.52(B) 9 50.52(B)(1)(a) 10       Added 50.52(B)(1)(b) 11       Rnbd 50.52(B)(1)(b)       as 50.52(B)(1)(c) 1323-2003  9-17-03 1       Rpld 57.66 1325-2003 10-15-03 1 39.12(a) 2 39.13(a) 1326-2003 10-15-03 1       Added 62.09 2       Added 42.05.2. 3       Added 55.13 1331-2003 11-19-03 1 31.51.2.(C) 1332-2003 12-17-03 1 40.00-40.30 1333-2003 12-17-03 1 80.20(f)(5) 1334-2003 12-17-03 1       Added 80.21 1340-2004  3-10-04 1       Added 22.30(f) 1341-2004  3-10-04 1       Added 62.122(a)(21) 2       Rpld 62.122(c)(10)       Rnbd 62.122(c)(11)-(17)       as 62.122(c)(10)-(16) 1342-2004  3-10-04 1 86.05(C)(1)(e)3. 2 86.05(C)(1)(e)5. 3 86.05(C)(1)(e)7. 4 86.05(C)(1)(e)8. 1343-2004  3-24-04 2 23.10(b) 3 24.40(e) 4 22.30(d) 1344-2004  5- 5-04 1       Added 62.135(b)(1) 1356-2004  9-22-04 1 55.12(f) 1357-2004  9-22-04 1 50.52(A)(1) 2 50.52(A)(2) 3 50.52(B)(1) 4 50.52(B)(2) 1362-2004 12- 1-04 1 80.21 1363-2004 12- 1-04 1       Added 62.162(a)(15) 1364-2004 12- 1-04 1 1.95(3) 2 62.24(e) 3 62.34(e) 4 62.44(f) 5 62.54(f) 6 62.64(e) 7 62.74(f) 8 80.00.1(c) 9 80.00.1(f) 1367-2005  2- 2-05 1 62.122(d)(3) 1371-2005  4-20-05 1       Rpld 62.135(b)(1) 2       Added 62.190 1375-2005  5- 4-05 1       Added 81.30(c) 1376-2005  5- 4-05 1       Added 30.10(l)-(n) 2       Rpld 30.20(a)       Rnbd 30.20(b), (c)       as 30.20(a), (b)       Rpld 30.20(d), (e)       Rnbd 30.20(f)-(h)       as 30.20(c)-(e) 3       Added 30.21 4 42.05 2. 5 62.09 6 55.13 7       Added 26.00 8 21.41 9       Added 31.52 1377-2005  5- 4-05 1       Added 62.180 1378-2005  6- 1-05 1       Added 62.122(a)(22) 2 62.122(d)(1) 1379-2005  6- 1-05 1       Rpld 55.12(e)       Rnbd 55.12(f)-(y)       as 55.12(e)-(x)       Rpld 62.12(c)(1), (2)       Rnbd 62.12(c)(3)-(8)       as 62.12(c)(1)-(6)       Rpld 62.22(c)(3), (4)       Rnbd 62.22(c)(5)       as 62.22(c)(3)       Rpld 62.32(c)(1), (2)       Rnbd 62.32(c)(3)-(7)       as 62.32(c)(1)-(5)       Rpld 62.42(c)(1), (2)       Rnbd 62.42(c)(3)-(7)       as 62.42(c)(1)-(5)       Rpld 62.62(c)(3), (4)       Rnbd 62.62(c)(5)       as 62.62(c)(3)       Rpld 62.72(c)(1), (2)       Rnbd 62.72(c)(3)-(5)       as 62.72(c)(1)-(3)       Rpld 62.78(c)(1), (2)       Rnbd 62.78(c)(3), (4)       as 62.78(c)(1), (2)       Rpld 62.132(c)(1)       Rnbd 62.132(c)(2)-(9)       as 62.132(c)(1)-(8) 2 1.95(50) 3 80.01 1380-2005  6-15-05 1       Added 62.102(a)(12) 2       Added 62.122(a)(23) 3       Rpld 62.102(c)(4)       Rnbd 62.102(c)(5)-(8)       as 62.102(c)(4)-(7) 4       Rpld 62.122(c)(2)       Rnbd 62.122(c)(3)-(16)       as 62.122(c)(2)-(15) 1385-2005  8-17-05 1 40.00(B)(3)(p) 2       Added 40.11 1386-2005  8-17-05 1 50.52 1405-2006  3-22-06 1       Added 23.15 1415-2006  8-16-06 1       Added 60.90 1416-2006  8-16-06 1 62.166(c) 1417-2006  8-16-06 1 86.05(C)(2)(h) 1418-2006  8-16-06 1       Added 62.200 1436-2007  1-17-07 1, 2 80.00.1 1437-2007  1-17-07 1 60.90(k)(2) 1441-2007  3-21-07 1       Added 80.40 1444-2007  4- 4-07 1       Added 89.00 2       Added 62.122(c)(16) 1447-2007  5-16-07 1 31.51(7)(B)-(D) 1469-2007 11- 7-07 1 80.00.1 1489-2008  4-16-08 1 83.50(tit.) 2 83.50(a)(2) 3 83.50(b) 4 83.50(c)(1) 1491-2008  8-20-08 2 50.00(d)(1) 1493-2008  7- 2-08 1       Added 62.62(a)(6) 2       Added 62.67 1494-2008  7-16-08 1(Exh. A)       Added 42.06 1506-2008 10-15-08 1       Added 59.70 1507-2008 10-15-08 1 80.08 1515-2009  1- 7-09 1 55.12(f) 1516-2009  1- 7-09 1 85.00 1517-2009  1-21-09 1 86.02 2       Added 86.04(k) 1522-2009  7-15-09 1       Added 61.90 1530-2009  9-23-09 1.A. 1.95(44) 1.B. 1.95(293) 2.A.1.       Rpld 62.12(a)(7)-(9)       Added 62.12(a)(7)       Rnbd 62.12(a)(10)       as 62.12(a)(8) 2.A.2.       Added 62.12(c)(7), (8) 2.B.1.       Rpld 62.22(a)(2)-(4)       Added 62.22(a)(2)       Rnbd 62.22(a)(5)       as 62.22(a)(3) 2.B.2.       Rpld 62.22(c)(3)       Added 62.22(c)(3), (4) 2.C.1.       Rpld 62.32(a)(2)-(4)       Added 62.32(a)(2) 2.C.2.       Rpld 62.32(c)(5)       Added 62.32(c)(5), (6) 2.D.1.       Rpld 62.42(a)(4)-(6)       Added 62.42(a)(4)       Rnbd 62.42.(a)(7)-(9)       as 62.42(a)(5)-(7) 2.D.2.       Rpld 62.42(c)(5)       Added 62.42(c)(5), (6) 2.E.1.       Rpld 62.52(a)(6)-(8)       Added 62.52(a)(6)       Rnbd 62.52(a)(9), (10)       as 62.52(a)(7), (8) 2.E.2.       Rpld 62.52(c)(6)-(8)       Added 62.52(c)(6), (7)       Rnbd 62.52(c)(9)       as 62.52(c)(8) 2.F.1.       Rpld 62.62(a)(2)-(4)       Added 62.62(a)(2)       Rnbd 62.62(a)(5), (6)       as 62.62(a)(3), (4) 2.F.2.       Rpld 62.62(c)(3)       Added 62.62(c)(3), (4) 2.G. 62.122(c)(11), (12) 2.H. 62.132(c)(2) 62.132(c)(4) 2.I.       Added 62.173(a)(4) 3       Rpld 80.20(b)(1)(b)-(d)       Added 80.20(b)(1)(b) 4 83.00 1531-2009  9-23-09 1 80.01 A. 2       Added 80.01 J. 1532-2009  9-23-09 1 81.30 1533-2009 10- 7-09 1       Added 59.81-59.91 1534-2009 11- 4-09 1       Added 1.95(154)       Rnbd 1.95(154)-(182)       as 1.95(155)-(183) 2       Added 1.95(184)       Rnbd 1.95(183)-(392)       as 1.95(185)-(394) 3       Added 62.184(a)(3) 1541-2010  1-20-10 1       Added 80.11 1547-2010  5- 5-10 1       Added 80.07.1(d) 1548-2010  5- 5-10 1 86.03(c)(7) 2       Added 86.03(c)(13) 1549-2010  5-19-10 1       Added 26.01 1550-2010  5-19-10 1       Added 40.31 1551-2010  6-16-10 1 86.05(E)(2) 2       Added 86.05(E)(3), (4) 1554-2010  8-18-10 1 42.15 2 51.14(b) 3 57.10 4 57.11 5 57.12 1572-2011  2- 2-11 1 62.200(tit.) 1573-2011  2- 2-11 1       Rpld 62.111-62.117  
