CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SEMINOLE, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Adopted: September 8, 1998 
Effective: September 8, 1998 
____________ 
Published in 1998 by Order of the City Council 
Republished in 2010 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SEMINOLE, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Leslie Waters 
Mayor 
____________ 
Thomas Barnhorn 
Chris Burke 
Roger Edelman 
Bob Matthews 
Jim Quinn 
Trish Springer 
City Council 
____________ 
Ann Toney-Deal 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jay Daigneault 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Patty Beliveau, CMC 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Seminole, Florida. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1998 Code, as supplemented through February 12, 2008, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1998 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE INDEX 	LDCi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Anne Wilson, Editor, and Eric W. Grant, Vice President, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Frank P. Edmunds, City Manager, Rose Benoit, City Clerk, Mark Ely, Community Development Director and the other members of the city staff, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Seminole, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Seminole, Florida. 
© ;hg;Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Seminole, Florida. 2010. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 10-98 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Seminole, Florida; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
The City Council of Seminole, Florida Hereby Ordains: 
WHEREAS, the Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Seminole, Florida," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 70, each inclusive, is adopted; and 
WHEREAS, all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 27, 1998, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed; and 
WHEREAS, the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance; and 
WHEREAS, unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or a term of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or both a fine and term of imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits; and 
WHEREAS, additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments; and 
WHEREAS, ordinances adopted after January 27, 1998, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code; and 
This ordinance shall become effective upon passage of the final reading. 
Passed on first reading: August 25, 1998 
Passed on final reading: September 8, 1998 
	      Dottie K. Reeder, Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      Lynne M. Keane, City Clerk 	
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Charter of the City of Seminole, as adopted by Ordinance No. 5-94 on May 10, 1994, and by referendum on September 8, 1994, and effective on March 14, 1995. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, F.S. ch. 166. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CREATION AND POWERS 
 
Section 1.01. - Creation and Powers. 
The City of Seminole, Florida, as created by Chapter 165.04, Laws of Florida, as amended, shall have all governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions, and render municipal services, and may exercise any power for municipal purposes except as otherwise provided by law.  
Section 1.02. - Acquisition and Use of Property Acquired by Eminent Domain. 
The City shall have the power to acquire by purchase, gift, devise, condemnation or otherwise, property real of personal, or any estate or interest therein within or without the City, and for any of the purposes of the City and to improve, sell lease, mortgage, pledge or otherwise dispose of the same or any part thereof, provided that the purchase or sale of any real property shall require a supermajority vote (5/7) from the full City Council. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Charter or other law providing for the use of the power of eminent domain; the City shall not use the power of eminent domain to take private property for the purpose of making the property so taken available for a private commercial, financial, retail or industrial enterprise. The City may only use the power of eminent domain to take private property if such property is to be owned by the City and used for a public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 31-2009, § 1, 11-24-09/3-9-10)  
ARTICLE II. - CORPORATE LIMITS 
 
Section 2.01. - Description of Corporate Limits. 
The corporate boundaries of the City shall remain fixed as they exist on the date this Charter takes effect provided that the City shall have the power to change its boundaries in the manner prescribed by law. 
State Law reference— Annexations, F.S. ch. 170.  
ARTICLE III. - LEGISLATIVE 
 
Section 3.01. - City Council: Powers and Composition. 
There shall be a City Council consisting of a Mayor and six Council members with all legislative powers of the City vested therein elected at large by the qualified electors of the City. Council members shall have been electors and residents of the City for one year prior to qualifying. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 1, 7-27-99)  
Section 3.02. - Election and Terms. 
Beginning 2014, the regular election of City Council, including Mayor, shall be held on the first Tuesday of November of each year. All elections shall be for three year terms and decided by popular vote. Elections shall be held in the manner provided by Article VI of this Charter. 
During the second business meeting in November, newly elected City Council member(s) will subscribe to an oath of office and Council shall elect a Vice-Mayor. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 2, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 32-2004, § 1, 12-28-04/3-8-05; Ord. No. 32-2009, § 1, 11-24-09/3-9-10; Ord. No. 11-2014 , § 7(Att.), 7-22-14/11-4-14) 
Note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 32-2004 provided for an effective date of 3-10-05, 12:01 a.m.  
Section 3.03. - Compensation and Expenses. 
The Council may determine the annual salary of Council members by ordinance.  
Section 3.04. - Mayor. 
There shall be a Mayor who shall be a member of the City Council and preside at meetings of the Council, shall have a vote, but shall have no administrative or executive duties except as may be provided elsewhere herein or as necessary to conduct the specific requirements of the office of Mayor. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 3, 7-27-99)  
Section 3.05. - Vice-Mayor. 
The Council shall elect annually from its members a Vice-Mayor at the next regular council meeting after each annual election. The Vice-Mayor may be replaced with any other member at any time by five votes of the Council. In the absence of the Mayor and Vice-Mayor, the Councilor with the most seniority shall act as Mayor. 
(Ord. No. 34-2004, § 1, 12-8-04/3-8-05; Ord. No. 33-2009, § 1, 11-24-09/3-9-10) 
Note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 34-2004 provided for an effective date of 3-10-05, 12:01 a.m.  
Section 3.06. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Appointment and Removals. Neither the Council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any City administrative officer or employees whom the Manager or any of the Manager's subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the Council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(b)  Interference With Administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations, the Council or its members shall deal with City officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the Manager solely through the Manager, and neither the Council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. Nothing in the foregoing is to be construed to prohibit individual members of the council from closely scrutinizing by questions and personal observation, all aspects of City government operations so as to obtain independent information to assist the members in the formulation of sound policies to be considered by the Council. It is the express intent of this Charter, however, that recommendations for improvement in City government operations by individual Council members be made to and through the City Manager, so that the Manager may coordinate efforts of all City departments to achieve the greatest possible savings through the most efficient and sound means available. 
( Ord. No. 11-2014 , § 7(Att.), 7-22-14/11-4-14)  
Section 3.07. - Vacancies; Forfeitures of Office; Filling of Vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of a Council member shall automatically become vacant upon death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, or forfeiture of office. 
(b)  Forfeiture of Office. A member of the Council shall forfeit such office if the member: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during the member's term any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(2)  Is convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or violates any standard of conduct or code of ethics for public office as provided by law. 
(3)  Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Council without being excused by vote of the Council. 
(4)  Fails to attend six publically posted meetings (business, workshops or special meetings) during a 12-month period without being excused by vote of the Council. For purposes of this subsection, 12-month period shall mean 12 rolling months. 
(c)  Filling of Vacancies. 
(1)  Vacancy in Council: A vacancy in the Council shall be temporarily within 60 days of its occurrence by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council until the vacancy may be scheduled for a regular election, when the voters will fill such vacancy for the remainder of the term unless an election is scheduled to be held within 60 days of the occurrence of such vacancy to fill the seat so vacated. 
(2)  Vacancy in Office of Mayor: 
(a)  Temporary Absence. In the event that the Mayor shall be temporarily absent or disabled the Vice-Mayor shall act as the Mayor during such absence or disability. 
(b)  Permanent Absence. In the event that the Mayor dies, resigns, becomes permanently disabled, ceases to be qualified or is removed from office as provided by law, the Vice-Mayor will become Interim-Mayor with the full powers, salary, and duties of the Mayor as provided by this Charter or other law. The office of Mayor shall be filled at the next regular election for any unexpired portion of the term. 
(d)  Extraordinary Vacancies. In the event that four members of Council are removed from office at any given time by death, disability, or forfeiture of office, the Governor shall appoint an interim Council which shall call a Special Election to be held within six months of the occurrence of the vacancies. Such election shall be done in such manner as to assure properly balanced future elections. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 4, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 34-2009, § 1, 11-24-09/3-9-10; Ord. No. 11-2014 , § 7(Att.), 7-22-14/11-4-14; Ord. No. 12-2015 , §§ 2, 3, 8-11-15/11-3-15)  
Section 3.08. - City Clerk. 
The City Manager shall appoint an officer of the City who shall have the title of City Clerk. The City Clerk shall give notice of Council meetings to its members and the public, keep the journal of its proceedings and perform such other duties as are assigned by the Council, City Manager, this Charter or by State Law. The City Clerk shall be directed by the City Manager. The City Clerk has an obligation to faithfully serve the administrative authority of the City as well as the Mayor and City Council. 
The City Clerk shall: 
(1)  Maintain all official City records, ordinances, resolutions, minutes of City Council, Board/Committee meetings, and other official City records; 
(2)  Maintain the official Municipal Code book; 
(3)  Coordinate all municipal elections with the Supervisor of Elections; 
(4)  Maintain the official seal of the City. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 5, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 35-2009, § 1, 11-24-09/3-9-10)  
Section 3.09. - City Attorney: Appointment, Removal, Qualifications and Duties. 
(a)  The City Attorney shall be appointed by the affirmative vote of four members of the Council and may be removed by the same number of votes. 
(b)  The City Attorney shall be an attorney-at-law with at least three years experience, admitted to practice before the highest courts of the State of Florida, and be a member in good standing of the Florida Bar Association. 
(c)  The City Attorney shall: 
(1)  Act as legal advisor to the Council, the City manager and all city departments, offices, and agencies. 
(2)  Prosecute and defend on behalf of the City all complaints, suits, and controversies in which the City is a party when such action is required by the Council. 
(3)  Review all contracts, bonds, and other instruments in which the City is concerned and shall endorse thereon approval or disapproval of the form, sufficiency, and correctness thereof; no contract with the City shall take effect until it has been so endorsed as approved by the Attorney in writing. 
(4)  Shall perform such other duties as may be directed by the Council or the laws of the State of Florida. 
(5)  Shall recommend to the Council, by letter, one or more qualified attorneys to perform duties of the City Attorney, if required, during the temporary absence or disability of the City Attorney. 
(d)  The Council may appoint an Assistant City Attorney and may contract with other attorneys or firms of attorneys to perform such services on behalf of the City on specialized projects as may be deemed necessary or expedient. 
(e)  The Council shall determine the compensation to be paid to the city Attorney, Assistant City Attorney, and special counsel. 
( Ord. No. 11-2014 , § 7(Att.), 7-22-14/11-4-14)  
Section 3.10. - Procedure. 
(a)  Meetings. The Council shall meet at least twice each month at such times and places as the Council may prescribe by rule. Meetings may be held on call of the City Manager, the Mayor, or a majority of the members, upon no less than 24 hours notice to each member and the public. All meetings shall be public except as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(b)  Rules and Journal. The Council shall determine its rules and order of business. 
(c)  Voting. Voting on ordinances shall be by roll call and recorded in the journal. Four members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, but adoption of an ordinance or approval of a contract requires four affirmative votes. 
(Ord. No. 35-2004, § 1, 12-28-04/3-8-05) 
Note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 35-2004 provided for an effective date of 3-10-05, 12:01 a.m. 
State Law reference— Open meetings law, F.S. § 286.011.  
ARTICLE IV. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, RECALL 
 
Section 4.01. - Initiative. 
The qualified voters of the City shall have power to propose ordinances to the Council provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of City Officers or employees. If the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, the voters shall have the power to adopt or reject it at the City election. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 6, 7-27-99)  
Section 4.02. - Referendum. 
The qualified voters of the City shall have power to require reconsideration by the Council of any adopted ordinance and, if the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a City election, provided such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes, or appointment or salaries of City officers or employees. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 7, 7-27-99)  
Section 4.03. - Recall. 
The qualified voters of the City shall have the power to recall or remove from office any elected official or officials of the City, for the reasons and in the manner set forth by the laws of the State of Florida. 
State Law reference— Recall procedure for elected city officials, F.S. § 100.361.  
Section 4.04. - Procedures. 
Any action exercising the extraordinary powers of the voters under any one of the above three (3) sections of Article IV shall be held and administered according to the provisions of the laws of the State of Florida.  
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Section 5.01. - City Manager. 
There shall be a City Manager who shall be the chief administrative officer of the City. The Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the administration of all City affairs placed in the Manager's charge by or under this Charter. 
( Ord. No. 11-2014 , § 7(Att.), 7-22-14/11-4-14)  
Section 5.02. - Appointment; Removal; Compensation. 
(a)  Appointment. The Council shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term by a majority vote of all of the Council members. 
(b)  Removal. The Council may remove the Manager by the affirmative vote of four members of Council and upon demand by the Manager, a Public Hearing shall be held prior to a vote to remove the Manager. 
(c)  Compensation. The compensation of the Manager shall be fixed by the Council and shall not be reduced during the term of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 36-2009, § 1, 11-24-09/3-9-10; Ord. No. 11-2014 , § 7(Att.), 7-22-14/11-4-14)  
Section 5.03. - Acting City Manager. 
By written communication filed with the Council, the Manager shall designate, subject to approval of the Council, a qualified City Administrative Officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the Manager during temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability extending beyond 90 days, the Council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the City to serve until the Manager returns from said absence or disability. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 8, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 11-2014 , § 7(Att.), 7-22-14/11-4-14)  
Section 5.04. - Powers and Duties of the City Manager. 
The City Manager shall: 
(a)  Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all City employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this Charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this Charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this Charter. The Manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the Manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(b)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law; 
(c)  Attend all Council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote; 
(d)  See that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the Council, subject to enforcement by the Manager or by officers subject to the Manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(e)  Prepare and submit an annual itemized budget, budget message, and capital program to the Council, in a form provided by ordinance; 
(f)  Submit to the Council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(g)  Make such other reports as the Council may require concerning the operations of City Departments, offices, and agencies subject to the Manager's direction and supervision; 
(h)  Keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the City; 
(i)  Sign contracts on behalf of the City pursuant to the provisions of appropriations ordinances; 
(j)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required by the Council. 
( Ord. No. 11-2014 , § 7(Att.), 7-22-14/11-4-14)  
Section 5.05. - Supervision of Departments. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by general law, the City Manager will be responsible for the supervision and direction of all departments, agencies, or offices of the City. All departments, offices and agencies under the direction and supervision of the Manager shall be administered by an officer appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the Manager. With the consent of Council, the Manager may serve as the head of one or more such departments. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 9, 7-27-99)  
Section 5.06. - Personnel System. 
All appointments and promotions of City officials and employees except those specifically exempted by ordinance, shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence and to this end, the Council shall, by ordinance, establish personnel procedures and rules.  
Section 5.07. - Administrative Code. 
The Manager shall develop and keep current an administrative code for the purpose of implementing ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 36-2004, § 1, 12-28-04/3-8-05) 
Note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 36-2004 provided for an effective date of 3-10-05, 12:01 a.m.  
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS AND QUALIFICATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Elections, F.S. chs. 97—106. 
 
Section 6.01. - Electors. 
Any person who is duly registered as a voter in the County of Pinellas, Florida, and resides in the City of Seminole shall be an elector of the City. 
State Law reference— Municipal electors, F.S. § 166.032.  
Section 6.02. - Nonpartisan Elections. 
All nominations and elections for City Council and Mayor shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis.  
Section 6.03. - Conduct of Elections. 
(a)  The City Council shall, conduct all City elections in compliance with the terms and conditions as set forth by the Pinellas County Supervisor of Elections Office. 
(b)  A Charter amendment to be voted on by the electors of the City shall be presented by ballot title. 
(c)  The provisions of the general laws of the State of Florida pertaining to municipal elections relating to the qualification of electors, registrations, manner of voting, duties of election officers and all other particulars regarding the holding of elections shall govern all City elections, except as otherwise provided in this Charter and in pertinent ordinances adopted hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 11-2014 , § 7(Att.), 7-22-14/11-4-14)  
Section 6.04. - Elections. 
(a)  City Elective Positions. All members of the City Council and the Mayor, except as otherwise provided by the Charter, shall be elected at large by the qualified voters of the City of Seminole. 
(b)  Regular Elections. Regular City elections shall be held on the first Tuesday in November of each year. 
(c)  Special Elections. Special municipal elections may be called by the Council at any time for such purposes as are authorized by this Charter or by law. Notice of all Special Elections shall be published in a newspaper circulated in the City once a week for the two weeks immediately preceding the election. 
(d)  Tie Vote. In the case of a tie vote which affects the outcome of the election, there shall be a runoff election to determine the winner. 
(e)  Runoff Election. If any runoff election is necessitated, it shall be held not later than 45 days after the regular election. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2004, § 1, 12-8-04/3-8-05; Ord. No. 12-2006, § 1, 7-11-06/Ref. of 11-7-06; Ord. No. 23-2006, § 2, 1-9-07/Ref. of 11-7-06; Ord. No. 37-2009, § 1, 11-24-09/3-9-10) 
Note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 37-2004 provided for an effective date of 3-10-05, 12:01 a.m.  
Section 6.05. - Uncontested Elections. 
In the event the number of candidates who qualify is the same or less than the vacancies to be filled, each unopposed candidate shall be deemed to have voted for himself/herself and no election shall be held. Any vacancy on the Council or the Mayor's office for which no candidate qualifies shall be temporarily filled by appointment of a majority of the new Council until the next regular election. 
( Ord. No. 11-2014 , § 7(Att.), 7-22-14/11-4-14)  
ARTICLE VII. - TRANSITION SCHEDULE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-99, § 10, adopted July 27, 1999, repealed the former Art. VII, §§ 7.01—7.05, and enacted a new Art. VII to read as herein set out. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 5-94, §§ 7.01—7.05, adopted May 10, 1994. 
 
Section 7.01. - Ordinance Preserved. 
All ordinances in effect upon the adoption of this Charter, to the extent not inconsistent with it, shall remain in full force and effect until repealed or changed as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 10, 7-27-99)  
Section 7.02. - Adoption Of Amendments. 
If a majority of the qualified voters of the City voting upon a proposed Charter amendment vote in favor of it, the amendment shall become effective at the time fixed in the amendment or if no time is therein fixed, the amendment shall become effective when approved by the voters and filed in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 10, 7-27-99)  
ARTICLE VIII. - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS IN GENERAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum mandatory procedure for adoption of ordinances, F.S. § 166.041. 
 
Section 8.01. - Definitions. 
(a)  Ordinances means an official, legislative action of the Council, which action is a regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law. 
(b)  Resolution means an expression of the City Council concerning matters of administration, an expression of a temporary character, or a provision for the disposition of a particular item of business of the City Council.  
Section 8.02. - Procedure. 
(a)  All proposed ordinances and resolutions shall be prepared and adopted in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the State of Florida. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the City Council at any regular or special meeting. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the City Clerk shall distribute a copy to each Council member and the Mayor.  
Section 8.03. - Emergency Ordinances. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the Council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes; grant, renew or extend a franchise; set service or user charges for any municipal services; or authorize the borrowing of money. 
(b)  An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated in a preamble as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration that an emergency exists and shall describe it in clear and specific terms. 
(c)  An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least five Council members shall be required. After its adoption, the ordinance shall be published and printed as prescribed for other adopted ordinances. 
(d)  Emergency ordinances shall become effective upon adoption or at such other date as may be specified in the ordinance.  
Section 8.04. - Disaster Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, and when fewer than four Council members may be assembled for the purpose of a special meeting, and an emergency has occurred or is imminent and it is necessary, the Mayor, or in his or her absence, the Vice-Mayor, shall have the power to issue executive orders, proclamations and regulations which shall have the full force and effect of law. 
Such executive orders, proclamations, and regulations shall continue for no longer than allowable by State Law or until such time as at least four members of the City Council may be assembled. In the event that four members of the City Council may not be assembled at the expiration of the allowable period, then such executive orders, proclamations, and regulations may be renewed for a like period by the Mayor or Vice-Mayor until such time as such assembly is possible. 
A quorum of the City Council may, by resolution, terminate a state of disaster emergency at any time and rescind any previously issued executive orders, proclamations, or regulations issued under this section and shall indicate the nature of the disaster, the area or areas threatened and the conditions which have brought it about. Such orders, proclamations, or regulations shall be promptly disseminated by means calculated to bring the contents to the attention of the general public. 
An "Emergency" shall be deemed to be any matter imminently threatening the public health, safety, or welfare in the nature of flooding, hurricane, tornado, public riot, chemical discharge, or similar physical, natural, or manmade circumstances. In the issuance of orders, proclamations, and regulations, the Mayor or Vice-Mayor shall have the power to exercise the police powers constitutionally and statutorily available to municipalities as are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, unless such powers shall have been preempted to the office of the Governor. Nothing contained herein shall limit, modify, or abridge the authority of the Governor of the State of Florida to exercise any power vested in him [the Governor] by the statutes or common law of the State. 
(Ord. No. 38-2009, § 1, 12-22-09/3-9-10)  
Section 8.05. - Authentication, Recording, and Disposition of Charter Amendments, Ordinances and Resolutions. 
(a)  Authentication. The presiding officer of the Council and the person charged with keeping the journal shall authenticate by their signatures all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council. In addition, when Charter amendments have been approved by the electors, the presiding officer of the Council and the person charged with keeping the journal shall authenticate by their signatures the Charter amendment, such authentication to reflect the approval of the Charter amendment by the electorate. 
(b)  Recording. The person charged with keeping the journal shall keep properly indexed books in which shall be recorded, in full, all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council. Ordinances shall, at the direction of the Council, be periodically codified. The person charged with keeping the journal shall also maintain the City Charter in current form and shall enter all Charter amendments and send a copy of the revised Charter incorporating amendments to the Secretary of State's Office. 
(c)  Printing. The Council shall, by ordinance, establish procedures for making all resolutions, ordinances, technical codes adopted by reference, and this Charter available to the people of the City for public inspection and available for purchase at a reasonable price.  
ARTICLE IX. - FISCAL MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Financial matters, F.S. ch. 218. 
 
Section 9.01. - Budget Adoption. 
The Council shall, by ordinance, adopt the budget on or before the 30th day of September of each year. An ordinance adopting an annual budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated. 
State Law reference— Budget procedure, F.S. § 200.065.  
Section 9.02. - Appropriation Amendments During the Fiscal Year. 
(a)  Supplemental Appropriations. If, during the fiscal year, revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget are available for appropriation, the Council, by ordinance, may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess. 
(b)  Reduction of Appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the Manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the Manager shall report to the Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action to be taken and recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The Council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may, by ordinance, reduce one or more appropriations. 
( Ord. No. 11-2014 , § 7(Att.), 7-22-14/11-4-14)  
Section 9.03. - Function of City Council. 
The City Council may borrow money, contract loans and issue bonds pursuant to the provisions of Florida Statutes, provided that: 
(a)  Any one proposal to obligate the City for more than fifty (50) percent of the previous year's tax revenue (taxes, license fees, permits revenues and intergovernmental revenues) shall be put to referendum (with the exception of revenue bonds for public health, safety or industrial development). 
(1)  For purposes of this Section, tax revenue means taxes, license fees, permit revenues and intergovernmental revenues. 
(b)  Total indebtedness shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the last certified assessed taxable value of all real property located in the City. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 11, 7-27-99)  
ARTICLE X. - CHARTER AMENDMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Procedure for amending Charter, F.S. § 166.031. 
 
Section 10.01. - Initiation by Ordinance. 
The Council may, by ordinance, propose amendments to any part or all of this Charter, except Article II prescribing boundaries, and upon passage of the initiating ordinance, shall place the proposed amendment to a vote of the electors at the next general election held within the City or at a special election called for such purpose. Amendment of Article II resulting from annexation done in accordance with general law shall be by ordinance of the Council and shall not be subject to a vote of the electors except as provided by general law.  
Section 10.02. - Initiation by Petition. 
The electors of the City may propose amendments to this Charter as provided by Florida Statutes - as from time to time, amended.  
Section 10.03. - Charter Review Committee. 
(a)  During the month of January, 1999, and each five years thereafter, there shall be established a Charter Review Committee composed of seven members who shall serve until the ballot language deadline date to the Pinellas County Supervisor of Elections Office for the next regularly scheduled election. Every effort shall be made to appoint one member who has served during the previous Charter Review Committee. The members shall be appointed by the City Council. Members shall be residents of the City of Seminole. Vacancies may be filled within 30 days in the same manner as the original appointments. 
(b)  The Charter Review Committee shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair from among its membership. Further meetings of the Committee shall be held upon the call of the Chair or any three members of the Committee. All meetings shall be opened to the public. A majority of the members of the Charter Review Committee shall constitute a quorum. The Committee may adopt other rules for its operations and proceedings as it deems desirable. The members of the Committee shall receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses pursuant to law. 
(c)  Expenses of the Charter Review Committee shall be verified by a majority vote of the Committee and forwarded to the City Council for payment. The City Council shall provide space, secretarial, staff and legal assistance. 
(d)  The Charter Review Committee shall review the operations of City government, meet with the Mayor and City Council, city management, and conduct no less than one public hearing in order to recommend amendments to this Charter, if any. 
(e)  Charter amendments proposed by the Charter Review Committee, shall be reviewed by the City Council. The City Council may submit the amendments proposed by the Charter Review Committee, to referendum on or before the next regularly scheduled municipal election. 
(Ord. No. 10-99, § 12, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 38-2004, § 1, 12-8-04/3-8-05; Ord. No. 11-2014 , § 7(Att.), 7-22-14/11-4-14) 
Note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 38-2004 provided for an effective date of 3-10-05, 12:01 a.m.  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES  
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Seminole, Florida," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1991, § 21-101)  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Seminole as printed in part I of this volume. 
City. The word "city" shall be construed as if the words "of Seminole" followed it and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
City council. Whenever the term "council" or "city council" is used, it shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of Seminole. 
Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Seminole, Florida. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 1.090(a). 
Corporate limits. Whenever in this Code an act is prohibited, declared unlawful, required to be performed, directly or by implication, such references shall imply "within the corporate limits of the City of Seminole." 
County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Pinellas. 
State Law reference— Pinellas County, F.S. § 7.52. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision or section appears requiring the head of a department or some other city official, officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty, unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
F.S. Whenever the abbreviation F.S. is used, it shall refer to the latest edition or supplement of the Florida Statutes as adopted by the state legislature. 
Gender. A word imparting the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Number. A word imparting the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officer, department, employee, board, committee, commission, etc. Whenever reference is made to an officer, department, employee, board, committee, commission, etc., it shall be deemed to refer to an officer, department, board, committee, commission, etc., of the City of Seminole, Florida. 
Or, and. "And" may be read "or," and "or" may be read "and" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, syndicate, or other group or combination acting as a unit, association, club, society, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, trustee, executor, administrator, receiver, or other fiduciary, and bodies politic and corporate, and shall include the plural as well as the singular. 
Personal property. Personal property includes every species of property except real property. 
State. The word "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
(Code 1991, § 21-102) 
State Law reference— Definitions of terms used in the Florida Statutes, F.S. § 1.01.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1991, § 21-103)  
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
All references in this Code to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections of this Code are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Seminole, Florida, 1991, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, penalties, contracts, rights. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
State Law reference— No bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or any law impairing the obligation of contracts, shall ever be passed, Fla. Const., art. I, § 10.  
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1991, § 21-104) 
State Constitution reference— "No bill attainder, ex post facto law, or any law impairing the obligation of contracts, shall ever be passed." Declaration of Rights, Fla. Const., art. I, § 10.  
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes, charges, rates or fees. 
(8)  Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones. 
(9)  Any rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map. 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations, or any ordinance regarding pension or retirement plans, funds or benefits. 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinances. 
(16)  Any ordinance calling elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law. 
(b)  All such ordinances described in subsection (a) of this section are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code and are on file in the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Seminole, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Seminole, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered as follows ____________ , which said section shall read as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  When the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: "Section ____________ . It is the intention of the city council and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Seminole, Florida, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1991, § 21-106)  
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ ." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-13. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1991, § 21-107) 
State Law reference— Falsifying public records, penalty, F.S. § 839.13.  
Sec. 1-14. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1991, § 21-105)  
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty. 
(a)  The violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this Code shall constitute an offense against the city, and where no specific penalty is provided therefor shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the city shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement by the city. 
(c)  Each act, action or thing done in violation of the provisions of this Code, or ordinance of the city, shall be construed, deemed and taken as a separate and distinct violation of such provisions of this Code; and in every event that a violation of this Code, or any of the provisions hereof, shall continue, each day of such continuance shall be deemed, construed and taken as a separate and distinct violation of the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1991, § 21-108) 
State Law reference— Penalty, F.S. § 162.21.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(3); administration and enforcement of adult entertainment regulations, § 10-76 et seq.; elections, ch. 14; administrative rules and regulations for parks, § 26-32; taxation and finance, ch. 42; administration and enforcement of local business tax, § 42-141 et seq.; administration of land development code, ch. 50; concurrency management and multi-modal impact fees, ch. 54; administration of floodplain regulations, § 62-281 et seq.; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, § 70-36 et seq. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, §§ 3.01—3.07; elections and qualifications, art. VI. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance calling elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(16); elections, ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Compensation. 
(a)  The annual compensation of the mayor and councilmembers, which shall be paid in equal installments, is as follows: 
(1)  The mayor shall receive $9,300.00. 
(2)  All councilmembers shall receive $5,562.00. 
(Code 1991, §§ 22-118, 22-119; Ord. No. 01-96, § 1, 4-23-96; Ord. No. 29-2000, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 35-2005, 10-25-05) 
Charter reference— Salary to be by ordinance, § 3.03. 
Editor's note— The effective date for Ord. No. 32-2005 shall be retroactive to Oct. 1, 2005.  
Sec. 2-32. - Vice-mayor. 
If the mayor dies, resigns, becomes permanently disabled, ceases to be qualified or is removed from office as provided by law, the vice-mayor shall become interim mayor with the full powers and duties of the mayor as provided by the Charter until the vacancy is filled as provided in the Charter. 
(Code 1991, § 22-133) 
Charter reference— Powers of mayor, § 3.04; qualifications of election, art. VI; filling of vacancies, § 3.07(c).  
Sec. 2-33. - Disruptive meetings. 
It shall be unlawful to disturb any meeting of the city council or of any committee thereof, or to behave in a disorderly manner at any such meeting. 
(Code 1991, § 22-149)  
Sec. 2-34. - Rescinded action. 
No vote or action of the council shall be rescinded at any special meeting unless there be present at such special meeting as many members of the council as were present at the meeting when such vote or action was taken. 
(Code 1991, § 22-150)  
Sec. 2-35. - Robert's Rules of Order. 
Except when in conflict with the foregoing provisions or applicable statutes, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the deliberations of the city council. 
(Code 1991, § 22-152)  
Sec. 2-36. - City funded city council out of state travel. 
(a)  The mayor shall be entitled to city funded out of state travel. At the sole discretion of the mayor, the mayor may designate a councilmember to travel out of state as the mayor's replacement for city funded out of state travel. A mayoral replacement does not prohibit the council from approving one other council from traveling out of state. 
(b)  Upon the approval of a majority vote of the council at a regularly scheduled council meeting, one councilmember shall be entitled to city funded out of state travel. The councilmember that desires to travel out of state shall submit their request far enough in advance so that the approval for city funded out of state travel shall be given at a regularly scheduled council meeting prior to the first day of city funded out of state travel. 
( Ord. No. 16-2014 , 9-24-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-2014 , adopted Sept. 24, 2014, shall be effective Oct. 1, 2014.  
Secs. 2-37—2-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations, or any ordinance regarding pension or retirement plans, funds or benefits saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(14). 
 
Sec. 2-71. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Officials of the city who are authorized by the city to conduct inspections shall have the right to make or cause to be made an entry into any building or premises for the purpose of making inspections if such inspections are for the purpose of determining compliance with city or state ordinances, laws, rules or regulations relating to city or county building, fire, safety, environmental, animal control, land use, plumbing, electrical, health, minimum housing or zoning standards. 
(b)  Upon arrival at the building or premises, the inspector shall identify himself to the owner, occupant or person in charge. If the owner, occupant or person in charge refuses to allow the inspector entry, the inspector shall not attempt to force entry but shall obtain, with the help of the city attorney, an inspection warrant pursuant to F.S. § 933.20 et seq. 
(Code 1991, § 21-109)  
Sec. 2-72. - Reimbursement for expenses. 
(a)  All expenses of city officials and employees expended toward the furtherance of business for the city shall be reimbursed as provided in this section. 
(b)  The expenses of the mayor or councilmember shall be given in writing to the city clerk stating the nature of the expense and number of automobile miles driven in connection with such expense. 
(c)  All expenses of city employees must be approved by the city manager prior to disbursement. 
(Code 1991, § 22-117) 
State Law reference— Per diem and travel expenses, F.S. § 112.061.  
Secs. 2-73—2-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CODE ENFORCEMENT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Code enforcement, F.S. ch. 162. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Code inspector means any authorized agent, law enforcement officer employed or contracted to provide police services to the city, or employee of the city whose duty it is to assure code compliance. 
Repeat violation means a violation of a provision of a code or ordinance by a person whom the code enforcement board has previously found to have violated the same provision within five years prior to the violation. 
(Code 1991, § 11.04.02; Ord. No. 35-2000, 4-24-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.04.  
Sec. 2-107. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating the code enforcement board, an administrative board with authority to impose administrative fines and other noncriminal penalties and to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective and inexpensive method of enforcing the codes and ordinances in force in the city where a pending or repeated violation exists. The code enforcement board has the authority to hold hearings and assess fines against violators of the city codes and ordinances. 
(Code 1991, § 11.04.03) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.02.  
Sec. 2-108. - Obstructing inspector. 
Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any code inspector, the code administrator or the city council in the discharge of any duties as provided in this article, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-150. 
(Code 1991, § 11.04.18)  
Secs. 2-109—2-191. - Reserved.[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-00, adopted February 8, 2000, repealed div. 2, 3, §§ 2-131—2-170. The former sections pertained to code enforcement board and procedures and derived from Code 1991, §§ 11.02.02, 11.02.02A, 11.02.02B, 11.04.01, 11.04.04—11.04.10, 11.04.11(1)—11.04.11(7), 11.04.12—11.01.17. 
 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL MASTER-CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-192. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Code inspector shall mean those employees or other agents of the city duly authorized and appointed by the city manager whose duty it is to assure compliance with city codes. 
Codes shall mean Seminole Code of Ordinances and all codes and statutes adopted by reference within the Code of Ordinances, as now existing or as may be amended by ordinance from time to time. 
Continuing violations are those violations which remain uncorrected beyond the prescribed time period for correction contained in the civil violation notice. For each day of continued violation after the time period for correction has run, an additional penalty in the same amount as for the original violation shall be added. 
Repeat violation shall mean a violation of a provision of the Code of Ordinances by a person who has been previously found to have violated the same provision within five years prior to the violation, notwithstanding the violations occur at different locations. 
Violator shall mean the person responsible for the code violation, which, in the appropriate circumstances, shall either be the perpetrator of the violation or the owner of the real property upon which the violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00)  
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL MASTER 
 
Sec. 2-193. - Establishment. 
There is hereby created and established the office of special master for the purpose of providing a code enforcement process for the city. The special master is hereby vested with all the powers now granted under F.S. Ch. 162, and as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 2-194. - Special master—Qualifications and removal. 
(1)  The special master shall be a person licensed to practice law in the state. Appointments shall be made by the city manager on the basis of experience or interest in code enforcement. Such appointments shall be submitted to the city council for ratification. 
(2)  The city manager shall appoint one or more special masters as are deemed necessary, with such appointments being subject to ratification by the city council. The city manager shall have authority to remove a special master with or without cause. 
(3)  A special master shall not be city employees, but shall be compensated at a rate to be determined by administrative action. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00; Ord. No. 07-2007, § 2, 8-14-07)  
Sec. 2-195. - Powers of the special master. 
The special master shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt procedures for the conduct of hearings; 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses for hearings; subpoenas may be served by the city police department or by any employee designated by the city manager; 
(3)  Subpoena documentary and tangible evidence for hearings; 
(4)  Take testimony under oath; 
(5)  Assess and order the payment of civil penalties; 
(6)  Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance; and, 
(7)  Award costs incurred by the city as part of code enforcement cases heard before the special magistrate, when such case results in the imposition of an order finding a violation by the special magistrate. Upon request of the city at the time the special magistrate imposes an administrative fine costs shall be eligible for award to the city by the special magistrate. Eligible costs for award include: costs associated with mailing and posting notices for the case; copying costs for the case at $0.15/page; and, city costs associated with recording administrative fines as liens. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00; Ord. No. 20-2014 , § 1, 10-28-14)  
DIVISION 3. - CLERK 
 
Sec. 2-196. - Clerk. 
The city manager shall appoint a city employee to be the code enforcement clerk, who shall perform the functions assigned to the clerk as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00)  
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 2-197. - Initiation by inspector. 
(1)  The code inspector has the duty of enforcing the various codes and initiating enforcement proceedings before the special master. 
(2)  The code inspector is authorized to issue a citation to a person when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted code or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 2-198. - Report of violations. 
(a)  Except as provided in [subsections] (c) and (d) below, if a violation of the codes is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator of the violation and give the violator a reasonable time, in light of the nature of the violation, to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the code inspector shall request that the clerk set a hearing and notify the violator of the hearing as provided herein. The clerk shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be served on the violator. If the violation is corrected and is then repeated or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code inspector, the case may be presented to the special master even if the violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(b)  If a repeat violation is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator, but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. The code inspector, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, shall have the clerk set a hearing and notify the violator. The notice shall state that the case may be presented to the special master even if the violation has been corrected prior to the board hearing. 
(c)  If the code inspector has reason to believe a violation or the condition causing the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may request that the special master set an immediate hearing on the violation. 
(d)  If the owner of property which is subject to an enforcement proceeding before a special master contracts to transfer or does transfer ownership of such property between the time the notice was served and the time of the hearing, such owner shall: 
(1)  Disclose the existence and the nature of the enforcement proceeding to the buyer; 
(2)  Deliver to the buyer a copy of the notice of violation and the notice of hearing; 
(3)  Disclose to the buyer that he/she will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and with orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding; and 
(4)  Within five days after the date of the transfer of title, file a notice of title transfer with the code enforcement official, with the identity and address of the new owner and copies of the disclosures made to the new owner. 
If the property is transferred before the hearing, the proceeding shall not be dismissed, but the new owner shall be provided with a reasonable period of time to correct the violation before a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 2-199. - Citation; notice to appear. 
A citation or notice to appear issued by a code inspector shall be on such form as approved by the code administrator and shall comply with the requirements for citations or notices to appear as found in F.S. §§ 162.21, 633.052, 553.80 and/or other applicable statutes and as required by the county court. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00; Ord. No. 35-2000, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 2-200. - Hearing procedures. 
A hearing before the special master shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  The special master shall conduct hearings on a regularly scheduled monthly basis or more frequently upon request of the city manager. No hearing shall be set sooner than ten days from the date the notice of code violation is served. 
(2)  All hearings before the special master shall be open to the public. All testimony shall be under oath. Assuming proper notice, a hearing may proceed in the absence of the named violator. 
(3)  The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded electronically or by a stenographer and if recorded by a stenographer may be transcribed at the expense of the party requesting the transcript. 
(4)  The city manager, shall provide clerical and/or administrative support personnel for the special master to facilitate the proper performance of clerical and special master duties. 
(5)  Each case before a special master shall be presented by the code inspector or representative of the office issuing the violation. 
(6)  The hearing shall not be conducted in accordance with the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if the special master finds it competent and reliable regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule to the contrary. 
(7)  All testimony at the hearing shall be under oath. Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues. 
(8)  The special master shall make findings of fact based on the evidence in the record alone and may state conclusions of law. In order to make a finding upholding the code inspectors determination that a violation exists, the special master shall find that a preponderance of the evidence indicates that the violator was legally responsible for the violation of the relevant section of the ordinances or codes as cited and that a violation did or does in fact exist. 
(9)  The prescribed time for correction of the violation given to the named violator and contained in the code violation notice shall be presumed to have been a reasonable time for correction. Upon presentation of relevant evidence by the named violator that the time for correction was not reasonable, the special master may find that the time given for correction was insufficient, and the penalty for a continuing violation may be calculated from a date determined by the special master to be the reasonable date for correction. 
(10)  If the named violator is found guilty of the violation, he/she may be held liable for the costs of the enforcement proceeding and such costs shall be included in the lien authorized by law. 
(11)  The fact-finding determination of the special master shall describe whether the alleged violation did in fact occur and, if so, whether the person named in the civil violation notice is legally responsible for that violation. The special master shall either affirm or reverse the determination of the code inspector as to the responsibility of the named violator for the correction of the ordinance or code violation. The special master may modify the determination of the code inspector as to the time for correction contained in the code violation notice. If the special master reverses the determination of the code inspector and finds the named violator not responsible for the alleged violation in the code violation notice, the named violator shall not be liable for the payment of any civil penalty, absent a successful appeal by the city of the special master's decision. If the decision of the special master is to affirm the code inspector's determination of violation, then any of the following may be included in the order: 
a.  Amount of civil penalty; 
b.  Administrative costs of hearing; and 
c.  Date by which the violation shall be corrected to prevent resumption of continuing violation penalties. 
(12)  A special master shall not conduct a hearing if the named violator, prior to the scheduled hearing date, files with a duly authorized city and county board of appropriate jurisdiction for administrative interpretation of the legal provision(s) on which the alleged violation was based. Upon exhaustion of the administrative review and finalization of the administrative order by such board, the special master may exercise all powers granted herein. The special master shall not, however, exercise any jurisdiction over alleged code violations where a named violator has properly filed a request for administrative interpretation and review by such city or county board until such time for review has lapsed. 
(13)  The special master shall be bound by the interpretations and decisions of the authorized city or county boards of appropriate jurisdiction concerning their administrative interpretations. In the event that the authorized board finds that the cited violation of the ordinance or code has not been properly interpreted, that provision upon which the violation is based, shall prohibit the hearing officer from proceeding with the enforcement of the alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00; Ord. No. 07-2007, § 1, 8-14-07)  
Sec. 2-201. - Fines and penalties. 
(a)  The violation of any provision of any ordinances or codes shall constitute a civil offense punishable by civil penalty as follows: 
(1)  Not in excess of $250.00 per day for a first violation; 
(2)  Not in excess of $500.00 per day for a repeat violation; 
(3)  An assessment of the cost of repairs incurred by the city where the violation was in the nature of a violation described in F.S. § 162.06(4); 
(4)  In the instance where the special master finds that the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the special master may impose a fine not to exceed $5,000.00 per violation; 
(5)  City costs; and, 
(b)  Civil penalties assessed pursuant to this article are due and payable to the city upon the order of the special master. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00; Ord. No. 20-2014 , § 2, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 2-202. - Recovery of unpaid civil penalties. 
(1)  The city may institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel payment of civil penalties imposed under this supplemental code enforcement procedure. 
(2)  A certified copy of an order imposing a civil penalty may be recorded in the public records of the county and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists or existed; provided that if the violator does not own the land, upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator; and that it may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the personal property, but shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the city may foreclose or otherwise execute on the lien. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 2-203. - Duration of lien. 
No lien shall continue for a period longer than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee, that it incurs in the foreclosure. The city council shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 2-204. - Notices. 
All notices required by this article shall be served as required by F.S. 162.12 and as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 2-205. - Appeals. 
(a)  The violator or the city may appeal an order of a special master by filing a notice of appeal with the county circuit court. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the issuance of the order by the special master. 
(b)  In the absence of reversal of a special master's ruling by an appellate court of competent jurisdiction, the findings of the special master shall be conclusive as to a determination of responsibility for the ordinance or code violation and such findings shall be admissible in any proceeding to collect unpaid penalties. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the city from enforcing its ordinances or codes by any other means. The enforcement procedures outlined herein are cumulative to all others and shall not be deemed to be prerequisites to filing suit for enforcement of any section of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-2000, 2-8-00)  
Chapter 3 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management, F.S. ch. 252. 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter to provide the necessary organization, powers, and authority to enable the timely and effective use of all available city resources to prepare for, respond to, and recover from emergencies or disasters, natural and manmade, likely to affect the security, safety, or health of the City of Seminole and its residents, whether such events occur within or beyond the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall be intended to relieve city department of their normally assigned duties, responsibilities, and functions. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall be construed as a delegation of authority to abridge or diminish the legislative powers of the city council. 
(d)  Assignments of duties and tasks related to response and recovery of civil emergencies shall be in concert with and in accordance to the National Incident Management System (NIMS). 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein are hereby defined: 
City shall mean the City of Seminole, a municipal corporation. 
Emergency shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions which adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of citizens, visitors, or property within the City of Seminole which can be controlled or combated by Seminole services, personnel, equipment or facilities. 
State of local emergency shall mean the existence of conditions which adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of citizens, visitors, or property within the City of Seminole which may be beyond the control of the services, personnel equipment, and facilities of the city and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to control or combat. 
State of emergency shall mean the existence of conditions which adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens, visitors, or property within Pinellas County or the State of Florida and such conditions, by reason of their magnitude, are beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of any single city or county and require the combined forces of an entire region to control or combat and is declared by Pinellas County and/or the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-3. - Legislative authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by F.S. § 252.38. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-4. - Applicability of chapter. 
All officers, employees, contractors, vendors, boards, commission, authorities, and other agencies of or within the city are subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-5. - Director of emergency management. 
(a)  The city manager shall perform the functions of the director of emergency management, and shall implement, manage, and report on all actions authorized and taken under the provision of this chapter. 
(b)  The city manager, when acting as the director of emergency management, shall have the power, duty, and responsibility to: 
(1)  Recommend the declaration of a state of local emergency to the mayor and/or city council, and to inform them of the reasons for and of events requiring the declaration; 
(2)  Direct the creation, revision, and exercise of emergency response plans conforming to nation, state and county emergency plans for the mitigation of, preparation for, response to, and recovery from emergencies; 
(3)  Direct the efforts of the emergency manager in the preparation for, response to, and recovery from emergency conditions; 
(4)  Recommend a budget to the city council for the creation and maintenance of an emergency response capability as provided herein; 
(5)  Promulgate emergency regulations necessary for the protection of life and property, establishment of public order, and control of adverse conditions affecting public welfare resulting from an emergency. 
(6)  Establish and designate a public information office to develop and coordinate a City emergency awareness program. 
(7)  Revise the emergency operations plan in order to keep the plan current and provide for the safety of city residents. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-6. - Emergency manager. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint the fire chief as the emergency manager. The duties of the emergency manager shall include the ongoing planning for and coordination of those actions necessary for the creation and maintenance of an effective emergency response capability to prepare for and manage emergency conditions. 
(b)  The emergency manager shall have the responsibility and duty to: 
(1)  Direct the development and maintenance of the city's emergency plans, including annual revisions; 
(2)  Designate a fire department staff officer as the emergency management coordinator; 
(3)  Establish an emergency management planning committee; 
(4)  Direct the development of a city emergency operations center (EOC) to include equipment, staffing, and operational procedures necessary for the management and control of emergency conditions; 
(5)  Develop and submit an annual budget to the city manager for the operations, maintenance, and training of an emergency response system and infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-7. - Emergency management coordinator. 
(a)  The emergency management coordinator shall be appointed by the emergency manager. 
(b)  The emergency management coordinator shall have the responsibility and duty to: 
(1)  Plan, develop, and maintain the city's emergency plans, including updates; 
(2)  Chair the emergency management planning committee; 
(3)  Plan for and develop an emergency operations center (EOC) to include equipment, staffing, and operational procedures necessary for the management and control of emergency conditions; 
(4)  Provide and coordinate a city training program in emergency response and management. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-8. - Emergency management planning committee. 
(a)  The emergency management planning committee shall be appointed by the emergency manager, and be composed of the emergency management coordinator and designated city department directors or their representatives. 
(b)  The emergency management coordinator shall act as the chair of the emergency management planning committee unless otherwise designated by the members of the planning committee. 
(c)  The emergency management planning committee shall have the responsibility and duty to: 
(1)  Function as part of the EOC during a declared emergency; 
(2)  Assist in the creation, revision, and exercise of emergency operations plan; 
(3)  Advise the emergency management coordinator of requirements for resources necessary for the creation, maintenance, and exercise of a capable, efficient emergency response capability. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-9. - Declaration of a state of local emergency. 
(a)  The mayor shall have the authority to declare a state of local emergency by proclamation after consulting with the director of emergency management. Upon the absence or unavailability of the mayor, the vice mayor, the members of the city council in order of their seniority on the council, and after every effort has been made to contact same, the director of emergency management, or the emergency manager, in the order named, may issue such a declaration. 
(b)  Any declaration of a state of local emergency and all emergency regulations activated under the provisions of this chapter shall be confirmed by the city council by resolution within two working days of such declaration, or at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, whichever occurs first, unless the nature of the local emergency renders a meeting of the city council impractical. Confirmation of the declaration of local emergency shall disclose the reasons for, anticipated impacts of actions proposed and taken to manage the local emergency, and other pertinent data relating to the emergency requiring the declaration. 
(c)  Upon the declaration of a state of local emergency, pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement of the provisions of the following emergency ordinances shall, as necessary, be effective during the period of such emergency to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community: 
(1)  Curfew; declare certain areas off-limits. 
(2)  Regulation of the use of water. 
(3)  Prohibition of price gouging and over-charging. 
(4)  Restrictions on the sale, dispensing, and transportation of alcoholic beverages, weapons, explosives, and combustibles. 
(5)  Evacuation. 
In addition, pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement of the provisions of the above referenced emergency ordinances shall be rescinded upon a termination of the state of local emergency. 
(d)  The following policies shall, as necessary, also be in effective during the period of a state of local emergency: 
(1)  All available resources of the city shall be utilized, as reasonably necessary, to cope with the disaster or emergency, including the appropriation and expenditure of funds necessary for emergency management and emergency assistance purposes. A report made to the city council subsequent to the termination of the state of local emergency; 
(2)  Make provisions for availability and use of temporary emergency housing and emergency warehousing of materials; 
(3)  Confiscate merchandise, equipment, vehicles, or property needed to alleviate the emergency. Reimbursement shall be within 90 days and at normal average retail price. 
In addition to the above emergency ordinances and policies, this chapter shall also include the proclamation to declare the state of local emergency; the resolution to confirm the state of local emergency; and the resolution terminating the state of local emergency, and rescinding the enforcement of the provision of the emergency ordinances put into effect as referenced above. 
(e)  Pursuant to F.S. § 252.38, a declared state of local emergency will last for a period of up to seven days, which may be extended, as necessary, in seven-day increments. The city shall also have the power and authority, under F.S. § 252.38, to waive the procedures and formalities otherwise required of the city by pertaining to: 
(1)  Performance of public work and taking whatever prudent action is necessary to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(2)  Entering into contracts. 
(3)  Incurring obligations. 
(4)  Employment of permanent and temporary workers. 
(5)  Utilization of volunteer workers. 
(6)  Rental of equipment. 
(7)  Acquisition and distribution, with or without compensation, of supplies, materials, and facilities. 
(8)  Appropriation and expenditure of public funds. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 03-2011, § 1, 10-25-2011)  
Sec. 3-10. - Suspension of local building regulations and/or fees. 
The city manager may authorize the suspension of local building regulations and/or fees during and following a declared state of emergency when the building official certifies that such action is necessary to the expeditious restoration of property damaged by the emergency event. Such suspension of building regulations and fees may be applied on a case-by-case basis as required to remedy specific conditions and to facilitate the provision of emergency housing to disaster victims. The building official shall specify the provisions of the building code and fees to be suspended and the reasons therefore when certifying the necessity of such suspension to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-11. - Termination of a state of local emergency. 
A state of local emergency shall be terminated by resolution of the city council stating that the conditions leading to or causing the emergency conditions no longer exist, and that the city's departments are able to manage the situation without extraordinary assistance and powers. Notice of such termination shall be made to the public by the director of emergency management by the same means as the notice of the declaration of the state of local emergency. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-12. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any rule or regulation thereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subjected to the penalties provided in section 2-201 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18; solid waste, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and certain other public property, ch. 38; development standards, ch. 58; natural resources, ch. 62; signs, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 70. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 6-1—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Adoption of technical codes by reference. 
(a)  The following technical codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied fully herein. 
2007 Edition, Florida Building Code, Building. 
2007 Edition, Florida Building Code, Existing Building. 
2007 Edition, Standard Mechanical Code. 
2007 Edition, Standard Plumbing Code. 
2008 Edition, National Electrical Code. 
2007 Florida Fire Prevention Code, per F.S. § 633.0215, as amended. 
2007 Edition, Florida Building Code, Residential. 
2007 Edition, Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
1994 Edition, Standard Housing Code. 
1994 Edition, Standard Housing Code. 
(b)  No amendments or revisions to the National Fire Protection Association NFPA No. 1 and the entire Volumes 1 through 13, enacted after January 1, 2001, shall be enforced, effective or binding upon the city unless and until said amendments or revisions are specifically adopted and approved by the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-94, § 2, 10-11-94; Ord. No. 5-97, § 1, 8-26-97; Ord. No. 30-2001, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 36-2005, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 09-2009, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 8-11-09) 
State Law reference— Florida Building Code, F.S. § 533.70 et seq.  
Sec. 6-32. - Designated officials. 
When reference is made within the technical codes to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated official of the city or fire department who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the technical code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the technical codes are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 17-94, § 3, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 6-33. - Florida Building Code—Administrative amendments. 
Chapter 1. ADMINISTRATION. 
SECTION 101 — GENERAL. 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Florida Building Code, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location; maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (town houses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Residential. 
2.  Existing buildings undergoing repair, alterations or additions and change of occupancy shall be permitted to comply with Chapter 34 of this code. 
101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
101.2.3 Florida Building Code, Residential. Construction standards or practices which are not covered by Florida Building Code, Residential volume shall be in accordance with the provisions of Florida Building Code, Building. 
101.3 Intent. The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. 
101.3.1 Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
101.3.2 Warranty and Liability. The permitting, plan review or inspection of any building, system or plan by this jurisdiction, under the requirements of this code, shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. This jurisdiction shall not be liable in tort for damages or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.9 and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. 
101.4.1 Electrical. The provisions of Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
101.4.2 Gas. The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories. 
101.4.3 Mechanical. The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems. 
101.4.4 Plumbing. The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. 
101.4.5 Property maintenance. Reserved. 
101.4.6 Fire prevention. For provisions related to fire prevention, refer to the Florida Fire Prevention Code. The Florida Fire Prevention Code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation. 
101.4.7 Energy. The provisions of Chapter 13 of the Florida Building Code, Building shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency. 
101.4.8 Accessibility. For provisions related to accessibility, refer to Chapter 11 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
101.4.9 Manufactured buildings. For additional administrative and special code requirements, see section 428, Florida Building Code, Building, and Rule 9B-1 F.A.C. 
SECTION 102 — APPLICABILITY. 
102.1 General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
102.1.1. The Florida Building Code does not apply to, and no code enforcement action shall be brought with respect to, zoning requirements, land use requirements and owner specifications or programmatic requirements which do not pertain to and govern the design, construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair or demolition of public or private buildings, structures or facilities or to programmatic requirements that do not pertain to enforcement of the Florida Building Code. 
Additionally, a local code enforcement agency may not administer or enforce the Florida Building Code, Building to prevent the siting of any publicly owned facility, including, but not limited to, correctional facilities, juvenile justice facilities, or state universities, community colleges, or public education facilities, as provided by law. 
102.2 Building. The provisions of the Florida Building Code shall apply to the construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every public and private building, structure or facility or floating residential structure, or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings, structures or facilities. Additions, alterations, repairs and changes of use or occupancy group in all buildings and structures shall comply with the provisions provided in Chapter 34, of this code. 
The following buildings, structures, and facilities are exempt from the Florida Building Code as provided by law, and any further exemptions shall be as determined by the Legislature and provided by law: 
(a)  Building and structures specifically regulated and preempted by the federal government. 
(b)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(c)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms. 
(d)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(e)  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices, except that the provisions of Part V ( F.S. §§ 553.501—553.513) relating to accessibility by persons with disabilities and permits shall be required for structural support and tie down, electric supply and all other such utility connections to such mobile or modular structures as required by this jurisdiction. 
(f)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(g)  Temporary sets, assemblies, or structures used in commercial motion picture or television production, or any sound-recording equipment used in such production, on or off the premises. 
(h)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
102.2.1 In addition to the requirements of F.S. §§ 553.79 and 553.80, facilities subject to the provisions of F.S. Ch. 395 and Ch. 400, Pt. II shall have facility plans reviewed and construction surveyed by the state agency authorized to do so under the requirements of F.S. Ch. 395, , and Ch. 400, Pt. II, and the certification requirements of the federal government. 
102.2.2 Buildings or structures for residential uses moved into or within a county or municipality shall not be required to be brought into compliance with the state minimum building code in force at the time the building or structure is moved, provided. 
1.  The building or structure is structurally sound, meeting the wind speed requirements of the new location and is in occupiable condition for its intended use; 
2.  The occupancy use classification for the building or structure is not changed as a result of the move; 
3.  The building is not substantially remodeled; 
4.  Current fire code requirements for ingress and egress are met; 
5.  Electrical, gas and plumbing systems meet the codes in force at the time of construction and are operational and safe for reconnection; and 
6.  Foundation plans are sealed by a professional engineer or architect licensed to practice in this state, if required by the applicable Florida Statutes for all buildings or structures of the same residential occupancy class. 
102.2.3 The building official shall apply the same standard to a moved residential building or structure as that applied to the remodeling of any comparable residential building or structure to determine whether the moved structure is substantially remodeled. The cost of the foundation on which the moved building or structure is placed shall not be included in the cost of remodeling for purposes of determining whether a moved building or structure has been substantially remodeled. 
102.2.4 This section does not apply to the jurisdiction and authority of the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services to inspect amusement rides or the Department of Financial Services to inspect state-owned buildings and boilers. 
102.2.5 Each enforcement district shall be governed by a board, the composition of which shall be determined by the affected localities. At its own option, each enforcement district or local enforcement agency may promulgate rules granting to the owner of a single-family residence one or more exemptions from the Florida Building Code relating to: 
1.  Addition, alteration or repair performed by the property owner upon his or her own property, provided any addition or alteration shall not exceed 1,000 square feet or the square footage of the primary structure, whichever is less. 
2.  Addition, alteration or repairs by a non-owner within a specific cost limitation set by rule, provided the total cost shall not exceed $5,000.00 within any 12-month period. 
3.  Building and inspection fees. 
Each code exemption, as defined in this section, shall be certified to the local board 10 days prior to implementation and shall be effective only in the territorial jurisdiction of the enforcement district or local enforcement agency implementing it. 
102.2.6 This section does not apply to swings and other playground equipment accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling. 
Exception: Electrical service to such playground equipment shall be in accordance with Chapter 27 of this code. 
102.3 Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code. 
102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
102.5 Partial invalidity. In the event that any part or provision of this code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions. 
102.6 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in this code, or the Florida Fire Prevention Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
102.7 Relocation of manufactured buildings. 
(a)  Relocation of an existing manufactured building does not constitute an alteration. 
(b)  A relocated building shall comply with wind speed requirements of the new location, using the appropriate wind speed map. If the existing building was manufactured in compliance with the Standard Building Code (prior to March 1, 2002), the wind speed map of the Standard Building Code shall be applicable. If the existing building was manufactured in compliance with the Florida Building Code (after March 1, 2002), the wind speed map of the Florida Building Code shall be applicable. 
SECTION 103 — ADMINISTRATION AND INSPECTION DIVISION. 
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Administration and Inspection Division is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. All code officials employed by the department shall be certified in accordance with F.S. Ch. 468, Pt. XII. 
103.2 Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this code, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, within the jurisdiction of the department, unless he is the owner of such. which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interest of the department. 
SECTION 104 - DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL. 
104.1 General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code, and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. 
104.1.1 Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requiring the building official or some other officer or employee to do some act of perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the building official or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize professional level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
104.2 Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, and alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this code. 
104.2.1 Revocation of permits. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any provisions of this code. 
104.2.2 Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
104.2.3 Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this code. 
104.3 Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code. 
104.4 Inspections. The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority. 
104.5 Identification. The building official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code. 
104.6 Right of entry. 
104.6.1 Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this code. If such building or premises are occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
104.6.2 When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code. 
104.7 Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
104.8 Liability. The building official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code. 
104.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. 
104.9.1 Used materials and equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this code for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official. 
104.10 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner's representative, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of building safety. 
104.10.1 Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The building official shall coordinate with the floodplain administrator to review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 116 [117]. 
104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. When alternate life safety systems are designed, the SFPE Engineering Guide to Performance-Based Fire Protection Analysis and Design of Buildings, or other methods approved by the building official may be used. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternative. 
104.11.1 Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources. 
104.11.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records. 
104.11.3 Accessibility. Alternate designs and technologies for providing access to and usability of a facility for persons with disabilities shall be in accordance with Section 11-2.2. 
104.12 Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
SECTION 105 — PERMITS. 
105.1 Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any required impact-resistant coverings, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. 
105.1.1 Annual facility permit. In lieu of an individual permit for each alteration to an existing electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing or interior nonstructural office system(s), the building official is authorized to issue an annual permit for any occupancy to facilitate routine or emergency service, repair, refurbishing, minor renovations of service systems or manufacturing equipment installations/relocations. The building official shall be notified of major changes and shall retain the right to make inspections at the facility site as deemed necessary. A annual facility permit shall be assessed an annual fee and shall be valid for one year from date of issuance. A separate permit shall be obtained for each facility and for each construction trade, as applicable. The permit application shall contain a general description of the parameters of work intended to be performed during the year. 
105.1.2 Annual permit records. The person to whom an annual permit is issued shall keep a detailed record of alterations made under such annual permit. The building official shall have access to such records at all times or such records shall be filed with the building official as designated. 
105.1.3 Food permit. As per F.S. § 500.12, a food permit from the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services is required of any person who operates a food establishment or retail store. 
105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
Gas : 
1.  Portable heating appliance. 
2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
Mechanical: 
1.  Portable heating appliance. 
2.  Portable ventilation equipment. 
3.  Portable cooling unit. 
4.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code. 
5.  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe. 
6.  Portable evaporative cooler. 
7.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less. 
8.  The installation, replacement, removal, or metering of any load management control device. 
Plumbing: 
1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. 
2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
105.2.1 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official. 
105.2.2 Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs or installation of replacement parts may be made with the prior approval of the building official without a permit, provided the repairs do not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; additionally, ordinary minor repairs shall not include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring systems or mechanical equipment or other work affecting public health or general safety, and such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
105.2.3 Public service agencies. Reserved. 
105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished by the building department for that purpose. Permit application forms shall be in the format prescribed by a local administrative board, if applicable, and must comply with the requirements of Section 713.135(5) and (6). 
Each application shall be inscribed with the date of application, and the code in effect as of that date. For a building permit for which an application is submitted prior to the effective date of the latest edition of Florida Building Code, the state minimum building code in effect in the permitting jurisdiction on the date of the application governs the permitted work for the life of the permit and any extension granted to the permit. 
105.3.1 Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefore. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefore as soon as practicable. When authorized through contractual agreement with school board, in acting on applications for permits, the building official shall give first priority to any applications for the construction of, or addition or renovation to, any school or educational facility. 
105.3.1.1 If a state university, state community college, or public school district elects to use a local government's code enforcement offices, fees charged by counties and municipalities for enforcement of the Florida Building Code on buildings, structures, and facilities of state universities, state colleges, and public school districts shall not be more than the actual labor and administrative costs incurred for plans review and inspections to ensure compliance with the code. 
105.3.1.2 No permit may be issued for any building construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair, or addition unless the applicant for such permit provides to the enforcing agency which issues the permit any of the following documents which apply to the construction for which the permit is to be issued and which shall be prepared by or under the direction of an engineer registered under chapter 471 Florida Statutes: 
1.  Electrical documents for any new building or addition which requires an aggregate service capacity of 600 amperes (240 volts) or more on a residential electrical system or 800 amperes (240 volts) or more on a commercial or industrial electrical system and which costs more than $50,000.00. 
2.  Plumbing documents for any new building or addition which requires a plumbing system with more than 250 fixture units or which costs more than $50,000.00. 
3.  Fire sprinkler documents for any new building or addition which includes a fire sprinkler system which contains 50 or more sprinkler heads. A Contractor I, Contractor II, or Contractor IV, certified under § 633.521, may design a fire sprinkler system of 49 or fewer heads and may design the alteration of an existing fire sprinkler system if the alteration consists of the relocation, addition or deletion of not more than 49 heads, notwithstanding the size of the existing fire sprinkler system. 
4.  Heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning documents for any new building or addition which requires more than a 15-ton-per-system capacity which is designed to accommodate 100 or more persons or for which the system costs more than $50,000.00. This paragraph does not include any document for the replacement or repair of an existing system in which the work does not require altering a structural part of the building or for work on a residential one-family, two-family, three-family or four-family structure. 
An air-conditioning system may be designed by an installing air-conditioning contractor certified under F.S. Ch. 489, to serve any building or addition which is designed to accommodate fewer than 100 persons and requires an air-conditioning system with value of $50,000.00 or less; and when a 15-ton-per system or less is designed for a singular space of a building and each 15-ton system or less has an independent duct system. Systems not complying with the above require design documents that are to be sealed by a professional engineer. 
Example 1: When a space has two 10-ton systems with each having an independent duct system, the contractor may design these two systems since each unit (system) is less than 15 tons. 
Example 2: Consider a small single story office building which consists of 6 individual offices where each office has a single three-ton package air conditioning heat pump. The six heat pumps are connected to a single water cooling tower. The cost of the entire heating, ventilation and air conditioning work is $47,000.00 and the office building accommodates fewer than 100 persons. Because the six mechanical units are connected to a common water tower this is considered to be an 18-ton system. It therefore could not be designed by a mechanical or air conditioning contractor. 
NOTE: It was further clarified by the Commission that the limiting criteria of 100 persons and $50,000.00 apply to the building occupancy load and the cost for the total air-conditioning system of the building. 
5.  Any specialized mechanical, electrical, or plumbing document for any new building or addition which includes a medical gas, oxygen, steam, vacuum, toxic air filtration, halon, or fire detection and alarm system which costs more than $5,000.00. 
Documents requiring an engineer seal by this part shall not be valid unless a professional engineer who possesses a valid certificate of registration has signed, dated, and stamped such document as provided in F.S. § 471.025. 
105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned, becoming null and void 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
105.3.3 An enforcing authority may not issue a building permit for any building construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair or addition unless the permit either includes on its face or there is attached to the permit the following statement: "NOTICE: In addition to the requirements of this permit, there may be additional restrictions applicable to this property that may be found in the public records of this county, and there may be additional permits required from other governmental entities such as water management districts, state agencies, or federal agencies." 
105.3.4 A building permit for a single-family residential dwelling must be issued within 30 working days of application there for unless unusual circumstances require a longer time for processing the application or unless the permit application fails to satisfy the Florida Building Code or the enforcing agency's laws or ordinances. 
105.3.5 Identification of minimum premium policy. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 440, Workers' Compensation, every employer shall, as a condition to receiving a building permit, show proof that it has secured compensation for its employees as provided in F.S. §§ 440.10 and 440.38. 
105.3.6 Asbestos removal. Moving, removal or disposal of asbestos-containing materials on a residential building where the owner occupies the building, the building is not for sale or lease, and the work is performed according to the owner-builder limitations provided in this paragraph. To qualify for exemption under this paragraph, an owner must personally appear and sign the building permit application. The permitting agency shall provide the person with a disclosure statement in substantially the following form: 
Disclosure Statement: State law requires asbestos abatement to be done by licensed contractors. You have applied for a permit under an exemption to that law. The exemption allows you, as the owner of your property, to act as your own asbestos abatement contractor even though you do not have a license. You must supervise the construction yourself. You may move, remove or dispose of asbestos-containing materials on a residential building where you occupy the building and the building is not for sale or lease, or the building is a farm outbuilding on your property. If you sell or lease such building within 1 year after the asbestos abatement is complete, the law will presume that you intended to sell or lease the property at the time the work was done, which is a violation of this exemption. You may not hire an unlicensed person as your contractor. Your work must be done according to all local, state and federal laws and regulations which apply to asbestos abatement projects. It is your responsibility to make sure that people employed by you have licenses required by state law and by county or municipal licensing ordinances. 
105.3.7 Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has received a right-of-way permit from the authority having jurisdiction over the street, alley or public lane 
105.4 Conditions of the permit. 
105.4.1 Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction or violations of this code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. 
105.4.1.1 If work has commenced and the permit is revoked, becomes null and void, or expires because of lack of progress or abandonment, a new permit covering the proposed construction shall be obtained before proceeding with the work. 
105.4.1.2 If a new permit is not obtained within 180 days from the date the initial permit became null and void, the building official is authorized to require that any work which has been commenced or completed be removed from the building site. Alternately, a new permit may be issued on application, providing the work in place and required to complete the structure meets all applicable regulations in effect at the time the initial permit became null and void and any regulations which may have become effective between the date of expiration and the date if issuance of the new permit. 
105.4.1.3 Work shall be considered to be in active progress when the permit has received an approved inspection within 180 days. This provision shall not be applicable in case of civil commotion or strike or when the building work is halted due directly to judicial injunction, order or similar process. 
105.4.1.4 The fee for renewal reissuance and extension of a permit shall be set forth by the administrative authority. 
105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. Failure to obtain an approved inspection within 180 days of the previous approved inspection shall constitute suspension or abandonment. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Permits issued for the demolition of a structure shall expire sixty (60) days from the date of issuance. For a justifiable cause, one (1) extension of time for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days may be allowed. Such request shall be in writing to the building official. 
105.6 Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. 
105.7 Placement of permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project. 
105.8 Notice of commencement. As per F.S. § 713.135, when any person applies for a building permit, the authority issuing such permit shall print on the face of each permit card in no less than 14-point, capitalized, boldfaced type: "WARNING TO OWNER: YOUR FAILURE TO RECORD A NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT MAY RESULT IN YOUR PAYING TWICE FOR IMPROVEMENTS TO YOUR PROPERTY. IF YOU INTEND TO OBTAIN FINANCING, CONSULT WITH YOUR LENDER OR AN ATTORNEY BEFORE RECORDING YOUR NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT." 
105.9 Asbestos. The enforcing agency shall require each building permit for the demolition or renovation of an existing structure to contain an asbestos notification statement which indicates the owner's or operator's responsibility to comply with the provisions of F.S. § 469.003 and to notify the Department of Environmental Protection of her or his intentions to remove asbestos, when applicable, in accordance with state and federal law. 
105.10 Certificate of protective treatment for prevention of termites. A weather resistant jobsite posting board shall be provided to receive duplicate Treatment Certificates as each required protective treatment is completed, providing a copy for the person the permit is issued to and another copy for the building permit files. The Treatment Certificate shall provide the product used, identity of the applicator, time and date of the treatment, site location, area treated, chemical used, percent concentration and number of gallons used, to establish a verifiable record of protective treatment. If the soil chemical barrier method for termite prevention is used, final exterior treatment shall be completed prior to final building approval. 
105.11 Notice of termite protection. A permanent sign which identifies the termite treatment provider and need for re-inspection and treatment contract renewal shall be provided. The sign shall be posted near the water heater or electric panel. 
105.12 Work starting before permit issuance. Upon approval of the building official, the scope of work delineated in the building permit application and plan may be started prior to the final approval and issuance of the permit, provided any work completed is entirely at risk of the permit applicant and the work does not proceed past the first required inspection. 
105.13 Phased permit approval. After submittal of the appropriate construction documents, the building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. Corrections may be required to meet the requirements of the technical codes. 
105.14 Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity to the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity to the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. The building official shall ensure that any person conducting plans review is qualified as a plans examiner under F.S. Pt. XII of chapter 468, and that any person conducting inspections is qualified as a building inspector under F.S. Part III of chapter 468. 
105.15 When any activity requiring a building permit that is applied for on or after July 1, 2008, and for which the estimated cost is $50,000.00 or more for a building that is located in the wind borne debris region as defined in the Florida Building Code and that has an insured value of $750,000.00 or more, or, if the building is uninsured or for which documentation of insured value is not presented, has a just valuation for the structure for purposes of ad valorem taxation of $750,000.00 or more. Opening protections as required within the Florida Building Code, Building or Florida Building Code, Residential for new construction shall be provided. 
SECTION 106 - CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS. 
106.1 Submittal documents. Construction documents, special inspection and structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a design professional where required by the statutes. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a design professional. 
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code. If the design professional is an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture as provided for in F.S. Chapter 481, Part II, or engineering as provided for in F.S. Chapter 471 and 61G15 Florida Administrative Code then he/she shall affix his/her official seal, original signature and date to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, as required by Florida Statute. If the design professional is a landscape architect registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of landscape architecture as provided for in F.S. Chapter 481, Part II, then he or she shall affix his or her seal, original signature and date to said drawings as defined in § F.S. § 481.303(b)(a)-(b)(c)(d), and 61G1 Florida Administrative Code. 
106.1.1 Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. (See also Section 106.3.5). 
106.1.1.1 Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9. 
106.1.1.2 For roof assemblies required by the code, the construction documents shall illustrate, describe, and delineate the type of roofing system, materials, fastening requirements, flashing requirements and wind resistance rating that are required to be installed. Product evaluation and installation shall indicate compliance with the wind criteria required for the specific site or a statement by an architect or engineer for the specific site must be submitted with the construction documents. 
106.1.2 Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this code. In other than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces. 
106.1.3 Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this code. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings. 
The construction documents shall include manufacturer's installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used. 
106.1.2 Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal, signature and date as state law requires. 
106.1.3 Quality of building plans. The building official may establish through departmental policy, standards for plans and specifications, in order to provide conformity to its record retention program. This policy may include such things as minimum size, shape, contrast, clarity, or other items related to records management, such as Building plans shall be drawn to a minimum 1/8 inch scale upon substantial paper, cloth or other acceptable medium. 
106.1.4 Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
1.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
2.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored 
106.2 Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted. 
106.3 Examination of documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Building plans approved pursuant to F.S. § 553.77(5) and state-approved manufactured buildings are exempt from local codes enforcing agency plan reviews except for provisions of the code relating to erection, assembly or construction at the site. Erection, assembly (including utility crossover connections) and construction at the site are subject to local permitting and inspections. 
2.  Industrial construction on sites where design, construction and fire safety are supervised by licensed design and inspection professionals and which contain adequate in-house fire departments and rescue squads is exempt, subject to approval of the building official, from review of plans and inspections, providing the appropriate licensed design and inspection professionals certify that applicable codes and standards have been met and supply appropriate approved drawings to local building and fire-safety inspectors. 
106.3.1 Approval of construction documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be endorsed, in writing or by stamp, as "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative. 
106.3.2 Previous approvals. This code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180 days after the effective date of this code and has not been abandoned. 
106.3.3 Phased approval. Reserved 
106.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge. 
106.3.4.1 General. When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. if the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. 
The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. 
106.3.4.2 Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period. 
Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building official. 
Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the design and submittal documents have been approved by the building official. 
106.3.4.3 Certifications by contractors authorized under the provisions of F.S. § 489.115(4)(b) shall be considered equivalent to sealed plans and specifications by a person licensed under F.S. Ch. 471 or F.S. Ch. 481 by local enforcement agencies for plans review for permitting purposes relating to compliance with the wind resistance provisions of the code or alternate methodologies approved by the Florida Building Commission for one-and two-family dwellings. Local enforcement agencies may rely upon such certification by contractors that the plans and specifications submitted conform to the requirements of the code for wind resistance. Upon good cause shown, local government code enforcement agencies may accept or reject plans sealed by persons licensed under F.S. Chs. 471, 481 or 489. 
106.3.5 Minimum plan review criteria for buildings. The examination of the documents by the building official shall include the following minimum criteria and documents; a floor plan, site plan, foundation plan, floor/roof framing plan or truss layout and all exterior elevations: 
Commercial Buildings: 
Building: 
1.  Site Requirements: 
Parking. 
Fire access. 
Vehicle loading. 
Driving/turning radius. 
Fire hydrant/water supply/Post Indicator Valve (PIV). 
Set back/separation (assumed property lines). 
Location of specific tanks, water lines and sewer lines. 
2.  Occupancy group and special occupancy requirements shall be determined. 
3.  Minimum type of construction shall be determined (Table 503). 
4.  Fire resistant construction requirements shall include the following components: 
Fire resistant separations. 
Fire resistant protection for type of construction protection of openings and penetrations of rated walls fire blocking and draft stopping. 
Calculated fire resistance. 
5.  Fire suppression systems shall include: 
Early warning smoke evacuation systems. 
Schematic fire sprinklers. 
Standpipes. 
Pre-engineered systems. 
Riser diagram. 
Same as above. 
6.  Life safety systems shall be determined and shall include the following requirements: 
Occupant load and egress capacities. 
Early warning. 
Smoke control. 
Stair pressurization. 
Systems schematic. 
7.  Occupancy load/egress requirements shall include: 
Occupancy load. 
Gross. 
Net. 
Means of egress. 
Exit access. 
Exit. 
Exit discharge. 
Stairs construction/geometry and protection. 
Doors. 
Emergency lighting and exit signs. 
Specific occupancy requirements. 
Construction requirements. 
Horizontal exits/exit passageways. 
8.  Structural requirements shall include: 
Soil conditions/analysis. 
Termite protection. 
Design loads. 
Wind requirements. 
Building envelope. 
Structural calculations (if required). 
Foundation. 
Wall systems. 
Floor systems. 
Roof systems. 
Threshold inspection plan. 
Stair systems. 
9.  Materials shall be reviewed and shall at a minimum include the following: 
Wood. 
Steel. 
Aluminum. 
Concrete. 
Plastic. 
Glass. 
Masonry. 
Gypsum board and plaster. 
Insulating (mechanical). 
Roofing. 
Insulation. 
10.  Accessibility requirements shall include the following: 
Site requirements. 
Accessible route. 
Vertical accessibility. 
Toilet and bathing facilities. 
Drinking fountains. 
Equipment. 
Special occupancy requirements. 
Fair housing requirements. 
11.  Interior requirements shall include the following: 
Interior finishes (flame spread/smoke develop). 
Light and ventilation. 
Sanitation. 
12.  Special systems: 
Elevators. 
Escalators. 
Lifts. 
13.  Swimming Pools: 
Barrier requirements. 
Spas. 
Wading pools. 
Electrical: 
1.  Electrical: 
Wiring Services. 
Feeders and branch circuits. 
Overcurrent protection. 
Grounding. 
Wiring methods and materials. 
GFCIs. 
2.  Equipment. 
3.  Special Occupancies. 
4.  Emergency Systems. 
5.  Communication Systems. 
6.  Low voltage. 
7.  Load calculations. 
Plumbing: 
1.  Minimum plumbing facilities. 
2.  Fixture requirements. 
3.  Water supply piping. 
4.  Sanitary drainage. 
5.  Water heaters. 
6.  Vents. 
7.  Roof drainage. 
8.  Back flow prevention. 
9.  Irrigation. 
10.  Location of water supply line. 
11.  Grease traps. 
12.  Environmental requirements. 
13.  Plumbing riser. 
Mechanical: 
1.  Energy calculations. 
2.  Exhaust systems: 
Clothes dryer exhaust. 
Kitchen equipment exhaust. 
Specialty exhaust systems. 
3.  Equipment. 
4.  Equipment location. 
5.  Make-up air. 
6.  Roof-mounted equipment. 
7.  Duct systems. 
8.  Ventilation. 
9.  Combustion air. 
10.  Chimneys, fireplaces and vents. 
11.  Appliances. 
12.  Boilers. 
13.  Refrigeration. 
14.  Bathroom ventilation. 
15.  Laboratory. 
Gas: 
1.  Gas piping. 
2.  Venting. 
3.  Combustion air. 
4.  Chimneys and vents. 
5.  Appliances. 
6.  Type of gas. 
7.  Fireplaces. 
8.  LP tank location. 
9.  Riser diagram/shutoffs. 
Demolition: 
1.  Asbestos removal. 
Residential (one- and two-family) Building: 
1.  Site requirements: 
Set back/separation (assumed property lines). 
Location of septic tanks. 
2.  Fire-resistant construction (if required). 
3.  Fire. 
4.  Smoke detector locations. 
5.  Egress: 
Egress window size and location. 
Stairs construction requirements. 
6.  Structural requirements shall include: 
Wall section from foundation through roof, including assembly and materials connector tables. 
Termite protection. 
Design loads. 
Wind requirements. 
Building envelope. 
Structural calculations (if required). 
Foundation. 
Wall systems. 
Floor systems. 
Roof systems. 
7.  Accessibility requirements: 
Show/identify accessible bath. 
Manufactured/Mobile Homes: 
1.  Site requirements: 
Setback/separation (assumed property lines). 
Location of septic tanks (if applicable). 
2.  Structural: 
Wind zone. 
Anchoring. 
Blocking. 
3.  Plumbing: 
List potable water source and meter size (if applicable). 
4.  Mechanical: 
Exhaust systems. 
Clothes dryer exhaust. 
Kitchen equipment exhaust. 
5.  Electrical: 
Exterior disconnect location. 
Exemptions. Plans examination by the building official shall not be required for the following work: 
1.  Replacing existing equipment such as mechanical units, water heaters, etc. 
2.  Minor electrical, plumbing and mechanical repairs. 
3.  Annual maintenance permits. 
4.  Prototype plans: 
Except for local site adoptions, siding, foundations and/or modifications. 
Except for structures that require waiver. 
5.  Manufactured buildings plan except for foundations and modifications of buildings on site. 
106.4 Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the reviewed construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the reviewed construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. 
106.5 Retention of construction documents. One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by Florida Statutes. 
106.6 Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and, if accompanied by drawings, show the structural design and that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. The building official shall ensure that any person conducting plans review is qualified as a plans examiner under part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes, and that any person conducting inspections is qualified as a building inspector under part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes. 
SECTION 107 - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES. 
107.1 General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause. 
107.2 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this code as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare. 
107.3 Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
107.4 Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued. 
107.6.1 Building permits issued on the basis of an affidavit. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), the authority granted to the building official to issue permits, to rely on inspections, and to accept plans and construction documents on the basis of affidavits and plans submitted pursuant to Section 105.14 and Section 107.6, shall not extend to the flood load and flood resistance construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
SECTION 108 FEES 
108.1 Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until fees authorized under F.S. § 553.80 have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, has been paid. 
108.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. 
108.2.1 Types of fees enumerated. Fees may be charged for but not limited to the following: 
Permits. 
Plans Examination. 
Certificates of competency (including fees for applications, examinations, renewal, late renewal, and reciprocity. 
Re-inspections. 
Administrative fees (including fees for investigative and legal costs incurred in the context of certain disciplinary cases heard by the board). 
Variance requests. 
Administrative appeals. 
Violations. 
Other Fees as established by City Council resolution or ordinance. 
108.3 Building permit valuation. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official. 
108.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the building official's approval or the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees or as provided by local ordinance. This provision shall not apply to emergency work when delay would clearly have placed life or property in imminent danger. But is all such cases the required permit(s) must be applied for within three (3) business days and any unreasonable delay in obtaining those permit(s) shall result in a double fee. The payment of a double fee shall not preclude or be deemed a substitute for prosecution for commencing work without first obtaining a permit. The building official may grant extensions of time or waive fees when justifiable cause has been demonstrated in writing. 
108.5 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
108.6 Refunds. The building official is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
SECTION 109 — INSPECTIONS. 
109.1 General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes the building official shall be permitted to require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor whenever the boundary lines cannot be readily determined in the field. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
109.1.1 Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
109.1.2 Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by 109. He or she may accept reports of department inspectors, independent inspectors or of recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their licensure, Qualifications and reliability. A certificate required by any provision of this code shall not be based on such reports unless the same are recorded by the building code inspector or the architect or engineer performing building code inspections in a manner specified by the building official. The building official shall ensure that all persons making such inspections shall be certified in accordance to Chapter 468 Florida Statues. 
109.2 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has bee filed. 
109.3 Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections, and such other inspections as deemed necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical codes. The building official shall determine the timing and sequencing of when inspections occur and what elements are inspected at each inspection. 
Building: 
1.  Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected and shall at a minimum include the following building components: 
1.  Stem-wall. 
2.  Monolithic slab-on-grade. 
3.  Piling/pile caps. 
4.  Footers/grade beam. 
1.1.  Slab Inspection: To be made after the reinforcement is in place, all concealed conduit, piping, ducts and vents are installed and the electrical, plumbing and mechanical work is complete. Slab shall not be poured until all required inspections have been made and passed. 
A foundation/Form board survey prepared and certified by a registered surveyor may be required, prior to approval of the slab inspection. The survey shall certify placement of the building on the site, illustrate all surrounding setback dimensions and shall be available at the job site for review by the building inspector. In lieu of providing a survey, the contractor may elect to uncover all property line markers and string-up all property lines in preparation for inspection. 
2.  Framing inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete and shall at a minimum include the following building components: 
1.  Window/door framing and installation. 
2.  Vertical cells/columns. 
3.  Lintel/tie beams. 
4.  Framing/trusses/bracing/connectors (including truss layout and Engineered drawings). 
5.  Draft stopping/fire blocking. 
6.  Curtain wall framing. 
7.  Energy insulation. 
8.  Accessibility. 
2.1.  Insulation Inspection: To be made after the framing inspection is approved and the insulation is in place. 
2.2.  Gypsum board nailing inspection 
3.  Sheathing inspection. To be made either as part of a dry-in inspection or done separately at the request of the contractor after all roof and wall sheathing and fasteners are complete and shall at a minimum include the following building components: 
1.  Roof sheathing. 
2.  Wall sheathing. 
3.  Sheathing fasteners. 
4.  Roof/wall dry-in. 
5.  Sheathing/cladding inspection. 
6.  Window/door buck attachment. 
NOTE: Sheathing fasteners installed and found to be missing the structural member (shiners) shall be removed and properly reinstalled prior to installation of the dry-in material. 
4.  Roofing inspection. To be made as two inspections and shall at a minimum include the following building components: 
1.  Dry-in. 
2.  Insulation. 
3.  Roof coverings (including in Progress). 
4.  Flashing. 
5.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
6.  Swimming pool inspection. 
1.  First inspection to be made after excavation and installation of reinforcing steel, bonding and main drain and prior to placing of concrete shell. 
2.  Underground electric inspection. 
3.  Underground piping inspection including a pressure test. 
4.  Deck inspection: to be made prior to installation of the deck material (with forms, deck drains, and any reinforcement in place. 
5.  Final inspection to be made when the swimming pool is complete and all required enclosure requirements are in place. 
6.  In order to pass final inspection and receive a certificate of completion, a residential swimming pool must meet the requirements relating to pool safety features as described in 424.2.17. 
7.  Demolition inspections. 
1.  First inspection to be made after all utility connections have been disconnected and secured in such manner that no unsafe or unsanitary conditions shall exist during or after demolition operations. 
2.  Final inspection to be made after all demolition work is completed. 
8.  Manufactured building Inspections. The building department shall inspect construction of foundations; connecting buildings to foundations; installation of parts identified on plans as site installed items, joining the modules, including utility crossovers; utility connections from the building to utility lines on site; and any other work done on site which requires compliance with the Florida Building Code. Additional inspections may be required for public educational facilities. See § 423.27.20. 
9.  Where impact-resistant coverings are installed to meet requirements of this code, the building official shall schedule adequate inspections of impact-resistant coverings to determine the following: 
1.  The system indicated on the plans was installed. 
2.  The system is installed in accordance with the manufactures installation instructions and the product approval: 
Electrical: 
1.  Underground inspection. (including bonding and ground.) To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-In inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Plumbing: 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Note: See Section P312 of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing for required tests. 
Mechanical: 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Gas: 
1.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to insure compliance with all the requirements of this code and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
Site Debris. 
1.  The contractor and/or owner of any active or inactive construction project shall be responsible for the clean-up and removal of all construction debris or any other miscellaneous discarded articles prior to receiving final inspection approval. Construction job sites must be kept clean. 
2.  All debris shall be kept in such a manner as to prevent it from being spread by any means. 
109.3.1 Footings and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job. 
109.3.2 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor. 
109.3.3 Reinforcing steel and structural frames. Reinforcing steel or structural frame work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
109.3.4 Termites. Building components and building surroundings required to be protected from termite damage in accordance with Section 1503.6, Section 2304.13 or Section 2304.11.6, specifically required to be inspected for termites in accordance with Section 2114, or required to have chemical soil treatment in accordance with Section 1816 shall not be covered or concealed until the release from the building official has been received. 
109.3.5 Shoring. For threshold buildings, shoring and associated formwork or falsework shall be designed and inspected by a Florida licensed professional engineer, employed by the permit holder or subcontractor, prior to any required mandatory inspections by the threshold building inspector. 
109.3.6 Threshold building. 
109.3.6.1 The enforcing agency shall require a special inspector to perform structural inspections on a threshold building pursuant to a structural inspection plan prepared by the engineer or architect of record. The structural inspection plan must be submitted to the enforcing agency prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a threshold building. The purpose of the structural inspection plans is to provide specific inspection procedures and schedules so that the building can be adequately inspected for compliance with the permitted documents. 
109.3.6.2 The special inspector shall inspect the shoring and reshoring for conformance to the shoring and reshoring plans submitted to the enforcing agency. A fee simple title owner of a building which does not meet the minimum size, height, occupancy, occupancy classification or number-of-stories criteria which would result in classification as a threshold building under F.S. § 553.71(7), may designate such building as a threshold building, subject to more than the minimum number of inspections required by the Florida Building Code, Building. 
109.3.6.3 The fee owner of a threshold building shall select and pay all costs of employing a special inspector, but the special inspector shall be responsible to the enforcement agency. The inspector shall be a person certified, licensed or registered under F.S. Ch. 471 as an engineer or under F.S. Ch. 481 as an architect. 
109.3.6.4 Each enforcement agency shall require that, on every threshold building: 
109.3.6.4.1 The special inspector, upon completion of the building and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, file a signed and sealed statement with the enforcement agency in substantially the following form: "To the best of my knowledge and belief, the above described construction of all structural load-bearing components complies with the permitted documents, and the shoring and reshoring conforms to the shoring and reshoring plans submitted to the enforcement agency." 
109.3.6.4.2 Any proposal to install an alternate structural product or system to which building codes apply be submitted to the enforcement agency for review for compliance with the codes and made part of the enforcement agency's recorded set of permit documents. 
109.3.6.4.3 All shoring and re-shoring procedures, plans and details be submitted to the enforcement agency for recordkeeping. Each shoring and reshoring installation shall be supervised, inspected and certified to be in compliance with the shoring documents by the contractor. 
109.3.6.4.4 All plans for the building which are required to be signed and sealed by the architect or engineer of record contain a statement that, to the best of the architect's or engineer's knowledge, the plans and specifications comply with the applicable minimum building codes and the applicable fire-safety standards as determined by the local authority in accordance with this section and F.S. Ch. 633. 
109.3.6.5 No enforcing agency may issue a building permit for construction of any threshold building except to a licensed general contractor, as defined in F.S. § 489.105(3)(a), or to a licensed building contractor, as defined in F.S. § 489.105(3)(b), within the scope of her or his license. The named contractor to whom the building permit is issued shall have the responsibility for supervision, direction, management and control of the construction activities on the project for which the building permit was issued. 
109.3.6.6 The building department may allow a special inspector to conduct the minimum structural inspection of threshold buildings required by this code, F.S. § 553.73, without duplicative inspection by the building department. The building official is responsible for ensuring that any person conducting inspections is qualified as a building inspector under F.S. Part XII of Chapter 468, or certified as a special inspector under F.S. Ch. 471 or Ch. 481. Inspections of threshold buildings required by F.S. § 553.79(5), are in addition to the minimum inspections required by this code. 
109.3.7 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with Chapter 13 and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R and U values, fenestration U value, duct system R value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency. 
109.3.8 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety. 
109.3.9 Special inspections. For special inspections, see Section 1704. 
109.3.10 Final inspections. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. 
109.4 Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
109.5 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this code. 
109.6 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
SECTION 110 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. 
110.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
110.2 Certificate issued. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following: 
1.  The building permit number. 
2.  The address of the structure. 
3.  The name and address of the owner. 
4.  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. 
5.  A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified. 
6.  The name of the building official. 
7.  The edition of the code under which the permit was issued. 
8.  The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3. 
9.  The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6. 
10.  The design occupant load. 
11.  If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required. 
12.  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. 
110.3 Temporary occupancy. The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid. 
110.4 Certificate of Completion. A certificate of completion is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
110.5 Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of this code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. 
SECTION 111 - SERVICE UTILITIES. 
111.1 Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this code for which a permit is required, until released by the building official. 
111.2 Temporary connection. The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power. 
111.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and the codes referenced in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
SECTION 112 — RESERVED. 
SECTION 113 — VIOLATIONS. 
113.1 Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted there under, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or continued. Upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits as provided by law and local ordinance. 
SECTION 114 - STOP WORK ORDER. 
114.1 Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
114.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
114.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
SECTION 115 - UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT. 
115.1 Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, insanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems necessary and as provided for in this section. A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe. 
115.2 Record. The building official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition. 
115.3 Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the building official shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the structure, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the building official acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order. 
115.4 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner personally; (b) sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address with the return receipt requested; or (c) delivered in any other manner as prescribed by local law. If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner. 
115.5 Restoration. The structure or equipment determined to be unsafe by the building official is permitted to be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations or additions are made or a change of occupancy occurs during the restoration of the structure, such repairs, alterations, additions or change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of Section 105.2.2 and Chapter 34. 
117 VARIANCES IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
117.1 Flood hazard areas. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the variance procedures adopted in the local floodplain management ordinance shall apply to requests submitted to the building official for variances to the provisions of Section 1612.4 of the Florida Building Code, Building or, as applicable, the provisions of R322 of the Florida Building Code, Residential. This section shall not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(Ord. No. 36-2005, § 2, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 21-2009, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 4, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 6-34. - Florida Building Code—Technical amendments. 
The Florida Building Code, Residential, is hereby amended by the following technical amendments: 
R322.2.1 Elevation requirements. 
1.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas not designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
2.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot (305 mm), or to the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
3.  In areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), buildings and structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM plus 1 foot, or at least 3 feet if a depth number is not specified. 
4.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
Exception: Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation, including basements whose floors are not below grade on all sides, shall meet the requirements of Section R322.2.2. 
R322.3.2 Elevation requirements. 
1.  All buildings and structures erected within coastal high-hazard areas shall be elevated so that the lowest portion of all structural members supporting the lowest floor, with the exception of mat or raft foundations, piling, pile caps, columns, grade beams and bracing, is: 
1.1 Located at or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher, if the lowest horizontal structural member is oriented parallel to the direction of wave approach, where parallel shall mean less than or equal to 20 degrees (0.35 rad) from the direction of approach, or 
1.2 Located at the base flood elevation plus 1 foot (305 mm), or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher, if the lowest horizontal structural member is oriented perpendicular to the direction of wave approach, where perpendicular shall mean greater than 20 degrees (0.35 rad) from the direction of approach. 
2.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides are prohibited. 
3.  The use of fill for structural support is prohibited. 
4.  Minor grading, and the placement of minor quantities of fill, shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios and walkways. 
Exception: Walls and partitions enclosing areas below the design flood elevation shall meet the requirements of Sections R322.3.4 and R322.3.5. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Peddlers and solicitors, ch. 30; taxation and finance, ch. 42; development standards, ch. 58; signs, ch. 66; office zoning district, § 70-516 et seq.; commercial neighborhood district, § 70-541 et seq.; commercial general district, § 70-571 et seq.; industrial limited warehousing district, § 70-601 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means an establishment where for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "adult arcade" is included within the definition of "adult motion picture theater." 
Adult bookstore means a place that sells or offers for sale, for any form of consideration, adult materials the gross sale of which represents more than ten percent of the gross sales of the place or that comprises more than ten percent of the individual items it displays on the premises as its stock in trade in any new or used publications or new or used merchandise. 
Adult dancing establishment means a commercial establishment that permits, suffers or allows employees to display or expose specified anatomical areas. Any establishment on whose premises an employee, who need not be the same employee, displays or exposes specified anatomical areas on more than one day in a 30-day period shall be deemed an adult dancing establishment and shall be required to obtain a license under this article. 
Adult entertainment establishment means an adult motion picture theater, a massage establishment, an adult bookstore, an adult motel, an adult dancing establishment, or an adult performance establishment. Any commercial establishment that displays a sign or engages in any other form of advertising capable of leading a reasonable person to believe that the establishment offers, presents, permits or engages in any form of adult entertainment shall be deemed an adult entertainment establishment under the appropriate classification. 
Adult materials means any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographics, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual representations or recordings, novelties and devices, which have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult motel means any hotel or motel, boardinghouse, roominghouse or other lodging used predominantly for transient customers, which includes the word "adult" in any name it uses or otherwise advertises, and actually permits, the presentation of film material that has as its primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified sexual activities for observation by patrons thereof. 
Adult motion picture booth means an enclosed area designed or used for the viewing by one or two persons of motion pictures, films, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. For the purposes of this article, an adult motion picture booth is included within the definition of an adult motion picture theater. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building, or a portion or part of an enclosed building, or an open-air theater designed to permit viewing by patrons seated in automobiles, used to present on a regular basis, for any form of consideration, film material that has as its primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified sexual activities for observation by adult patrons thereof, and includes any hotel or motel, boardinghouse, roominghouse or other lodging for transient customers which advertises, and actually permits, the presentation of such film material. For the purposes of this article, an adult motion picture theater includes both an adult arcade and an adult motion picture booth. 
Adult performance establishment means an establishment where any employee: 
(1)  Engages in a private performance or displays or exposes any specified anatomical areas to a person other than another employee, regardless of whether the employee actually engages in dancing; 
(2)  Wears any covering, tape, pastie, or other device that simulates or otherwise gives the appearance of the display or exposure of any specified anatomical areas, regardless of whether the employee actually engages in dancing; 
(3)  Offers, solicits, or contracts to dance or perform with a person other than another employee in consideration for any tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that person; or 
(4)  Dances or performs with or within three feet of a person other than another employee and accepts any tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that person. 
Alcoholic beverage means all beverages containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight. 
Commercial means operated for pecuniary gain, which shall be presumed for any establishment that has received an occupational license. For purposes of this article, operation for pecuniary gain shall not depend on actual profit or loss. 
Commercial establishment means any business location, place or business conducting or allowing to be conducted on its premises any commercial activity. 
Employee means a person who works or performs in a commercial establishment, irrespective of whether that person is paid a salary or wage by the owner or manager of the premises, and shall specifically include but not be limited to independent contractors or concessionaires. 
Establishment means a physical plant or location or the commercial activities or operations being conducted, or both together, as the context of this article may require. 
Licensed premises means not only buildings, rooms and areas where adult materials regulated under this article, or adult activities regulated by this article, are sold, offered, presented or stored or where any form of adult entertainment is presented, but also all other areas within 500 feet of the building, room or area where adult materials or adult activities are regulated and over which the licensee has some dominion and control and to which customers or patrons may pass, and shall include all of the floor or land areas embraced within the plan appearing on or attached to the application for the license involved and designated as such on the plan. 
Massage establishment means a site or premises, or portion thereof, upon which any person, who is an employee, manipulates the superficial tissues of the body of another person, with any portion of the hand, foot, leg, arm, or elbow, but not including the following: 
(1)  Licensed health care facilities; 
(2)  Licensed physicians or nurses engaged in the practice of their professions; 
(3)  Educational athletic facilities if the massage is a normal and usual practice in such facilities, establishments licensed under F.S. ch. 480, provided that all employees of those establishments who manipulate the superficial tissues of the body of another person are licensed under F.S. ch. 480; or 
(4)  Establishments exempted under F.S. § 480.034. 
Personal advertising means any communication on the part of an employee of an adult entertainment establishment that is designed to encourage a prospective patron to enter the establishment and is performed by repeatedly speaking in a raised tone of voice, by making prominent physical gestures, such as waving or repeatedly pointing, or by holding signs or other written statements. Personal advertising shall not include oral or physical references to an adult entertainment establishment by patrons or spectators. 
Premises means not only the rooms and areas physically occupied by a commercial establishment or where alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed, offered, presented or consumed, but also all areas within 500 feet of the rooms and areas physically occupied by a commercial establishment or where alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed, offered, presented or consumed over which the owner or management of the premises has some dominion and control and to which customers or patrons may pass. 
Principal stockholder means any individual, partnership or corporation that owns or controls, legally or beneficially, ten percent or more of a corporation's capital stock, and includes the officers, directors and principal stockholders of a corporation that is a principal stockholder under this article; provided, that if no stockholder of a corporation owns or controls, legally or beneficially, at least ten percent of the capital stock, all stockholders shall be considered principal stockholders; and further provided, that if a corporation is registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission or pursuant to F.S. ch. 517, and its stock is for sale to the general public, it shall not be considered to have any principal stockholders. 
Private performance means modeling, posing, or the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by an employee of an adult entertainment establishment to a person other than another employee, while the person is in an area not accessible during such display to all other persons in the establishment or, while the person is in an area in which the person is totally or partially screened or partitioned during such display from the view of all persons outside the area. 
Public nudity means to display or expose at an adult entertainment establishment less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(1)  Human genitals or pubic region. 
(2)  The cleavage of the human buttocks. 
(3)  The areola or nipple of the human female breast. 
Religious institution means a building used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
School means an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by F.S. ch. 233, or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes day care facilities, nursery schools, kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools, senior high schools, colleges, universities, junior colleges, and any special institutions of learning under the jurisdiction of the state department of education, but it does not include vocational or professional institutions. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals or pubic region; 
b.  The cleavage of the human buttocks; 
c.  Any portion of the human female breast below the top of the areola (the colored ring around the nipple). This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the breast, but shall not be interpreted to include any portion of the cleavage of the breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal act means: 
(1)  A violation of this article; 
(2)  An offense under F.S. Ch. 800 (lewdness, indecent exposure); 
(3)  An offense under F.S. § 806.01, 806.10, 806.111, or 806.13(2)(c) (arson and criminal mischief); 
(4)  An offense under F.S. ch. 796 (prostitution); 
(5)  An offense under F.S. § 847.013 or 847.014 (obscenity); 
(6)  An offense under F.S. § 877.03 (breach of the peace); 
(7)  An offense under F.S. § 893.13 (possession or sale of controlled substances); or 
(8)  An offense under F.S. § 849.09(2), 849.10 or 849.25(3) (gambling). 
Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(2)  Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sapphism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, urolagnia or zooerasty; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast; and 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1)—(3) above. 
Straddle dance also known as a "lap dance," or "face dance," means the use by an employee, whether clothed or not, of any part of his body to massage, rub, stroke, knead, caress or fondle the genital or pubic area of a patron, while on the premises, or the placing of the genital or pubic area of an employee in contact with the face of a patron, while on the premises. 
Violation of this article means a violation of any provision of this article as found by a jury or any other trier of fact. All violations occurring on the same day prior to an arrest or the issuance of a notice to appear shall be considered as a single violation. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-6), (33-8), 1-10-95) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-32. - Authority. 
This article is enacted under the home rule power and the police power of the city in the interest of the public health, peace, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the city; and under the authority of the city to regulate the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages under the 21st Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-1), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-33. - Scope. 
This article shall be effective throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-2), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-34. - Purpose. 
The intent of the city council in adopting this article is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations that will reduce the adverse effects adult entertainment businesses have had and may have upon the city and to protect the health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-3), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-35. - Findings of fact. 
Based on evidence and testimony presented at public hearings before the city council and on the findings incorporated in the Jacksonville Municipal Code, the Los Angeles Municipal Code, the Detroit Zoning Ordinance, the Adult Entertainment Code of Orange County, Florida, and the "Summary of a National Survey of Real Estate Appraisers Regarding the Effect of Adult Bookstores on Property Values" conducted by the Division of Planning, Department of Metropolitan Development, Indianapolis, January, 1984, the city council hereby finds: 
(1)  The possession, display, exhibition, distribution and sale of books, magazines, motion pictures, prints, photographs, periodicals, records, novelties and devices which depict, illustrate, describe or relate to specified sexual activities are businesses that may exist within the city. 
(2)  The operating and maintaining of places: 
a.  Where the superficial tissues of one person are manipulated, rubbed, stroked, kneaded or tapped by a second person, accompanied by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas; 
b.  Where dancers, entertainers, performers or other individuals, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas; or 
c.  Where straddle dancing occurs; 
are businesses that may exist within the city. 
(3)  When the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) are present in an area of the city, other activities that are illegal, immoral or unhealthful tend to accompany them. Such activities include but are not limited to prostitution, pandering, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, exposing minors to harmful materials, possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and property. These illegal, immoral or unhealthful activities tend to concentrate around and be aggravated by the presence of the activities detailed in subsections (1) and (2). 
(4)  There is a higher incidence of certain types of criminal behavior among employees and patrons at establishments engaged in adult entertainment than among employees and patrons at other commercial establishments. 
(5)  The concentration within limited areas of the city of business operations and activities described in subsections (1) and (2) tends to attract an undesirable number of transients, blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring business, lower property values, promote an increase in crime, particularly of the kinds detailed in subsection (3), and ultimately results in residents and businesses moving to other locations. 
(6)  The buildings and establishments in which the activities and business operations described in subsections (1) and (2) take place are conducive to and are often used for the commission of immoral, lewd, indecent or illegal acts. 
(7)  The business operations and activities detailed in subsections (1) and (2) frequently occur in commercial establishments either selling or allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises concurrent with the display of specified anatomical areas or straddle dancing. 
(8)  There is a direct relationship between the concurrent consumption of alcoholic beverages and the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) and an increase in criminal activities, moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and good order of the community. 
(9)  The concurrence of the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages with the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) is hazardous to the health and safety of those persons in attendance, and tends to depreciate the value of adjoining property, harm the economic welfare of the community as a whole, and adversely affect the public's interest in the quality of life, tone of commerce and total community environment in the city. 
(10)  In order to preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the community and the citizens thereof, it is necessary and advisable to regulate and restrict the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in commercial establishments where the business operations and activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur. 
(11)  Physical contact within commercial establishments between persons exhibiting specified anatomical areas and patrons or spectators poses a threat to the individual health of both and promotes the spread of communicable and social diseases. 
(12)  Personal advertising within close proximity to public thoroughfares disrupts traffic and poses a traffic hazard and a threat to the safety of citizens using those thoroughfares. 
(13)  There is a higher incidence of criminal activity among the employees and patrons of commercial establishments that permit the concurrence of the consumption of alcoholic beverages and straddle dancing than among the employees of other commercial establishments. 
(14)  In order to preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the community and the citizens thereof, it is necessary and advisable to regulate and restrict the conduct of owners, operators, agents, employees, entertainers, performers, patrons, and persons on the premises of commercial establishments where the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) take place. 
(15)  The business operations and activities described in subsections (1) and (2) are commercial ventures operated for the purpose of making a profit, and as such are proper subjects for regulation by the city in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(16)  Straddle dancing does not contain any element of communication and is expressly found by the city council to be conduct rather than expression. 
(17)  The potential dangers to the health, safety and welfare of citizens of the city posed by permitting an adult dancing establishment or a massage establishment to operate without first meeting the requirements of this article are so great as to require the inspection of the establishments prior to permitting them to initiate operations and thereafter. 
(18)  Straddle dancing in commercial establishments poses a threat to the individual health of participants and promotes the spread of communicable and social diseases. 
(19)  Requiring employees of adult entertainment establishments to obtain an adult entertainment permit will help reduce incidents of criminal activities by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects, will provide a means of preventing minors from working in adult entertainment establishments, and will make it easier for health officials to control the spread of contagious diseases in such establishments. 
(20)  Prohibiting establishments at which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) from operating within set distances of educational institutions, religious institutions, residences, areas zoned or designated for residential use, and parks, at which minors are customarily found, will serve to protect minors from the adverse affects of the activities that accompany such establishments. 
(21)  The combination of two or more classifications of adult entertainment, as defined in section 10-103, within the same building, premises or other structure tends to encourage such illicit, immoral or undesirable activities as prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, public masturbation, sodomy and unnatural sex acts, which are harmful to the health and safety of patrons and the general community. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-4), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-36. - Obscenity not permitted. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to allow or permit the possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials or to authorize the exposing of persons under 17 years of age to motion pictures, exhibitions, shows, representations and presentations of specified sexual activities or persons displaying or exhibiting specified anatomical areas. These matters are preempted to the state and are subject to state regulation, and it is not the intent of the city council to legislate with respect to preempted matters. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-7), 1-10-95) 
State Law reference— Obscenity, F.S. ch. 847.  
Sec. 10-37. - Proscriptions where alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or permitted and where food or beverages are sold or dispensed. 
The human genitals or pubic region, the areola of the female breast, and the cleavage of the human buttocks shall not be displayed or exposed on a licensed premises where alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or permitted. It shall be unlawful for any employee to exhibit specified anatomical areas while selling or dispensing any form of food or beverage. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-49), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-38. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or to permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. This article shall not apply to conduct the regulation of which has been preempted to the state under F.S. Ch. 847. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-50), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-39. - Sale to minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, or to offer to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, massage establishment, adult dancing establishment, or adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-51), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-40. - Permitting violations of article or illegal acts. 
No licensee, owner or employee shall permit, suffer or allow violations of this article or illegal acts to take place on the licensed premises if the licensee or employee knows or has reason to know that such violations or illegal acts are taking place. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-52), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-41. - Zoning. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall not be allowed to open anywhere except in a commercial general or commercial general warehousing district. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-79), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-42. - Prohibited locations. 
(a)  No person shall propose, cause or permit the operation of or enlargement of an adult entertainment establishment, which, while in operation or after enlargement, would or will be located within 750 feet of a preexisting area: 
(1)  Adult entertainment establishment; 
(2)  Religious institution; 
(3)  Educational institution; 
(4)  Residence or residential zone; 
(5)  Park; 
or within 200 feet of a preexisting commercial establishment that in any manner sells or dispenses alcohol for on-premises consumption. In this subsection the term "enlargement" includes but is not limited to increasing the floor size of the establishment by more than ten percent. 
(b)  The distance requirements of subsection (a) are independent of and do not supersede the distance requirements for alcoholic beverage establishments that may be contained in other laws, rules, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-80), 1-10-95) 
State Law reference— Prohibition of adult entertainment establishment that displays, sells, or distributes materials harmful to minors near school, F.S. § 847.0134.  
Sec. 10-43. - Measurement of distance. 
The distance from any of the areas listed in section 10-42 shall be measured by drawing a straight line between the closest property lines of the proposed or existing area and the preexisting area. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-81), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-44. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  An adult entertainment establishment which, on December 13, 1994, was located on a site which is prohibited by section 10-41 shall cease operations by October 13, 1995. 
(b)  When a nonconforming use of an adult entertainment establishment has been discontinued for 90 consecutive days or more, the nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned; and the future use of the premises or site shall revert to only those uses permitted on the site on which the establishment is located. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-82), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-45. - Construction. 
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of licensing, regulating and dispersing adult entertainment and related activities. Unless otherwise indicated, all provisions of this article shall apply equally to all persons regardless of sex. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-9), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-46. - Presumptions. 
(a)  The presumptions given in subsections (b)—(f) of this section shall apply in actions brought for violations of this article. 
(b)  Any person who owns, operates, maintains or enters a commercial establishment, which advertises to the general public that the establishment provides, allows or permits the exhibition or display of specified anatomical areas, is presumed to be aware that the exhibition or display of specified anatomical areas is taking place in the establishment. 
(c)  Any establishment that has received an occupational license to operate commercially is presumed to be a commercial establishment. 
(d)  An employee, customer or patron of a commercial establishment who engages in straddle dancing may be prosecuted under section 10-178(b) or 10-184, whichever is more appropriate, but shall be prosecuted under only one of those provisions for each offense. 
(e)  An employee, customer or patron of a commercial establishment who contracts to perform a straddle dance and actually performs a straddle dance may be prosecuted under section 10-178(c) or 10-184, whichever is more appropriate, but shall be prosecuted under only one of those provisions for each offense. 
(f)  An employer of a commercial establishment who permits, suffers or allows any employee on the premises to perform or participate in a straddle dance may be prosecuted under section 10-40 or 10-184, whichever is more appropriate, but shall be prosecuted under only one of those provisions for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-74), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-47. - Exception; restroom use. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this article to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any person or employee of a commercial establishment or adult entertainment establishment to expose specified anatomical areas in connection with the use of approved sanitary facilities commonly known as restrooms. However, specified anatomical areas shall be exposed or displayed only in connection with excretory functions. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-75), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-48. - Proof. 
(a)  In all actions, civil or criminal, for violation of this article, testimonial evidence that a beverage was an alcoholic beverage, beer or wine may be offered by any person, who by taste, smell or drinking of such liquids, has knowledge of the presence of the alcoholic content thereof or the intoxicating effect thereof. 
(b)  The presence of alcoholic content of any beverage, beer or wine may be shown by hydrometer or gravity test made in or away from the presence of the fact finder by any person who has knowledge of the use of that instrument, but the production of such evidence is optional. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-76), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-49. - Immunity from prosecution. 
All officers and employees of the city who are acting within the scope of their authority and duties under this article shall be immune from prosecution, civil and criminal, for trespass upon real property. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-54), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-50. - Penalties. 
The violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute an offense against the city; and the offender, upon conviction, is subject to punishment as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-77), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-51. - Powers of the city council. 
The city council may bring suit to restrain, enjoin or otherwise prevent the violation of this article in the circuit court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-78), 1-10-95)  
Secs. 10-52—10-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 10-76. - Responsibility. 
(a)  Ultimate responsibility for the administration of this article is vested in the city manager. 
(b)  The building/life safety services section, which consists of occupational licensing, permitting and inspections, is responsible for the following: 
(1)  Verifying information contained in applications for adult entertainment licenses and for issuing all licenses. 
(2)  The inspection of licensed premises and premises applying for a license in order to pass upon the construction and physical configuration of the premises involved. 
(3)  The inspection of licensed premises and premises applying for a license to ascertain compliance with: 
a.  All statutes or ordinances in effect in the city. 
b.  All zoning regulations and all other applicable land use laws. 
(c)  The county department of health is responsible for inspections pertaining to health codes and applicable state laws and regulations. 
(d)  The fire rescue department is responsible for inspections pertaining to fire prevention codes and applicable statutes thereon. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-15), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-77. - Power of administrative agencies. 
When a provision of this article gives the city manager the authority or duty to act, the authority or duty vests in the city manager, who is empowered to delegate such authority or duty to any public officer, inspector or employee, provided only that such officer, inspector or employee shall act in accordance with the administrative procedures of the agency or office concerned. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-16), 1-10-95)  
Secs. 10-78—10-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, F.S. § 166.221. 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Unlicensed operation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, massage establishment, adult dancing establishment, or any adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license therefor under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-47), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-102. - Required of commercial establishments advertising adult entertainment. 
Any commercial establishment that displays a sign or engages in any other form of advertising capable of leading a reasonable person to believe that such establishment offers, presents, permits or engages in an activity required by this article to be licensed shall obtain an adult entertainment license in the appropriate classification. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-48), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-103. - Required; classifications. 
(a)  Requirement. No adult entertainment establishment shall be permitted to operate without having been first granted an adult entertainment license by the occupational licensing department under this article. 
(b)  Classifications. Adult entertainment establishment licenses referred to in this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore. 
(2)  Adult theater, which shall include adult arcades, places or buildings having adult motion picture booths, places or buildings having a hall or auditorium for the presentation of film material. 
(3)  Adult performance establishment, which includes massage establishments and lingerie modeling. 
(c)  Single classification of license. An adult entertainment license for a particular adult entertainment establishment shall be limited to one classification of license. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-17), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-104. - Application; application fee; consent by applicant. 
(a)  Required. Any person desiring to operate an adult entertainment establishment shall file with the occupational licensing department a sworn license application on standard application forms supplied by the department. 
(b)  Contents of application. The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he is 18 years of age or older; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, the names and mailing addresses of all partners whether general or limited, the residence address of at least one person authorized to accept service or process, and provide a copy of any existing partnership agreement; or 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, the name and address of the registered corporate agent for service of process, and provide a copy of its articles of incorporation; 
(2)  If the applicant intends to conduct the establishment under a name other than that of the applicant, the establishment's fictitious name registration under F.S. § 865.09; 
(3)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) has, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a felony of any state or of the United States or any specified criminal act and, if so, the specific crime involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction; 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) has had a previous license under this article suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose license under this article has previously been suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation; 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (1) holds any other licenses under this article and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed establishments; 
(6)  The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing; 
(7)  The location of the proposed establishment, including a legal description of the property site, and a legal street address; 
(8)  The applicant's mailing address, business addresses, residential address, and business and residential telephone numbers; 
(9)  A site plan drawn to appropriate scale of the proposed establishment, including but not limited to: 
a.  All property lines, rights-of-way, and the location of buildings, parking areas and spaces, curb cuts and driveways; 
b.  All windows, doors, entrances and exits, fixed structural features, walls, stages, partitions, projection booths, admission booths, adult booths, concession booths, stands, counters and similar structures; 
c.  All proposed improvements or enlargements to be made, which shall be indicated and calculated in terms of percentage of increase in floor size; 
(10)  A recent photograph of the applicant; and 
(11)  The applicant's social security number or employer's tax identification number and either the applicant's drivers license number or the number of a state or federally issued identification card. 
(c)  Application fee. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $200.00. If the application for a license is approved and a license is granted, the fee shall be applied as a credit towards the annual license fee required for the first year. 
(d)  Incomplete application. If the occupational licensing department determines or learns at any time that the applicant has not properly completed the application for a proposed establishment, it shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and shall allow the applicant ten days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. 
(e)  Consent. By applying for a license under this article, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise of their responsibilities under this article by the agents or department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-18), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-105. - Investigation. 
Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city and upon payment of the application fee, the city shall verify the information required by this article. The city shall investigate the proposed licensed premises for compliance with this article and other applicable laws and regulations relating to construction, safety, fire protection, zoning and public health. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-20), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-106. - Issuance; denial; revocation. 
(a)  Approval and issuance. Upon the completion of the investigation of an application, the city shall approve or disapprove the application. If approved, the city shall issue the license upon the payment of the appropriate license fee provided in sections 10-109 and 10-114. 
(b)  Disapproval and denial. If the occupational licensing department recommends disapproval, they shall indicate the reason therefor upon the application, or in a separate writing, and shall deny the application. If the application is disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of the disapproval and the reasons therefor. Notification shall be by certified mail and shall be sent to the address on the license application, which shall be considered the correct address. Notwithstanding any other provision in this article, the city shall deny any application for a license in which the applicant has supplied false or untrue information. 
(c)  Revocation. Should a license be issued as a result of false information, misrepresentation of fact, or mistake of fact, it shall be revoked. If the application is revoked, the city shall notify the licensee of the revocation and the reasons therefor. Notification shall be by certified mail and shall be sent to the address on the license application, which shall be considered the correct address. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-21), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-107. - Limitation on licenses and licensed premises. 
No more than one license shall be issued and in effect for any single location with the city. A licensed premises may be owned by the licensee or may be leased by the licensee from a person not a licensee under this article; provided that a licensee who is a tenant or lessee may not surrender his tenancy or lease to the owner or lessor if by so doing the owner or lessor will take possession, control and operation of the licensed premises and the business licensed under this article, unless the license is transferred as provided in section 10-110, and further provided, that a licensee who is the owner of the licensed premises may not lease or otherwise give up possession, control and operation of the licensed premises and the business licensed under this article to any other individual, partnership or corporation unless the license is transferred as provided in section 10-110. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-22), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-108. - Display; mutilation prohibited. 
All licensees licensed under this article shall display their licenses in conspicuous places on their licensed premises, in a clear, transparent cover or frame. The license shall be available for inspection at all times by the public. No person shall mutilate, cover, obstruct or remove a license so displayed. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-23), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-109. - Term renewals; revocation. 
(a)  Term. All licenses issued under this article, except new licenses, shall be annual licenses, which shall be in effect from October 1 through September 30. 
(b)  Renewals. A license not renewed by October 1 of each year shall be considered delinquent and, in addition to the regular license fee, subject to a delinquency penalty. 
(c)  Revocation. All licenses not renewed within 120 days of September 30 will be revoked by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-24), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-110. - Transfer of license. 
When a licensee shall have made a bona fide sale of the business he has been licensed under this article to conduct, he may obtain a transfer of the license issued under this article to the purchaser of the business, but only if, before the transfer, the application of the purchaser shall be approved by the city in accordance with the same procedure provided in sections 10-104 through 10-106, in the case of issuance of new licenses. Before the issuance of any transfer of license, the transferee shall pay a transfer fee of ten percent of the appropriate annual license fee. Licenses issued under this article shall not be transferable in any other way than as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-25), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-111. - Licensee moving to new location; changing name of business. 
(a)  New location. A licensee may move his licensed premises to a new location and operate at the new location upon approval by the city of the licensee's application for a change of location. The licensee shall submit to the city an application for a change of location, accompanied by an application fee of $200.00 at the time the application is filed. The application will contain, or have attached to it, a plan drawn to appropriate scale of the licensed premises at the new location indicating the area to be included in the new licensed premises, all windows, doors, entrances and exits and the fixed structural features of the new licensed premises. If more than one license has been issued to the licensed premises at the old location, the licensee shall state in his application for a change of location which of the licenses are being moved to the proposed new location. Upon approval of the application, there shall be issued to the licensee a license for the new location without the payment of any further fee. 
(b)  Change of name. No licensee may change the name of the business located at his licensed premises without first giving the city 30 days' notice in writing of such change and without first making payment of a change-of-name fee, the amount of which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-26), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-112. - Suspension. 
(a)  Violations of health, building, zoning or fire provisions. If a licensed premises is found in violation of a health, building, zoning or fire provision of this article, the appropriate agency shall notify the licensee of the violation according to the standard procedures of the agency and shall follow its normal agency procedures for correcting the violation and shall grant the licensee the right to exhaust applicable administrative remedies. Should the licensee fail either to correct the violation or to obtain an administrative reversal of the agency finding, the appropriate agency shall notify the city manager, who shall forthwith initiate procedures for suspension of the license. 
(b)  Other violations. If a jury or other trier of fact in a court of law finds that a licensee has violated section 10-40, whether or not an adjudication of guilt has been entered, the city manager shall forthwith initiate procedures for suspension of license. 
(c)  Fine or suspension of license. 
(1)  Procedure. Upon receiving notice that a licensee has violated a provision of this article, as provided in subsections (a) and (b) above, the city manager shall suspend the license issued for the premises where the violation occurred, unless otherwise provided below, and shall notify the licensee of his action. Notification shall be by certified mail and shall be sent to the address on the license application, which shall be considered the correct address. 
(2)  Periods of suspension. A single violation by a licensee of this article shall result in suspension of the adult entertainment license for 30 days. Upon a second violation of this article within a period of two years from the date of a prior violation of this article, but not including any time during which the license was suspended, the license shall be suspended for 90 days. Upon a third violation of this article within a period of two years from the first of three violations, but not including any time during which the license was suspended, the license shall be suspended for 180 days. All periods of suspension shall begin on the 15th day from the date the city mails a notice of suspension to the licensee or on the date the licensee delivers his license to the city, whichever comes first. 
Employers of adult entertainment establishments are responsible for the acts of their employees. Two violations of this article within a 30-day period by the same employee, as determined by a jury or other trier of fact, shall result in the suspension for seven days of the adult entertainment license of the establishment where the employee works or performs. Upon a third violation of this article by the same employee within a period of 90 days from the date of a prior violation of this article, but not including any time during which the license was suspended, the license shall be suspended for four weeks. Upon a fourth violation of this article by the same employee within a period of 180 days from the first of three violations, but not including any time during which the license was suspended, the license shall be suspended for 180 days. Upon a fifth violation of this article by the same employee within a period of one year from the first of five violations, but not including any time during which the license was suspended, the license shall be suspended for one year. All periods of suspension shall begin on the 15th day from the date the city mails a notice of suspension to the licensee or on the date the licensee delivers his license to the city, whichever comes first. 
(3)  Surrender of license required. If a licensee after having been mailed notice of the suspension of his license in the manner herein provided fails to surrender his license to the city within 15 days or fails otherwise to account for the license to the satisfaction of the city, the period of suspension of the license shall be extended until and shall not expire until a period has elapsed after the date of surrender of the license, or after the date of expiration of the license, whichever comes first, which is identical in length with the original period of suspension. 
(4)  When a license is suspended for a violation of a health, building, zoning or fire provision of this article, as described in subsection (a) of this section, the license shall not be reissued until the violation is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-27), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-113. - Appeals. 
Appeals alleging error in the denial, suspension or revocation of a license or permit under this article shall be by petition for a formal hearing before the city council. A notice of intent to appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 15 days of the mailing of a notice of denial, suspension or revocation of a license or permit. Thereafter, and upon payment of a fee of $50.00 to cover administrative costs, a hearing will be scheduled within 30 days. The city clerk shall give the petitioning party at least ten days' written notice of the time and place for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-28), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-114. - License fee. 
There are hereby levied annual license fees under this article, which shall be paid to the city. The amount of such fees is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-29), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-115. - Records and reports; consent by licensee. 
Each licensee shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the city manager to implement this article and carry out its purpose. By applying for a license under this article, an individual, partnership or corporation shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the city and other interested agencies of the powers given by section 10-77 in the manner therein specified. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-30), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-116. - More than one classification of adult entertainment at a single location. 
No building, premises, structure or other facility that contains any classification of adult entertainment shall permit or contain any other classification of adult entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-31), 1-10-95)  
Secs. 10-117—10-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PERMIT FOR EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 10-141. - Adult entertainment permit required. 
Unless specifically excluded below, it shall be unlawful for any person to obtain employment in an establishment licensed or permitted to operate under this article, for any form of consideration, or to exhibit or display specified anatomical areas in an establishment licensed or permitted to operate under this article unless such person shall have first obtained an adult entertainment permit or temporary permit from the city manager. This section shall not apply to employees engaged exclusively in performing janitorial or maintenance services. This permit requirement shall be independent of and in addition to any permit or license requirements that may be imposed on employees pursuant to any federal, state or local statute, law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-53(a)), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-142. - Qualifications. 
Employees of a licensee on premises licensed under this article shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-53(b)), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-143. - Application for and issuance of adult entertainment permit. 
(a)  All employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall file an application for an adult entertainment permit with the city occupational licensing department. 
(b)  All applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable payment of a fee on file in the city clerk's office. 
(c)  The city shall submit the names of all applicants for an adult entertainment permit who intend to work in an adult dancing establishment or a massage establishment to the county health department. If, in the 30 days immediately preceding submission of an application, such applicant was a known carrier of any notifiable communicable disease, as defined in F.A.C. ch. 10D-3, the health department shall notify the city; and no permit shall be issued unless the applicant presents a statement from a licensed physician certifying that the applicant is free of all notifiable communicable diseases. Any person applying for an adult entertainment permit shall be deemed to have consented to having the county health department notify the city if the applicant is a known carrier of a notifiable communicable disease and shall be deemed to have waived any right he may have to maintain the privacy or confidentiality of such information. 
(d)  At the time an applicant applies for a permit and completes all requirements for the issuance of a permit, he shall be issued a temporary permit valid for seven days. No later than seven days from the filing of an application and, if applicable, upon presentation of the statement of a licensed physician as required in subsection (c) above, the city shall issue a permit. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the city to issue the applicant a written permit, which shall bear the name, all aliases, address, sex, age, signature and photograph of the applicant. The city shall procure the fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant and the name(s) of all entertainment establishments where the applicant is to work or perform and shall keep the same on permanent file in its office. The fingerprints, names of establishments, and photograph of the applicant shall be furnished by the applicant at the time of filing his application. The city may request an applicant to provide such additional information as is necessary to effect the purposes of this article. Upon delivery of the permit to the applicant, the applicant may begin working on the licensed premises as a permanent employee. There shall be submitted with each application for a permit proof of the applicant's age. Such proof may be provided by production of the applicant's driver's license, passport, or a certified copy of his birth certificate. If the applicant is unable to furnish any of such documents, a certificate from the public school authorities as to the age of the applicant upon entering school as required by F.S. § 232.03 or the school authorities of the state where applicant enrolled in school, shall be submitted. Upon inability of the applicant to establish a birth date as above provided, the date may be established in the order of preference as provided by F.S. § 232.03. However, uncertified copies of such documents shall not be accepted. Any applicant who does not possess a driver's license, passport or certified copy of his birth certificate may obtain a temporary permit upon completion of all other requirements for an application and submission of a written request to the appropriate authority in his state of birth that certified evidence of his date of birth be provided to the city. 
(f)  No permit shall be issued when its issuance would violate a statute, ordinance, law or when an order from a court of law prohibits the applicant from obtaining an adult entertainment permit in the city. 
(g)  Any adult entertainment establishment holding a valid adult entertainment license issued pursuant to this article shall be permitted to provide its employees with current permit application forms approved by the city and to take the photograph of the applicant in a manner and with equipment approved by the city on the express condition that the establishment: 
(1)  Requires the employee to complete the application form and be photographed within one working day of the time the employee begins to work or perform in the establishment; 
(2)  Mail a notice in writing to the city within one working day that the employee has begun to work or perform at the establishment; 
(3)  Make the employee available for fingerprinting at a time and location to be determined by the city, at which time and place the employee shall present to the city his completed application form and photograph; 
(4)  On the first Monday of every month provide the city with a current listing of all employees and their positions; 
(5)  In exchange for acceptance of the benefits provided by this subsection, waive any and all rights to challenge the permit requirements of this article; 
(6)  Reimburse the city for reasonable additional expenses incurred pursuant to this subsection; and 
(7)  Be liable for damages to the city of $250.00 per day per violation if any employee who performs in the establishment is not entitled to a permit. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-53(c)), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-144. - Revocation. 
Should a permit be issued as a result of false information, misrepresentation of fact or mistake of fact, it shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-53(d)), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-145. - Expiration and renewal. 
A permit under this article shall expire two years from the date of issuance. A permittee under this article shall be entitled to a renewal of his permit as a matter of course, except when the permit has been suspended or revoked, upon presentation of his previous permit or presentation of an affidavit as to its loss or destruction to the city and payment of a fee, on file in the city clerk's office, made payable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-53(e)), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-146. - Possession of permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an employee to work, perform or to exhibit or display specified anatomical areas in an adult entertainment establishment without an adult entertainment permit in his immediate possession at all times. 
(b)  No person charged with violating this section shall be convicted if he produces to the city within 72 hours of detention or in court a permit issued to him. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a properly authenticated notification from the city verifying issuance of a valid permit, the clerk of the court is authorized to dismiss such cases at any time prior to the defendant's appearance in court. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-53(f)), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-147. - Suspension. 
(a)  Procedure. Upon receiving notice that a jury or other trier of fact in a court of law has found that a permittee violated any provision of this article, whether or not an adjudication of guilt has been entered, the mayor shall suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of his action. Notification shall be by certified mail and shall be sent to the address on the permit application, which shall be considered the correct address. 
(b)  Period of suspension. A single violation of this article shall result in the suspension of the adult entertainment permit for 30 days. Upon a second violation of this article within a period of two years from the date of a prior violation of this article, but not including any time during which the permit was suspended, the permit shall be suspended for 90 days. All periods of suspension shall begin on the 15th day from the date the city mails a notice of suspension to the permittee or on the date the permittee delivers his permit to the city, whichever comes first. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-53(h)), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-148. - Appeal. 
If an application for permit under this division is denied or if a permit is suspended or revoked, the procedures specified in section 10-113 shall be available to the applicant or permittee, in the manner therein specified. If the applicant or permittee does not appeal the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee shall be deemed to have failed to have exhausted his administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-53(i)), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-149. - Replacement of lost permits. 
Replacements for lost permits shall be obtained by completing an application as required in section 10-143. All applications for replacement permits shall be accompanied by a fee on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-53(j)), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-150. - Change of address, name or place of employment. 
Whenever any person, after applying for or receiving an adult entertainment permit, shall move from the residential address named in such application, or in the permit issued to him, or when the name of the permittee is changed by marriage or otherwise, or when the permittee takes on employment or begins to perform at an adult entertainment establishment not indicated in his application, such person shall within ten days thereafter notify the city in writing of his old and new address, or of such former and new names. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-53(k)), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-151. - Violations. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this division, or otherwise fails to secure a permit as required by this division, shall be prosecuted and punished in accordance with section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-53(g)), 1-10-95)  
Secs. 10-152—10-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 10-176. - General requirements. 
In addition to the special requirements contained in sections 10-179 through 10-182, each licensed premises shall: 
(1)  Conform to all applicable building statutes, codes or ordinances, whether federal, state or local, specifically including the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(2)  Conform to all applicable fire statutes, codes or ordinances, whether federal, state or local. 
(3)  Conform to all applicable health statutes, codes or ordinances, whether federal, state or local. 
(4)  Have each glass area that faces a public thoroughfare or through which casual passersby can see the materials or activity inside the licensed premises covered over by black paint or other opaque covering; provided, that this requirement shall not apply if the uncovered glass area exposes to public view only a lobby or anteroom containing no material or activity other than a reception counter or desk and chairs or couches for customers to use while waiting. 
(5)  Conform to the requirements of F.S. Ch. 381 and the rules and regulations of the state department of health and rehabilitative services made pursuant thereto. Each licensed premises shall be deemed to be a place serving the public for the purposes of sanitary facilities. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-36), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-177. - Advertising. 
No adult bookstore, massage establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult dancing establishment or any other adult entertainment establishment shall: 
(1)  Display a sign advertising the presentation of any activity prohibited by a state statute, an ordinance of the county, or any applicable city ordinance. 
(2)  Display a sign capable of leading a reasonable person to believe that the establishment engages in an activity prohibited by a state statute, an ordinance of the county, or any applicable city ordinance. 
(3)  Erect, install, maintain, alter or operate any sign in violation of any applicable state, county or city law. 
(4)  Engage in, encourage or permit any form of personal advertising for the commercial benefit of the establishment or for the commercial benefit of any individual who displays or exhibits anatomical areas within the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-37), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-178. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No employee shall engage in specified sexual activities on the licensed premises in the presence of patrons or spectators or for any form of consideration. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any person or employee of a commercial establishment or adult entertainment establishment to expose specified anatomical areas in connection with the use of approved sanitary facilities commonly known as restrooms. However, specified anatomical areas shall be exposed or displayed only in connection with excretory functions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any employee, customer or patron of a licensed premises to participate in a straddle dance on the licensed premises. 
(c)  No employee, while on the licensed premises or within the scope of his employment, shall contract or agree to perform, for any form of consideration, a straddle dance and actually perform the straddle dance, regardless of where such performance takes place. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a customer or patron of a licensed premises to touch with the hands an employee's breasts, pubic area or genitals, whether the employee is clothed or not. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for an employee of a licensed premises to touch with the hands a customer or patron's breasts, pubic area or genitals. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-38), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-179. - Adult bookstore. 
In addition to the general requirements contained in sections 10-176 through 10-178, an adult bookstore shall observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  All materials, devices and novelties shall be so displayed that they cannot be seen by anyone other than customers who have entered the licensed premises. 
(2)  If recordings are offered for sale and customers may listen to them while on the licensed premises, soundproof booths or rooms shall be available for use by customers who desire to listen, and each such booth or room shall have: 
a.  One clear window, facing the major portion of the licensed premises, covering not less than one-fourth of the wall area into which the window is set, which window shall not be covered or obscured in any manner while the booth or room is in use; 
b.  Sufficient chairs or couches to accommodate the expected number of persons who will occupy the booth or room at one time; 
c.  The number of persons who may occupy the booth or room at one time clearly stated on or near the door to the booth or room, and only that number of persons shall be permitted inside the booth or room at one time; 
d.  The door or doors opening into the booth or room incapable of being locked or otherwise fastened so that it or they will freely open from either side; and 
e.  All areas where a patron or customer is to be positioned visible from a continuous main aisle and not obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-39), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-180. - Massage establishments. 
In addition to the general requirements contained in sections 10-176 through 10-178, a massage establishment shall observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  Any massage establishment seeking a license under this article shall present to the city a state license issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 480, at the time a license under this article is to be issued. No license under this article shall be issued if the applicant fails to present the state license. 
(2)  Dressing rooms shall be proportioned to the maximum number of persons who are expected to be in them at one time, excluding attendants and assistants; and separate dressing rooms shall be provided for men and women. Floors shall be of a smooth, impervious material with a nonslip surface and shall be covered at the wall junction for thorough cleaning. Partition walls shall terminate at least six inches above the floor or be placed on continuous raised masonry or concrete bases at least four inches high. 
(3)  One shower shall be provided for each 40 men or women, or fraction thereof, based upon the maximum number of persons who are expected to be using shower facilities at one time; and separate shower facilities shall be provided for men and women. Floors and partition walls shall be constructed as required in subsection (2) for dressing rooms, and duckboards or wooden gratings may be used on shower floors if duplicate sets are provided and rotated in use. 
(4)  One locker shall be provided for each patron who is expected to be on the licensed premises at one time, which shall be of sufficient size to hold clothing and other articles of wearing apparel. Each locker shall be capable of being locked by the patron, with no one else having the key so long as the patron is using the locker, or the locker shall be under the constant attention and supervision of an attendant. 
(5)  Massages of a person by another person who displays or exhibits specified anatomical areas are prohibited. 
(6)  No person shall massage the genitals or pubic area of another person. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-40), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-181. - Adult theaters. 
In addition to the general requirements contained in sections 10-176 through 10-178, an adult theater shall observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  If an adult theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall have: 
a.  Individual separate seats, not couches, benches or the like, to accommodate the number of persons allowed to occupy the area; 
b.  A continuous main aisle alongside of the seating areas in order that each person seated in the areas shall be visible from the aisle at all times; 
c.  A sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the hall or auditorium area that lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area; and 
d.  Sufficient illumination so that persons in all areas of the auditorium can be seen. 
(2)  If an adult theater contains adult booths, each adult booth shall have: 
a.  A sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance that states the maximum number of persons allowed to occupy the booth, which number shall correlate with the number of seats in the booth; 
b.  A permanently open entrance not less than 32 inches wide and not less than six feet high, which entrance shall not have any curtain rods, hinges, rails or the like which would allow the entrance to be closed or partially closed by any curtain, door or other partition; 
c.  Individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, which correlate with the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth; 
d.  A well-illuminated continuous main aisle alongside the booth in order that each person situated in the booth shall be visible from the aisle at all times; 
e.  Except for the entrance, walls or partitions of solid construction without any holes or openings in such walls or partitions; 
f.  Illumination by a light bulb of no less than 25 watts. 
(3)  All areas where a patron or customer is to be positioned must be visible from a continuous main aisle and must not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. 
(4)  In addition to the sanitary facilities required by section 10-176, there shall be provided within or adjacent to the common corridor, passageway, or area in adult motion picture theaters having adult motion picture booths, adequate lavatories equipped with running water, hand-cleansing soap or detergent, and sanitary towels or hand-drying devices; common towels are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-41), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-182. - Adult performance establishment. 
In addition to the general requirements contained in sections 10-176 through 10-178, an adult dancing establishment and lingerie modeling establishment shall observe the following requirements: 
(1)  Persons engaged in displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas are prohibited from simulating sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee or other person on the premises. 
(2)  No person shall engage in the display or exhibition of specified anatomical areas except while the person is positioned in an entertainment area consisting of a platform or other structure raised 18 inches above the immediately surrounding area and encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet, and while the person is positioned at least three feet from a patron or spectator; except that any establishment regulated by section 10-183 shall require that person to be positioned in an entertainment area consisting of a platform or other structure raised 18 inches above the immediately surrounding area and encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet, or while the person is positioned at least three feet from a patron or spectator. 
(3)  No spectator or patron shall be present in the entertainment area defined in subsection (2) during the course of any performance involving the display or exhibition of specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  No person maintaining, owning or operating an adult entertainment establishment shall suffer or permit the construction, maintenance or use of areas partitioned or screened from public view that are designed to be occupied or are commonly occupied alone or together by any person or persons on the premises of such establishment for private performances involving the display or exhibition of specified anatomical areas. 
(5)  No person on the premises shall be permitted to use or to be present in areas partitioned or screened from public view that are designed to be occupied together or alone by any person or persons on the premises of such establishment for the display or exhibition of specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit or authorize any acts or activities therein that are prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-42), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-183. - Exhibit or display of certain anatomical areas by employees or patrons at alcoholic beverage establishments. 
It shall be unlawful for any employee of a commercial establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, where the employee knows or should have known that alcoholic beverages are on the premises, to exhibit or display the human genital or pubic region, the cleavage of the human buttocks, or the areola of the human female breast. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, § I(33-56), 1-10-95)  
Sec. 10-184. - Straddle dancing prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee or customer or patron of any commercial establishment in the city, whether or not the establishment is licensed under this article, to perform or participate in a straddle dance while on the premises of the commercial establishment. It shall also be unlawful for any employee, while on the premises or within the scope of his employment, to contract or agree to perform, for any consideration, a straddle dance and to actually perform such straddle dance, regardless of where such performance takes place. 
(b)  Employers of commercial establishments within the city are responsible for the acts of their employees. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining or operating any commercial establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to knowingly, or with reason to know, permit, suffer or allow any employee on the premises to perform or participate in a straddle dance. 
(Ord. No. 4-94, §§ I(33-61), (33-62), 1-10-95)  
ARTICLE III. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 10-185. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions of terms shall prevail: 
(1)  The term "business establishment" shall include any place of business, such as a golf club, grocery store, drugstore, nightclub, hotel, cafe, bottle club, bar, restaurant, grill, filling station or location where: 
(a)  One person pays another for an article or product that is mixed with an alcoholic beverage, or an alcoholic beverage; or 
(b)  A drinking container, drink, water, beverage, or other product or article, for a consideration of any kind is sold, dispensed, served or provided, for the purpose of drinking an alcoholic beverage or with the knowledge, actual or implied, that the same will be, or intended to be, mixed, combined with, or drunk in connection or combination with an alcoholic beverage. Any place of business wherein an alcoholic beverage is carried, stored, dispensed, or consumed by the owner of the beverage or his guest, or stored or dispensed by the owner, operator or employee of such place, shall be deemed a business establishment defined in this paragraph, even if no consideration is paid directly for the dispensing, serving, or otherwise providing of such product or article, so long as the establishment charges any door fee, cover charge, entertainment fee, music fee, exhibition fee, membership fee, storage fee, or any indirect payment for admission to the premises. 
(2)  The term "alcoholic beverage" shall include distilled spirits and all beverages containing one-half of one percent or more alcohol by volume. The percentage of alcohol by volume shall be determined by measuring the volume of the standard ethyl alcohol in the beverage and comparing it with the volume of the remainder of the ingredients as though said remainder ingredients were distilled water. 
(Ord. No. 28-2003, § 1, 11-4-03)  
Sec. 10-186. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person, firm or corporation, or owner, lessor, partner, operator, manager, or employee of any business establishment as defined in this article violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed, upon conviction thereof, guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished therefore as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 28-2003, § 1, 11-4-03)  
Sec. 10-187. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide uniform regulation of all establishments and persons in the city dealing directly or indirectly with the sale, dispensing or consumption of alcoholic beverages. It is the legislative intent that this article apply to all establishments and persons in any manner dealing with the sale, dispensing or consumption of alcoholic beverages, that the owners or operators of such establishments shall be notified hereby that they are not exempted from any zoning and land use prohibitions and regulations in force in the city where such establishments are located, that owners, operators, employees, patrons and others controlling, working in, or consuming alcohol on the premises of such establishments shall be notified hereby of the conduct and activities prohibited by this article, and the penalties for any violation thereof, and that this article be liberally construed as to effectuate this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 28-2003, § 1, 11-4-03)  
Sec. 10-188. - Prohibited hours for sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on premises. 
1. 	All business establishments shall be prohibited from selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises from any day of the week except Sunday 	2:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
2. 	All business establishments shall be prohibited from selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises from on Sunday. 	2:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. 
 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages sold for consumption off premises: 
(1)  All business establishments shall be prohibited from selling alcoholic beverages in sealed containers for consumption off premises from 12:00 a.m. midnight to 8:00 a.m. any day of the week except Sunday. 
(2)  All business establishments shall be prohibited from selling alcoholic beverages in sealed containers for consumption off premises from 12:00 a.m. midnight Saturday to 11:00 a.m. Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 28-2003, § 1, 11-4-03) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of hours of sale of alcoholic beverages, F.S. § 562.14.  
Sec. 10-189. - Conduct prohibited; persons subject to article; presumptions, evidence and proof of violations. 
(a)  No patron or other person shall purchase, store on, or carry onto the premises of any business establishment, or consume therein, any alcoholic beverage at any time when such establishment is prohibited from the sale of alcoholic beverages under the terms of this article. For the purposes of this subsection, the payment of a charge of any kind for the admission to the premises or for other services or entertainment provided therein and the subsequent receipt of any alcoholic beverage, whether mixed or unmixed with any other substance, shall be deemed a purchase of an alcoholic beverage; and the presence of any alcoholic beverage container designated by symbol, device, label, or name as belonging to a particular person and the presence on the premises of such particular person shall be prima facie evidence that such person has consumed an alcoholic beverage, and it shall be the burden of any person charged under this subsection to prove that he or she did not consume any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  No employee or other person shall assist, permit, or allow any other person to store on or carry onto the premises of any business establishment, or consume therein, any alcoholic beverage at any time when such establishment is prohibited from the sale of alcoholic beverages under the terms of this article. For the purposes of this subsection, the building owner, business establishment owner, operator, lessee, manager or other person who is licensed by the state or the city to operate a business establishment on the premises shall be deemed to have permitted any violation of this subsection for which an employee is charged; and it shall be the burden of any person thus deemed to have permitted such violation to provide that the violation was committed by an employee beyond the scope of his instruction and employment. 
(c)  No employee or other person shall sell, serve, dispense, or provide in any manner or guise any alcoholic beverage to any person on the premises of any such business establishment at any time when such business establishment is prohibited from the sale of alcoholic beverages under the terms of this article. For the purposes of this subsection, competent eyewitness testimony that any person was allowed to serve himself alcoholic beverages from any container stored on the premises of from any container carried onto the premises shall be conclusive proof that this prohibition has been violated by the person in the control of the premises at the time. 
(d)  No building owner or business establishment owner, operator, lessee, licensee, partner, or officer of any firm or corporation who is licensed by the state or the city to operate a business establishment on the premises shall assist, permit, direct, instruct or otherwise provide or allow any employee or other person to engage in any conduct prohibited by subsection (b) or (c) or any patron or other person to engage in any conduct prohibited by subsection (a). Competent testimony or documentary evidence that any employee was hired or paid for hours worked within the time such business establishment is prohibited from the sale of alcoholic beverages under the terms of this article and that such employee was present therein and working at such time, shall be conclusive proof that this subsection has been violated. 
(e)  In any prosecution for violation of any prohibition in this section, it shall not have to be proven that the alcoholic beverage, or mixture of alcoholic beverage and any other substance, that was alleged to have been purchased, sold, carried onto, stored, served, dispensed, or consumed in a business establishment, contained more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, nor must it be proven that such beverage or mixture of beverage was dispensed from any particular container of an alcoholic beverage, in order to obtain a conviction therefore; and the court and jury shall be bound by the legislative intent expressed in this article and the provisions of this section in the consideration of testimony, evidence, and burdens and other matters of proof in any case where such provisions are not in conflict with any court rule or decision or any statute. 
(Ord. No. 28-2003, § 1, 11-4-03)  
Chapter 14 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Qualifications and election of city councilmembers, art. VI. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance calling elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(16); administration, ch. 2; city council, § 2-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Florida Elections Code, F.S. chs. 97—106. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - How arranged for. 
(a)  The city council shall authorize the city clerk to make all necessary arrangements for holding all municipal elections except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  No informalities in conducting city elections shall invalidate the same if they have been conducted fairly and in substantial conformity to the requirements of this chapter and Florida state law. The election is to be conducted under ordinances of the City of Seminole and all sections of F.S. chs. 97—106. 
(Code 1991, § 23-112; Ord. No. 21-2014 , § 1, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 14-2. - Polls; location; hours. 
(a)  The City of Seminole shall contract with the supervisor of elections to provide facilities and services for voting. 
(b)  Such polling place shall be open for such hours as may be fixed by law. If the designated polling place be destroyed, or otherwise rendered unfit to be used as a polling place prior to the day of the election, the supervisor of elections may, without further notice, transfer the polling place to a location most nearly available to the designated polling place. 
(Code 1991, § 23-111; Ord. No. 40-2003, § 1, 11-4-03; Ord. No. 21-2014 , § 2, 10-28-14) 
State Law reference— Temporary change of polling place in case of emergency, F.S. § 101.74.  
Sec. 14-3. - Publication of notice of election. 
The city clerk shall cause to be published a notice of the election, which shall state the date, time and place where such election shall be held. This notice shall be published one time, not less than five days nor more than 20 days prior to the election. It shall be published in a newspaper circulated within the city. 
(Code 1991, § 23-106)  
Sec. 14-4. - Election officers. 
The city council shall authorize the city clerk to contract with the supervisor of elections to designate, assign, and train all poll workers. The supervisor of elections shall appoint the poll workers for each election. In cases in which a poll worker is absent or refuses to act, the supervisor of elections shall appoint a qualified elector to act in their place. Each poll worker of election shall be a qualified voter of the city, when possible. Each poll worker shall be sworn to perform the duties in accordance with Florida law and shall have full charge of the polling places and all voting machines. Poll workers shall be paid according to the schedule set by the supervisor of elections for such services. No person who holds any office of trust, profit, or employment under the city shall serve as a poll worker of the election. 
(Code 1991, § 23-107; Ord. No. 21-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 14-5. - Ballots. 
The city council shall cause to be printed on the ballots the names of all persons who have qualified as candidates for any office. The ballots shall contain the names of all candidates for the same office printed together in alphabetical order. Each elector shall be entitled to one vote for each office to be filled in the election for councilperson and one vote for the office of mayor. 
(Code 1991, § 23-108)  
Sec. 14-6. - Canvass of returns. 
Pursuant to the election contract the county canvassing board shall certify the candidate who receives the highest number of votes cast for the office of mayor to be elected to such office and shall declare those persons equal in number to the positions to be filled who received the highest number of votes for the office of council to be elected to such office. The county canvassing board shall furnish an official certificate of election to the city. 
(Code 1991, § 23-109; Ord. No. 21-2014 , § 4, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 14-7. - Date of election. 
Beginning 2014, the regular election of city council, including mayor, shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday of November of each year. 
(Ord. No. 40-2003, § 2, 11-4-03; Ord. No. 21-2014 , § 5, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 14-8. - Term of office. 
(a)  Due to the transition from March elections to November, the term of offices shall be as follows: Beginning March 2011, two councilmembers will be elected for a term that will expire November 2014; March 2012, two councilmembers will be elected for a term that will expire November 2015; and March 2013, the mayor and two councilmembers will be elected for a term that will expire November 2016. Elections shall be held in the manner provided by Article VI of the Charter. 
(b)  During the second business meeting in November, newly elected city councilmember(s) will subscribe to an oath of office and council shall elect a vice-mayor. 
(Ord. No. 40-2003, § 3, 11-4-03; Ord. No. 21-2014 , § 6, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 14-9. - Time for qualifying. 
(a)  The qualifying period for candidates in the regular scheduled city election shall begin at 9:00 a.m. on the 98th day, preceding the scheduled regular election and the closing date for the qualifying period shall be 4:00 p.m. on the 85th day, preceding the scheduled regular election. 
(b)  The qualifying period for a special election shall be by resolution of the city council in accordance with the provisions of section 6.04 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 40-2003, § 4, 11-4-03; Ord. No. 21-2014 , § 7, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 14-10. - Early voting. 
The provisions of the Florida Election Code pertaining to early voting shall not be applicable to any regular or special city election. Nothing in this section shall prevent the Pinellas County Supervisor of Elections from implementing early voting procedures at any polling place within the city, provided that the supervisor of elections assumes full responsible for meeting all statutory and administrative requirements appertaining thereto. 
(Ord. No. 27-2004, 10-26-04)  
Secs. 14-11—14-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CANDIDATES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Qualifications for candidacy, § 3.01. 
State Law reference— Campaign financing, F.S. ch. 106. 
 
Sec. 14-41. - Application. 
Every person who shall desire to become a candidate for the office of mayor or councilmember shall qualify to become such candidate by filing, within the qualifying period set forth in section 14-9, with the city clerk during regular business hours at the city hall qualifying documents (application) under oath on forms provided by the city and obtained from the city clerk. 
(Code 1991, § 23-105(1), (2); Ord. No. 40-2003, § 5, 11-4-03)  
Sec. 14-42. - Qualifying fee or petition. 
The application filed under section 14-41 shall be accompanied by a qualifying fee in an amount on file in the city clerk's office for city councilmember or mayor. In lieu of such qualifying fee, the application may be accompanied by a qualifying fee in an amount on file in the city clerk's office for a candidate for city councilmember or mayor, together with petitions, which shall indicate prominently the position for which the person aspires, and shall be signed by and contain the residence address of not less than 40 of the qualified electors of the city in the exact manner as the signature of the qualified elector appears on the registration books of the supervisor of elections of the county. If the supervisor of elections shall determine that one or more signatures on such petition are not signatures of qualified electors, the decision of the supervisor of elections shall be presumed correct and the burden of presenting competent evidence to rebut such presumption shall be on the candidate. 
(Code 1991, § 23-105)  
Sec. 14-43. - Examination of application by city clerk. 
When an application is presented to the city clerk for filing under section 14-41, the city clerk shall immediately examine the application and the documents required to accompany the application and ascertain whether they conform to the provisions of this article. If found not to conform, the city clerk shall notify the applicant, in writing, why such application cannot be filed, and return it to the applicant. The application, together with the documents required to accompany the application, may be amended and again presented to the city clerk, who shall examine the amended application and its accompanying documents as hereinbefore provided. 
(Code 1991, § 23-105)  
ARTICLE III. - CANVASSING BOARD 
 
Sec. 14-44. - Canvassing board. 
The canvassing board for city elections shall be comprised of the city clerk, the city attorney and one member of the city council, who is not a candidate for election. The city council member shall not be a candidate for election and shall be appointed by a majority of the council to serve on the canvassing board for said election. 
(Ord. No. 23-2006, § 1, 1-9-07)  
Sec. 14-45. - Canvassing board meetings. 
Canvassing board meetings shall be scheduled in accordance with Florida law. The board shall meet for the purpose of canvassing and certifying the returns of the election except when the election is held in conjunction with an election conducted by Pinellas County or the city has contracted with the Pinellas County Supervisor of Elections and Pinellas County Canvassing Board to conduct the city election. In such cases the certification of the returns by the county canvassing board may be accepted as the certification of the municipal election return. 
(Ord. No. 23-2006, § 1, 1-9-07)  
Sec. 14-46. - Quorum. 
The presence of two members of the canvassing board shall be required to establish a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 23-2006, § 1, 1-9-07)  
Sec. 14-47. - Voting. 
An affirmative vote of at least two members shall be required for the approval of any matter that comes before the canvassing board, and said votes may be made by the signature of the board member where applicable and in accordance with Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 23-2006, § 1, 1-9-07)  
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; parks and recreation, ch. 26; solid waste, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and certain other public property, ch. 38; development standards, ch. 58; natural resources, ch. 62; environmentally sensitive lands, § 62-71 et seq.; zoning, ch. 70; zoning pollution regulations, § 70-936 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Prohibited generally. 
It is hereby declared unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to do or permit to be done any of the following acts or practices: 
(1)  To throw, deposit on or bury in, or cause to be deposited on or buried in, any land, public place, street, alley, vacant or unoccupied lot, or in any waters lying within the city, any garbage or trash. This subsection shall not limit the use by an owner or tenant of property owned or leased by such person provided that such person does not use his land in such a manner as to create a nuisance due to the emission of obnoxious odors, due to the attraction of flies, insects or animals to such property, due to the penetration or drainage of waste from such premises into or onto the premises of another or into streams, lakes or other bodies of water, or due to the danger of fire. 
(2)  To allow any accumulation of trash, debris, refuse, filth, stagnant water, or other noxious matter, or other conditions or matter conducive of the breeding of mosquitoes, the breeding, concealing or harboring of snakes, dangerous reptiles or animals, insects, vermin, or anything dangerous to the public health or public safety, or matter, trash, or excessive vegetative growth likely to create a fire hazard. 
(3)  To place or allow to be placed upon any of the streets, alleys, curbings, sidewalks or other public places of the city any rubbish, sweepings, debris, bottles, cans, trash or waste materials of any kind that might adversely affect traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, or that might endanger the health and safety of the public; however, this section shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage and trash in proper containers preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of. 
(Code 1991, §§ 25-102, 25-106, 25-109)  
Sec. 18-32. - Littering, prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any person, in person or by his agent or employee, to cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit in any manner in or upon any public way or public place in the city or any canal, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin within the jurisdiction of the city, any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste article, thing or substance whatsoever, whether liquid or solid. 
(2)  For any person, in person or by his agent or employee to use any vehicle to haul any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste or any other material, whether liquid or solid, which is loaded in such a manner as to allow littering of any part on any street, alley or public way in the city. 
(Code 1991, § 25-108(1), (3)) 
State Law reference— Florida Litter Law, F.S. § 404.413.  
Sec. 18-33. - Grass, weeds. 
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful as being harmful and dangerous to the preservation of the public health and welfare for the owner of any lot, place or area within the city to permit on such lot, place or area grass or other unhealthful growth in excess of ten inches in height or upon any sidewalk abutting the same, any weeds, grass or other unhealthful growth or other noxious matter that may be growing, lying or located therein. 
(Code 1991, § 27-102; Ord. No. 3-2003, § 1, 1-28-03)  
Sec. 18-34. - Owner to abate noxious, offensive conditions. 
In order to prevent and/or to abate such nuisance or nuisances as described in this article and so as to improve the public health, public safety and general welfare of the people of the city, it shall be the affirmative duty and legal responsibility of all persons owning or occupying land to take such steps as are necessary and proper to keep down, cut, remove, drain or otherwise abate excessive growth of weeds or noxious plants or high vegetation, growth, stagnant water, garbage, trash, filth, debris or other similar conditions upon land that affords, encourages, aids or abets such hazard or breeding places or harbors mosquitoes, insects, snakes, venomous reptiles, dangerous animals, fire hazard or other public nuisance. 
(Code 1991, § 27-103)  
Sec. 18-35. - Abatement of condition by city action. 
Whenever the city manager or other person under his direction shall find that an excessive growth of weeds or any other nuisances has arisen, or is being perpetrated, created, permitted, tolerated, maintained or allowed to arise or exist upon any land within the city limits, such condition shall be abated immediately by the owner or persons having possession of the land, in the following manner: 
(1)  The city manager or his designee shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible for the correction thereof. Such notice shall: 
a.  Be in writing. 
b.  Include the description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
c.  Specify the violation that exists and remedial action required. 
d.  Allow a period of ten days for corrective action to be taken. 
(2)  The notice provided for in subsection (1) above shall be served upon the owner or agent or occupant by delivery of a copy thereof to the owner or agent or occupant, or by forwarding a copy thereof to the owner or agent or occupant by registered or certified mail to his last known address, or by serving the owner or agent or occupant with such notice by any other method authorized under the laws of the state. If the service cannot be effected by one of the foregoing methods, the posting of a copy of such notice in a conspicuous place in or about the property or structure affected by the notice shall be deemed proper service of notice. 
(Code 1991, § 27-104)  
Sec. 18-36. - Action by city, liability of owner. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any owner, agent, custodian, lessee or occupant of any real property to maintain such property in conformance with the provisions of this article, the city manager is authorized to have cut such weeds, grass or underbrush and also to edge or trim all grass areas abutting streets and to remove any trash, debris, refuse, filth or other noxious matter and to assess the property owner actual cost for labor and equipment or $75.00, whichever is greater, for the work so done. 
(b)  The property owner will be assessed the cost so incurred and given 30 days to pay the assessment without interest. Thereafter, the amount so fixed, together with the maximum interest rate allowable by law and cost of collection, shall become a lien against the real property until paid. 
(c)  This lien shall be filed with the clerk of the circuit court in the county. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105)  
Sec. 18-37. - Conditions subject to special master code enforcement procedure. 
The existence of: excessive accumulations or untended growth of weeds, undergrowth or other dead or living plant life; overgrowth of lawn, grass or weeds; accumulation of stagnant water, rubbish, debris, construction material, construction debris, construction fill, or trash, including any wrecked, derelict or partially dismantled motor vehicle, trailer, boat, machinery, refrigerator, washing machine, plumbing fixture, furniture or similar article; all other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter upon any property within this city to the extent and in the manner that such property is or may reasonably become infested or inhabited by rodents, vermin or wild animals, or may furnish a breeding place for mosquitoes, or threatens or endangers the public health, safety or welfare, or may reasonably cause disease, or adversely affects and impairs the economic welfare of adjacent property; is hereby prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance, unlawful, and subject to code enforcement through the special master procedure. 
(Ord. No. 07-2007, § 3, 8-14-07)  
Secs. 18-38—18-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
County code cross reference— Noise regulations, § 14-26 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-66. - Keeping noisy, offensive animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city any animal, dog, cat, beast, fowl or bird that habitually utters, causes, emits or creates by any means noise or offensive odors, whether at night or during the day. 
(b)  It shall be further unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city any animal, dog, cat, beast, fowl or bird that unreasonably disturbs or annoys the residents who reside within 150 feet of the property on which the animal is kept or harbored. 
(Code 1991, § 27-121)  
Secs. 18-67—18-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INOPERATIVE VEHICLES ON RESIDENTIAL AND PUBLIC PROPERTIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Lost and abandoned property, F.S. ch. 705. 
 
Sec. 18-70. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motor vehicle means an automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, semitrailer, truck tractor and semitrailer combination, or any other vehicle operated on the roads of this state, used to transport persons or property, and propelled by power other than muscular power, but the term does not include traction engines, road rollers, such vehicles as run only upon a track, bicycles or mopeds. 
Inoperative vehicle means a motor vehicle that is in a state of disrepair and incapable of being moved under its own power, or a motor vehicle that is incapable of being lawfully operated on the streets of the state. A motor vehicle shall be deemed inoperative if one or more parts which are required for the operation of the vehicle are missing, are dismantled, are inoperative or are not attached to the vehicle as designed. A motor vehicle shall be presumed incapable of being lawfully operated on the streets of the state if a current registration tag, also known as a license plate, of a kind required under state law as a condition of operation upon the public streets, is not affixed thereto. 
Owner means the registered owner of the vehicle or the owner of the property upon which the inoperative vehicle is located. 
Property means any individual parcel of real property or any portion thereof. 
Public property means any federal, state, county or city-owned, leased, controlled, dedicated or platted real property including but not limited to parks, marinas, alleys, streets, rights-of-way or other real property. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 11-14-00)  
Sec. 18-71. - Intent. 
It is hereby declared, that due to the urban nature and population density of the city, it is in the best interest of its citizens to prohibit the open storage of inoperative motor vehicles on residential property and public property located in the incorporated limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 11-14-00)  
Sec. 18-72. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Violations of this article are punishable in accordance with the county court uniform fine schedule. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 11-14-00)  
Sec. 18-73. - Territory embraced. 
This article shall apply to the incorporated limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 11-14-00)  
Sec. 18-74. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person nor any business entity shall place, park or store, or allow to be placed, parked or stored, any inoperative motor vehicle(s) on any residentially zoned property located in the incorporated area of the city. 
(b)  No person nor any business entity shall place, park or store, or allow to be placed, parked or stored any inoperative motor vehicle(s) on any public property as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 11-14-00)  
Sec. 18-75. - Designation of investigating and enforcing authority. 
(a)  The code enforcement officer of the city and county deputy sheriffs are designated as the enforcing authority and are authorized to issue citations for violations of this section in accordance with the code of the city. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer and county deputy sheriffs are authorized to have removed from public property and impound any inoperative motor vehicle, which is in violation of this section, in accordance with the provisions of F.S. Ch. 705, as they pertain to lost or abandoned property. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 11-14-00)  
ARTICLE V. - SITE DEBRIS AND HURRICANE PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 18-76. - Site debris. 
(a)  The permit holder of any active or inactive construction project shall clean up and remove all construction debris or any other miscellaneous discarded articles prior to receiving final inspection approval or a certificate of occupancy, whichever is applicable. Construction job sites shall be kept clean, such that accumulation of construction debris must not remain on the property for a period of time exceeding ten days from a notice of violation. 
(b)  All debris shall be contained in such a manner as to prevent it from being spread on the property or onto adjacent property by any means. 
(Ord. No. 21-2005, § 1, 8-23-05)  
Sec. 18-77. - Hurricane protection. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for any person or entity to allow construction related materials (including but not limited to: roof tiles, lumber, scaffolding and debris) to remain loose or otherwise unsecured at a construction site from 12 hours after a hurricane watch has been issued by the National Weather Service for Pinellas County until the hurricane watch has been lifted. All such materials shall be either removed from the construction site or secured in such a manner so as to minimize the danger of such materials causing damage to persons or property from high winds. 
(b)  Any property owner and/or contractor that violates this section shall be subject to an immediate fine of $500.00 per day from the date and time of a notice of violation through the conclusion of the weather emergency, as may be determined by a special master; and 
(c)  The city reserves the right to assess costs for remediation of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 21-2005, § 1, 8-23-05)  
ARTICLE VI. - PORTABLE STORAGE BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 18-78. - Intent. 
A portable storage unit structure may be utilized as a temporary structure within the city when in compliance with the standards of this article. Any use of such structures within the city not in compliance with this article shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 32-2005, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 18-79. - Definition. 
The term "portable storage unit" shall be defined to be any container, storage unit, shedlike container or other portable structure than can or is used for the storage of personal property of any kind and which is located for such purposes outside an enclosed building other than an accessory building or shed complying with all building codes and land use requirements. It is the general intent of this definition to recognize portable storage units as temporary uses of property which are intended to be used for the loading and unloading of personal property, or to be used for the off-site storage of personal property. 
(Ord. No. 32-2005, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 18-80. - Location and placement. 
Location and placement standards for portable storage units are as follows: 
(1)  General. Portable storage units shall not create a hazardous condition and shall not block visibility for intersections of streets, alleys, driveways or sidewalks. 
(2)  Residential. Portable storage units placed on residential land shall be located in the driveway or on a hard surface and shall not be placed in a public or private right-of-way. 
(3)  Commercial. Portable storage units placed on nonresidential land shall not reduce required on-site parking, obstruct traffic circulation aisles, encroach into drainage areas or landscaping buffers, or placed in a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 32-2005, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 18-81. - Duration, frequency and extensions. 
(a)  Duration. Portable storage units shall not exceed the following durations of stay: 
(1)  Residential use (single-family, duplex, triplex). A maximum of ten calendar days per event with a maximum of four events per dwelling unit address per calendar year. 
(2)  Multi-family residential use (apartment, condominium, townhome). A maximum of ten calendar days per event with a maximum of four events per dwelling unit address per calendar year. 
(3)  Nonresidential use. A maximum of ten calendar days per event with a maximum of four events per each nonresidential unit/tenant on a property per calendar year. 
(b)  Frequency. An "event" shall consist of the delivery and pickup of the unit. At least 30 calendar days shall pass between the removal and subsequent placement of portable storage units "event." For construction sites involving new construction, the time limit for portable storage containers related to and used for the ongoing construction shall be restricted to the period of continuous construction under a valid building permit as defined in the Code. Any portable storage container at the site of construction, and not specifically related to and used for construction, shall be subject to this article in its entirety. 
(c)  Portable storage units will be permitted as long as an active building permit is in place. At such time the building permit expires, a final inspection has taken place, or a certificate of occupancy or completion has been issued, the unit must be removed. 
(d)  In the event of fire, hurricane or natural disaster causing substantial damage to the principal structure on the property; or, In those cases where a property owner undertakes improvements or repairs that do not require a building permit, the property owner shall be entitled to site a portable storage unit on their property, subject to all other applicable sections of this chapter, for 60 days. Before the expiration of the 60-day period, the property owner may apply to the city for permission to extend the time that a portable on demand storage structure may be located as a temporary structure on the property. Application for such extended duration shall be made in writing and filed with the general services department and shall give sufficient information to determine whether such extended duration should be granted. The general services director, or his designee, shall determine whether or not to grant such extended duration and the length of such extension. In the event of an adverse decision by the general services department, the applicant may appeal such decision to the city manager. In the event of such appeal, the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 32-2005, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 18-82. - Number and size. 
(1)  Number. No more than one portable storage unit may be located for any residential address. 
(2)  Size. No portable storage unit shall be allowed which exceeds more than 1,300 cubic feet of storage. 
(Ord. No. 32-2005, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 18-83. - Signage and compliance. 
(a)  Signage. All portable storage units shall have the name, current phone number, and address of the company providing the unit. Additionally, the volume of storage expressed in cubic feet and the date the unit was placed at the site shall be clearly posted on the exterior of the portable storage unit. No other signage shall be allowed on a portable storage unit. Allowed signage shall not exceed 33 percent of the area of the side of the portable storage unit containing the signage and no more than two sides of any portable storage unit shall contain signage. 
(b)  Compliance. Failure by the business, during container placement, to post portable storage containers with the required information shall be considered a violation of this section and subject to the penalties outlined in section 18-85. 
(Ord. No. 32-2005, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 18-84. - Security. 
Portable storage units shall be locked and secured by the owner or tenant of the unit or property at all times when loading or unloading is not taking place. Storage of hazardous material is prohibited. It shall be the obligation of the owner or user of such temporary structure to secure it in a manner that does not endanger the safety of persons or property in the vicinity of the temporary structure. 
(Ord. No. 32-2005, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 18-85. - Permits and exemptions. 
(a)  Permit. A permit is required to site a portable storage unit. However, no permit fee shall be required for any portable storage unit regardless of category. 
(b)  Exemptions. No permit shall be needed to allow for the siting of a portable storage facility used for deliveries or pickups which is placed on land for less than 48 hours. 
(Ord. No. 32-2005, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 18-86. - Removal and enforcement. 
In the event of a natural disaster as declared by the city, the requirements of this article may be waived for a specific period of time as deemed necessary by the city manager, or his designee, in order to meet the needs of the community. 
(a)  Removal. It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person or entity to allow for a portable storage unit to remain unsecured from 12 hours after a hurricane watch has been issued by the National Weather Service for Pinellas County until the hurricane watch has been lifted. All portable storage units shall either be removed or secured in such a manner so as to minimize the danger of such portable storage unit causing damage to persons or property from high winds. 
(b)  Enforcement. Any property owner that violates this section shall be subject to an immediate fine of $500.00 from the date and time of notice of violation through the conclusion of the weather emergency, as may be determined by a special master. The city reserves the right to assess costs for the remediation of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 32-2005, § 1, 10-11-05)  
Secs. 18-87—18-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PRIVATE DOCKS ON CITY-OWNED WATER BODIES 
 
Sec. 18-100. - Standards, procedures, required permits, indemnity and hold harmless agreement, inspection agreement, and required maintenance. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the city that no private dock shall be installed on any city-owned water body that abuts a private residential use until such time as said request meets the requirements and provisions of this section. 
(b)  Administrative approval. The proposed private dock must conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Only one dock shall be allowed per lot or parcel of private property; 
(2)  No dock shall exceed 192 square feet in size or 16 feet in length; 
(3)  The placement of the dock shall meet the required side yard setbacks for the zoning district in which the lot or parcel is located; 
(4)  An indemnity and hold harmless agreement and an inspection agreement provided by the city to the applicant shall be executed by the property owner prior to the issuance of a building permit for the installation of the dock; 
(5)  All docks shall be maintained in a safe and functional condition, as may be determined by the building official; 
(6)  An approved building permit is required prior to installation of any dock. 
(c)  Procedures. The city manager is authorized to create administrative procedures to implement the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 25-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Secs. 18-101—18-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CANINES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, F.S. ch. 828. 
 
Sec. 18-110. - Supervision, confinement and tethering of canines. 
(a)  As used in this section, tether means to restrain a canine by typing the canine to any object or structure, including without limitation a house, tree, fence, post, garage, or shed, by any means, including without limitation a chain, rope, cord, leash, or running line. Tethering shall not include using a leash to walk a canine. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a responsible party to tether a canine while outdoors, except when all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The canine is in visual range of the responsible party, and the responsible party is located outside with the canine. 
(2)  The tether is connected to the canine by a buckle-type collar or a body harness made of nylon or leather, not less than one inch in width. 
(3)  The tether has the following properties: it is at least five times the length of the canine's body, as measured from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail; it terminates at both ends with a swivel; it does not weigh more than 1/8 of the canine's weight; and it is free of tangles. 
(4)  The canine is tethered in such a manner as to prevent injury, strangulation, or entanglement. 
(5)  The canine is not outside during a period of extreme weather, including without limitation extreme heat or near-freezing temperatures, thunderstorms, tornadoes, tropical storms, or hurricanes. 
(6)  The canine has access to water, shelter, and dry ground. 
(7)  The canine is at least six months of age. Puppies shall not be tethered. 
(8)  The canine is not sick or injured. 
(9)  Pulley, running line, or trolley systems are at least 15 feet in length and are less than seven feet above the ground. 
(10)  If there are multiple canines, each canine is tethered separately. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the transportation of canines. 
(d)  For a first-time violation, the code enforcement officer shall issue a warning notice to the responsible party and shall wait at least ten days before taking any further enforcement action against the responsible party. Thereafter, each violation of this section shall be subject to enforcement in accordance with section 18-111 of this chapter or Chapter 2, Article V., Division 4 of the City Code. For all civil penalties for violations of this section collected pursuant to section 18-110, 50 percent of the amount collected shall be paid to Pinellas County Animal Services. 
(Ord. No. 39-2009, § 1, 12-22-09)  
Sec. 18-111. - Schedule of penalties. 
First offense —Unlawful tethering of canine - Warning with ten-day correction period. 
Second offense —Unlawful tethering of canine - $100.00 and additional ten-day correction period. 
Third offense —Unlawful tethering of canine - $250.00. 
Fourth and each subsequent offense —Unlawful tethering of a canine - $500.00 and one count of animal cruelty ($500.00 fine and/or imprisonment for up to 60 days). 
(Ord. No. 39-2009, § 2, 12-22-09)  
Secs. 18-112—18-174. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 18-175. - Title of article, applicability and interpretation. 
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the stormwater management and stormwater system illicit discharge and connection ordinance of the city. The provisions of this article shall be effective within the boundaries of the city and shall set prohibitions and restrictions to prevent illicit and illegal discharges from entering or being deposited into the city's stormwater collection system. This article shall be liberally construed to affect the purposes set forth in this article. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-176. - Policy, intent, purpose and objectives. 
It is the policy of the city council to regulate and control the management and storage of all surface waters within the city boundaries in harmony and conformance with all applicable federal, state, regional and local standards, including those of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), the Southwest Florida Water Management District (SWFWMD), the applicable Florida Administrative Code (F.A.C.), and all pertinent NPDES ordinances enacted by the Pinellas County Board of County Commissioners, as amended from time to time, are expressly made a part of this article and are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth. It is the intent of the city council to establish methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. It is the purpose of this article to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges into the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. The prohibitive discharge standards contained in this article were developed under the authority of section 5 of the Act and 40 CFR 122. applicable FDEP, SWFWMD regulations and applicable home rule power. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the Federal "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System" (NPDES) permit process. It is the objective of this article to prohibit illicit connections and discharges into the city's stormwater system and to establish the legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article by: 
(1)  Regulating the contribution of pollutants to the city's municipal separate stormwater system by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(2)  Prohibiting illicit connections and discharges to the city's municipal separate stormwater system. 
(3)  Establishing the legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-177. - Definitions; interpretation of certain words and terms. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and the words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Absorption area means any area designed or naturally capable of allowing stormwater percolation. 
Act means the Federal Clean Water Act Amendments to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, enacted by Congress in 1972 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Authorized enforcement agency means employees or designees appointed by the city to enforce this article to include the supervisor of the public works department, contract building official or any designated code enforcement officer. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Buildable area means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind which has enclosing walls for 50 percent of its perimeter. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof". (For the purposes of this article, each portion of a building separated from other portions by a fire wall shall be considered as a separate building.) 
Construction means any on-site activity which will result in soil disturbance, including but not limited to the building, assembling, expansion, modification or alteration of the existing property, the erection of buildings or other structures, or any part thereof, or land clearing. Such activities also include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, demolition, grading, excavating, utility installation, building erection, paving and landscaping. Construction activity also means any activity subject to NPDES construction permits including construction project activities resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. 
Discharge means any direct or indirect introduction of any solid, liquid or gaseous matter into the separate storm sewer system or to any receiving waters of the county. This includes discharges from nonpoint sources, diffuse runoff, leaching and atmospheric deposition. 
FDEP means the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Illicit or illegal discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge into any part of the storm drainage system located within the city limits, except as exempted in section 18-183 of this article. Illegal discharges are discharges including, but not limited to, municipal sewage (wastewater), process wastewater, wash water and discharges from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the city, as well as any pollutants and hazardous materials or other substances regulated by the US EPA or the FL DEP. 
Illicit or illegal connection means either: 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that conveys an illegal discharge into the storm drainage system, or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial facility to the storm drainage system whose source has not been thoroughly investigated and documented on plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved in writing by the city. 
Industrial activity means any activity subject to NPDES industrial stormwater permits, as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means the entire storm drainage system, as hereinafter defined, located within the city limits that is both publicly and privately owned and that has been designed and is used specifically for the collection and conveyance of stormwater, as hereinafter defined. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit, together with all conditions attached, issued by Florida Department of Environmental Protection under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b), that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Nonpoint sources (NPS) means diffuse runoff without a single point of origin that flows over the surface of the ground by stormwater and is then introduced to surface or ground waters. NPSs include, but are not limited to, atmospheric deposition and runoff, or leaching from agricultural lands, urban areas, unvegetated lands, onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems, and construction sites. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, public or private corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent, any natural person, joint venture, municipality, governmental agency, political subdivision, or public officer or any other entity whatsoever, or any combination of such, jointly or severally. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes; yard wastes, landscaping debris, and grass clippings; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; wastes in any form that would normally be required to use the sanitary sewer system; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Receiving waters of the city means surface waters of the city and county including but not limited to open channels, ponds, streams, creeks, lakes, swamps, wetlands located in the city and Pinellas County unincorporated jurisdiction, as well as marine waters extending three leagues, or nine miles from the coastline. 
Separate storm sewer system or "MS4" as stated in FAC 62-624.200(8), means the system of conveyances owned or operated by the city used for collecting, storing, and transporting stormwater. Such conveyances may include but are not limited to roads with stormwater systems, storm drains, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels, or ponds. 
Site of industrial activity means any area or facility used for manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage, or storage of finished products. 
Storm drainage system means the entire infrastructure within the city limits comprised of many components, both publicly and privately owned, by which stormwater is collected and conveyed through the city including, but not limited to, city, county, state and private street and road drainage systems comprised of gutters, curbs, inlets, and storm pipes; storm pumping facilities; drainage retention and detention areas/basins, both publicly and privately owned; natural and human-made or altered drainage swales, ditches, channels, and reservoirs; and all other stormwater related storm drainage facilities within the city. 
Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of accumulated water from natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation. Stormwater also means any surface runoff and drainage of water from land surfaces, including the surfaces of buildings and other hardened surfaces on the land, but does not include any industrial or commercial process water, sediment or contaminants introduced into water as a result of activities conducted on the site. 
Stormwater management plan means a document prepared according to Florida Department of Environmental Protection regulations that describes the best management practices and other required activities to be undertaken by a person or business to first identify sources of pollution and/or contamination at a site and the follow-up actions to be taken by such persons or businesses to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges into municipal stormwater, storm drainage systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
SWFWMD means the Southwest Florida Water Management District. 
Wastewater means any waters that are discharged from residential, commercial or industrial sanitary facilities including toilets, sinks, showers and wash-down operations. 
Watercourse means either: 
(1)  Any stream, river, creek, slough or other naturally occurring stormwater conveyance feature in which water usually flows over the surface of the land, or 
(2)  Any artificial or man-made swale, ditch, channel or other man-made stormwater conveyance feature in which water usually flows in a defined bed or bottom. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-178. - Administrative responsibility; authorized enforcement agency. 
The city manager, or his designee, is the authorized enforcement agency for this article. The city manager, or his designee shall administer, implement, and otherwise enforce all provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the designee under this article may be delegated by the city manager to individuals or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-179. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all water entering the stormwater drainage systems within the boundaries of the city that was generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the city. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-180. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other article, ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other article, ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law of the city, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article, ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-181. - Ultimate responsibility. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants to the city's local stormwater collection system. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-182. - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-183. - Illicit discharge prohibitions and exceptions. 
(a)  General prohibitions. Except as set forth under subsection (d) of this section or in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the separate storm sewer system or to any receiving waters of the county that is not composed entirely of storm water is prohibited. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. In addition to the general prohibitions set forth in subsection (a) of this section, any discharge to the separate storm sewer system or to any receiving waters of the county containing any chemicals, petroleum products, automotive fluids of any kind, sewage, industrial waste, sediment, construction or building materials, yard waste or other waste materials, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, orders or permits, or which causes or contributes to a violation of state water quality standards contained in the applicable Florida Administrative Code, in the waters of the United States, is prohibited. 
(c)  Prohibition of illegal discharges. Throwing, draining, or otherwise discharging, causing, or permitting others under its one's control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city's municipal separate stormwater system any liquids, solids or waters containing any wastewater, pollutants or hazardous materials other than stormwater is prohibited. 
(d)  Exceptions to the prohibition of illegal discharges. The following are exceptions to the illegal discharge prohibition: 
(1)  Discharges and releases from the following sources: 
Potable water line flushing; 
Landscape irrigation; 
Diverted stream flows; 
Rising ground waters; 
Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration; 
Uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
Discharges from potable water sources; 
Building foundation drains; 
Air conditioning condensation; 
Irrigation water; 
Natural springs; 
Water from crawl space pumps: 
Roof drains; 
Footing drains: 
Lawn watering; 
Individual residential car washing; 
Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street maintenance wash-down water. 
(2)  Discharges or water flow from firefighting operations or other similar discharges expressly specified in writing by the city engineer as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Discharges associated with investigatory dye-testing however this activity requires a 24-hour prior written notification to the department prior to the time of the dye test. 
(4)  Discharges of non-stormwater permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-184. - Illicit connections prohibition. 
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sanitary sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article shall be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the county sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-185. - Construction site discharges. 
Construction sites must be contained to the maximum extent practicable using BMPs to prevent vehicle track out, accidental discharge or run-off of construction materials, including but not limited to sediment, mud, soil, sand, rubble, concrete, or any other building or site materials. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-186. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
(a)  Submission of notice of intent to city. 
(1)  Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(2)  The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent to the city at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(3)  The copy of the notice of intent shall be delivered to the city either in person, by US Postal Service Registered Mail, or by FedEx/UPS, or other express, registered delivery and sent to the following mailing address: 
City of Seminole 
Office of the City Manager 
9199 - 113th Street N. 
Seminole, FL 33772 
(4)  A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the city. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-187. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry, inspection and sampling. The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with the requirements this article. 
(1)  If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The city has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow quantity and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the city reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(b)  Search warrants. The city may seek a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction if the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and city can demonstrate probable cause to believe that: 
(1)  There may be a violation of this article; or 
(2)  There is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-188. - Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
The city will establish and implement best management practices (BMPs) requirements for all activities, operations, and/or facilities within the city which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drainage system, or waters of the United States. 
The owner or operator of such activity, operation, or facility shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal local storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. 
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid Florida DEP issued NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with commercial or industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater management plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-189. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the department in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the department within two business days of the phone notice, if the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrent. Such records shall be retained for at least ten years. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-190. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek reimbursement of abatement costs as outlined in this article. 
(b)  Warning notice. When the city finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the city may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieve the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a warning notice. 
(c)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within five business days of service of notice of violation; and 
g.  A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be done by city forces or by a city contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(2)  Such notice of violation may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of a fine to cover actual administrative and remediation costs; and. 
f.  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(d)  Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and other remedies authorized by this article, the city may impose upon a violator one or more alternative compensatory actions such as, but not limited to, storm drain inlet stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, watercourse and/or drainage retention area cleanup, etc. 
(e)  Suspension of MS4 access. 
(1)  Emergency cease and desist orders: When the city finds that any person has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the person's violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the city may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to: 
a.  Promptly comply with all requirements of this article; and 
b.  Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
c.  Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. 
(2)  A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city within five business days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. 
(3)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(4)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the city for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city. 
(f)  City action. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other utility services. The city may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this article. 
(g)  Code enforcement. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within five business days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate, after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city seek a fine to be imposed pursuant to: 
(1)  The city code enforcement special magistrate process, pursuant to F.S. ch. 162 and chapter 2, City Code of Ordinances, with such fine not to exceed $250.00 per day for a first violation and shall not exceed $500.00 per day for a repeat violation, and, in addition, may include all costs of repairs incurred by the city. However, if a code enforcement special magistrate finds the violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may impose a fine not to exceed $5,000.00 per violation. 
a.  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the code enforcement special magistrate shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The gravity of the violation: 
2.  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
3.  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(h)  Civil penalties The city council instituting a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to establish liability and to recover damages for any pollution, or any degradation, alteration, or elimination, of or to the air, water, soil, natural resources, or animal or plant life of the county, caused by any violation of the ordinances, rules, or regulations adopted by the city council and to impose and recover a civil penalty for each such violation in an amount of not more than $5,000.00 for each offense. Each day during any portion of which such violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. 
A person who causes pollution or degradation, alteration, or elimination of or to the air, water, soil, natural resources, or animal or plant life of the city is liable to the city for such damages and the reasonable costs and expenses that the city incurs in investigating the source of the pollution or damage, in restoring the air, water, or animal or plant communities to their former condition, and in enforcing this article, whether by consent order, civil action, or otherwise. 
Whenever two or more persons cause pollution or damage to the air, water, soil, natural resources, or animal or plant life of the county in violation of any ordinance, rule, or regulation adopted by the board so that the damage is indivisible, each violator is jointly and severally liable for such damage and for the reasonable costs and expenses incurred in investigating the source of discharge or damage, in controlling and abating the source and the pollutant, and in restoring the air, water, or property, including the animal, plant, and aquatic life, to its former condition: however, if the damage is divisible and may be attributed to a particular violator or violators, each violator is liable only for the damage attributable to his violation. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-191. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation under the provisions of this article may appeal the determination of the city. The notice of appeal must be submitted in writing to the city manager and said appeal shall be forwarded to the code enforcement special magistrate within five business days from the date of the notice of appeal. A hearing on the appeal before the code enforcement special magistrate shall take place within 21 business days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the code enforcement special magistrate shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-192. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 calendar days of the decision of the code enforcement special magistrate upholding the decision of the city, then representatives of the city shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city employees or a city designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-193. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
Within 15 business days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may tile a written protest to the city manager objecting to the amount of the assessment within 15 business days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the city or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of that allowed by state law per annum shall be assessed on the outstanding balance beginning on the thirtieth day following discovery of the violation. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-194. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-195. - Ownership and maintenance responsibilities. 
Nothing in this article shall affect the ownership and/or maintenance responsibilities of individual storm drainage system components within the city. Privately-owned stormwater system components within the city, including privately-owned drainage retention areas, shall remain privately-owned and maintained until such time as a legal instrument is executed transferring such ownership and/or maintenance responsibility. Publicly-owned stormwater system components within the city, including publicly-owned drainage retention areas, shall remain owned and maintained by the city, county or state authority until such time as a legal instrument is executed transferring such ownership and/or maintenance responsibility. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Sec. 18-196. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. The city may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including costs associated with obtaining water quality and other samples and laboratory testing expenses. 
( Ord. No. 08-2014 , § 1, 10-14-14)  
Chapter 20 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Fireworks. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the use, display, sale and storage of fireworks and pyrotechnics in the City of Seminole and to provide requirements for the issuance of permits for the use, display, sale and storage of fireworks and pyrotechnics. 
(2)  Definitions. 
(a)  Fireworks are any combustible or explosive composition or substance or combination of substances, or unless otherwise exempt, any article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation. The term includes blank cartridges and toy cannons in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, dago bombs, and any fireworks containing any explosives or flammable compound or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance. The term "fireworks" does not include the following items: 
1.  Sparklers approved by the state fire marshal's office in accordance with F.A.C. ch. 4A-50. 
2.  Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion. 
3.  Snake or glow worm, which is a pressed pellet of not more than ten grams of pyrotechnic composition that produces a large, snakelike ash that expands in length as the pellet burns and that does not contain mercuric thiocyanate. 
4.  Smoke device, which is a tube or sphere containing not more than ten grams of pyrotechnic composition that, upon burning, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect. 
5.  Trick noisemaker, which is a device that produces a small report intended to surprise the user and includes: 
a.  Party popper: A small plastic or paper device containing not more than 16 milligrams of explosive composition that is friction sensitive and ignited by pulling a string protruding from the device that expels a paper streamer and produces a small report. 
b.  Booby trap: A small tube with a string protruding from both ends containing not more than 16 milligrams of explosive compound and ignited by pulling the ends of the string that produces a small report. 
c.  Snapper: A small paper-wrapped device containing not more than four milligrams of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand that, when dropped, explodes, producing a small report. A snapper may not contain more than 250 milligrams of total sand and explosive composition. 
d.  Cigarette load: A small wooden peg that has been coated with not more than 16 milligrams of explosive or pyrotechnic composition that, upon ignition of a cigarette containing one of the pegs, produces a small report. 
e.  Auto burglar alarm: A tube containing not more than ten grams of pyrotechnic composition that produces a loud whistle or smoke when ignited and is ignited by use of a squib. A small quantity of explosives not exceeding 50 milligrams may also be used to produce a small report. 
f.  Sparkler: A device which emits showers of sparks upon burning, does not contain any explosive compound, does not detonate or explode, is hand-held or ground-based, cannot propel itself through the air, and contains not more than 100 grams of chemical compound which produces sparks upon burning. If a sparkler or item similar to a sparkler does not appear on the state fire marshal's "List of Approved Sparklers," it will be considered a firework. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as applying to the manufacture, storage, sale, or use of signals necessary for the safe operation of railroads or other classes of public or private transportation, nor applying to the military or naval forces of the United States or of this state, or to peace officers. Nothing in this section shall be construed as forbidding the sale and use of blank cartridges for ceremonial, theatrical or athletic events. 
(3)  Private use and public display of fireworks. 
(a)  No person or entity can use, display, explode, sell, offer for sale, or store fireworks or pyrotechnics in the City of Seminole without first obtaining a permit from the City of Seminole. 
(b)  No person or entity can engage in the public display of fireworks or pyrotechnics without first obtaining a permit from the City of Seminole. 
(c)  No person or entity shall permit the storage of fireworks or pyrotechnic materials without obtaining a permit from the City of Seminole for the storage of said items. 
(d)  No person or entity shall store or permit the storage of more than ten pounds of sparklers without first obtaining a permit from the City of Seminole for such activity. 
(e)  No person or entity shall permit the retail seasonal storage of any amounts of sparklers without first obtaining a permit from the City of Seminole. 
(f)  Seasonal retailers who wish to store any amount of sparklers shall first obtain a permit from the City of Seminole for such activity. 
(4)  Permits. 
(a)  Application requirements. 
1.  An application for a permit to operate a display of fireworks or pyrotechnics in accordance with this section shall be made with the fire chief at least 15 days prior to the scheduled date of the event. The application shall be on a form prepared and approved by the City of Seminole Fire Chief. 
2.  The application submitted by any applicant must contain the following information: 
a.  The name of the individual, group or organization sponsoring the fireworks/pyrotechnics display, together with the names of persons actually in charge of the firing of the display. 
b.  A certificate of public liability insurance, naming the City of Seminole as a certificate holder, in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 combined single limits bodily injury and property damage with no aggregate. 
c.  The date and time the scheduled display. 
d.  The exact location planned for the fireworks or pyrotechnics display. 
e.  The approximate number and kinds of fireworks or pyrotechnics to be discharged. 
f.  The manner and place of storage of the fireworks or pyrotechnics prior to delivery and discharge at the display site. 
g.  A detailed site diagram of the grounds, or buildings where the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks/pyrotechnics are to be discharged, the location of all buildings, highways and other lines of communication, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, the location of other possible overhead obstructions. 
h.  Any further information as the fire chief may reasonably require to evaluate the level of public safety and protection for the display. 
(b)  Permit approval. 
1.  All applications will be reviewed to determine if the requirements of this section have been met. Each proposed location will be inspected to determine if the location complies with the regulations for the display of fireworks or pyrotechnics. 
2.  The fire chief or designee will determine if the display, as proposed by the applicant, will provide an acceptable degree of life safety based upon the terrain, available fire protection features or other requirements deemed appropriate. 
3.  The fire chief, or designee may, as a condition of the permit, require on-site uniformed public safety personnel, specialized fire protection equipment, law enforcement or security personnel, or extra suppression equipment. Any costs incurred to comply with the conditions of the permit will be the responsibility of the applicant. 
4.  A permit may be revoked at any time if the applicant fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
5.  A permit granted in accordance with this section is not transferable. 
(c)  Permit fees. Permit fees for sales, storage, use, or display of fireworks shall be as set forth by resolution of the City Council, City of Seminole, Pinellas County, Florida. 
(5)  Penalties and enforcement. Any person, entity, or any agent thereof, who violates any provision of this section may be subject to criminal sanction in accordance with F.S. Ch. 791. Each violation of this section constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. Responsibility for the enforcement of this section lies with the fire chief or designee, and the Pinellas County Sheriff's Department. In the event fireworks are displayed in violation of this section, the fire chief or designee may seize, cause to be seized, take or remove the illegal items at the owner's expense and seek criminal action against the violator as appropriate. It will be the responsibility of the fire chief or designee to insure compliance with respect to building code requirements applicable to the display, sale, storage and manufacture of fireworks, pyrotechnics, and sparklers. Nothing in this section may prevent the city from bringing a civil action or imposing civil penalties upon a violator in an appropriate case. 
(Ord. No. 5-99, §§ 1—5, 4-27-99) 
State Law reference— Sale of fireworks, F.S. ch. 791.  
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - State misdemeanor acts adopted, penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commit, within the limits of the city, any act that is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. The commission of such acts are prohibited. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of violating any act as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be punished by the same penalty as provided by the laws of the state, but in no case shall such penalty exceed that provided in section 1-15. 
Case Law reference— A municipality may enact an ordinance which creates an offense against municipal law for the same act that constitutes an offense against state law. Jaramillo v. City of Homestead, 322 So. 2d 496 (Fla. 1975). 
A municipality by ordinance may adopt state misdemeanor statutes by specific reference or by general reference, such as that contained in an ordinance making it unlawful to commit, within city limits, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. Id. 
An adoption by general reference of a misdemeanor statute permits subsequent amendments, revisions and repeals of the laws by the state legislature to apply to the municipal ordinances. Id. 
See also Hecht v. Shaw, 112 Fla. 762, 151 So. 333 (1933); McFarland v. Roberts, 74 So. 2d 88 (Fla. 1954); and State v. Smith, 189 So. 2d 846 (Fla. 4th D.C.A. 1966). 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083; discharging firearms in public, F.S. § 790.15. See also Fla. Stats. general index under heading "Fines and Civil Penalties" for listing of state law misdemeanors.  
Secs. 22-2—22-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES, PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-2015 , §§ 1—4, adopted Feb. 24, 2015, set out provisions adding §§ 22-1—22-4. To preserve the existing § 22-1, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been included as herein as Art. II, §§ 22-21—22-24. 
 
Sec. 22-21. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of the city to promote the public health, safety, general welfare, aesthetics, property values, and to control nuisances, by providing for the limitation and control of certain enumerated activities, acts, or practices. 
( Ord. No. 01-2015 , § 1, 2-24-15)  
Sec. 22-22. - Prohibited activity, act, or practice subject to civil citation/fine. 
The following activities, acts or practices are hereby declared to be nuisances, are therefore prohibited within the city limits, and are considered as violations of the Code. Said violations may be subject to a civil citation/ticket/fine to be issued only by a sworn law enforcement officer, for the following enumerated offenses: 
(1)  Human urination or defecation in public. 
(2)  Sleeping in a public place, but does not include camping on private property with the permission of the property owner, or within a public lodging establishment. 
(3)  Removing wildlife, including fish, from posted city property. 
(4)  Skateboarding on city property, when posted "No Skateboarding". 
(5)  Dog not on leash when on city property, when city property is so posted. 
(6)  Itinerant vending, when not part of a special event permit. 
(7)  Possession of an open container of alcohol off of private property, when not part of a city council approved special event. 
(8)  Commercial soliciting in residential areas without a current county home solicitation permit or city solicitation permit, as may be applicable. 
(9)  Selling, or advertising for sale, vehicles, goods, or services, from an abandoned nonresidential property, or from an abandoned residential property, or from within the public right-of-way. 
(10)  Dog at large, after a first notice to owner. 
(11)  Dog owner, or dog custodian/agent, not picking up the dog's waste when the dog's waste is not deposited on the dog owner's, or dog custodian/agent's, property. 
(12)  Allowing or permitting the entry into a public or private roadway or into a public or private waterway/waterbody of grass cuttings, chemicals (not including fertilizer legally applied on private/public property or used to treat/maintain a swimming pool), paint, oil, commercial car wash runoff, or commercial pressure washing runoff. 
(13)  Construction site related excavation/fill, soil, or debris/material entering into a public or private roadway, a public or private waterway/waterbody, or onto adjacent, non-construction related property. 
(14)  Inoperable vehicle parked or stored within the public right-of-way. 
(15)  Blocking or obstructing a sidewalk located within a publicly owned or publically dedicated right-of-way, including the sidewalk portion of a driveway approach, with a vehicle, vessel, trailer, semi-trailer, or commercial vehicle. 
(16)  In residential zoning districts, the overnight parking, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within a public right-of-way, of a commercial vehicle, a trailer, a vessel, a piece of construction equipment when not used as part of a current building permitted project, a cargo vehicle rated in excess of three-fourths ton carrying capacity, a privately owned fire engine, a privately owned school bus or passenger bus, a bucket truck, or any other similar or like vehicle. 
(17)  In residential zoning districts, when not stored or parked within a fully enclosed structure, the overnight parking on private property, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., of a privately owned fire engine, a privately owned school bus or passenger bus, a bucket truck, or any other similar or like vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 01-2015 , § 2, 2-24-15)  
Sec. 22-23. - Prohibited activity, act or practice subject to code enforcement under chapter 2 of the City Code. 
The activities, acts or practices listed in section 22-22 are hereby prohibited within the city limits and may be subject to code enforcement per chapter 2 of the City Code through the special magistrate code enforcement process. 
( Ord. No. 01-2015 , § 3, 2-24-15)  
Sec. 22-24. - Citation/fine authority and schedule. 
A citation/fine levied by a sworn law enforcement officer for a violation of section 22-22 shall be against the party or parties in violation of section 22-22, or against the registrant or registrants of a vehicle or property in violation of section 22-22, as me be applicable to the enumerated violation. 
The citation/fine levied for each offense resulting from a civil infraction/ticket issued by a sworn law enforcement officer shall be $25.00. 
( Ord. No. 01-2015 , § 4, 2-24-15)  
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and certain other public property, ch. 38. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Liability for damages. 
In addition to the penalty provided in section 1-15, any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to liability for damages resulting from such violations. 
(Code 1991, § 28-123)  
Secs. 26-2—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKS 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Purpose. 
The city parks are recreational facilities for public use and enjoyment. This article is designed to ensure such use and enjoyment, the safety of persons within the parks, and the protection and preservation of park areas and facilities. 
(Code 1991, § 28-111)  
Sec. 26-32. - Administrative rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall publish administrative rules and regulations to carry out the purposes of this article. Such rules and regulations shall not be more restrictive than this article. 
(Code 1991, § 28-112) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 26-33. - Reservation of park facilities; no admission fee. 
Park facilities are normally available on the basis of first come, first served; however, park facilities may be reserved not less than 48 hours in advance by persons or groups. No admission fee may be charged for admission to the park except for special events with the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1991, § 28-113)  
Sec. 26-34. - Operation of vehicles. 
All vehicles, including bicycles, shall be operated only on roadways unless otherwise instructed by park personnel or law enforcement officers. Vehicle speeds on park roadways shall not exceed five miles per hour. All vehicles, except bicycles, shall be parked only in established parking areas unless otherwise instructed by park personnel or law enforcement officers. Wheelchairs and child carriages are exempted from these requirements. 
(Code 1991, § 28-114)  
Sec. 26-35. - Fires for cooking. 
Fires are permitted only in fireplaces or cooking grills. All fires and burning coals shall be extinguished by the user before leaving the area. 
(Code 1991, § 28-115)  
Sec. 26-36. - Control of animals brought into park. 
No animals except household pets under appropriate control for the species shall be brought into the park. Reptiles or animals categorized as barnyard (e.g., goats, cattle, horses, etc.) are specifically not permitted in the park. Dogs must be kept on a secured leash at all times. Fecal matter deposited by animals shall be removed from the park grounds or deposited in waste receptacles by the person having the animal in the park. 
(Code 1991, § 28-118)  
Sec. 26-37. - Injuring park plant life, facilities. 
Trees, shrubs and plant life in parks shall be protected. No person shall do anything that may deface, injure or destroy park facilities or natural features, including plant and animal life. 
(Code 1991, § 28-120)  
Sec. 26-38. - Disposal of refuse. 
All refuse, waste and trash will be placed in receptacles provided in the park area or will be carried from the park by the user for disposal elsewhere. 
(Code 1991, § 28-121) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 34.  
Sec. 26-39. - Permit required for nonrecreational use of facilities; conditions. 
Persons or groups desiring to use park facilities for other than recreational uses, including fund-raising benefits by various means, are required to obtain a written permit from the city manager. If in the judgment of the city manager the purpose is in the public interest and the proposed use will not prevent the simultaneous use of park facilities by other patrons, the city manager may issue a permit clearly defining the permissible activity in scope, time and manner. The using group will be responsible for cleaning up and disposing of all refuse or debris caused by its activity. A cash bond may be required prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Code 1991, § 28-122)  
Secs. 26-40—26-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RECREATION AREAS 
 
Sec. 26-71. - Watercraft. 
(a)  Prohibited activities. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to operate any combustible engine water vehicle upon the lakes, waterways, and retention ponds in the city, with the exception of Lake Seminole and navigable waterways such as Long Bayou, Cross Bayou and the Intracoastal Waterway. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to operate any watercraft at a rate of speed which creates waves or a wake capable of causing, or which does cause, danger or injury to any person in or along a waterway or damage, or the possibility of damage, to docks, seawalls, watercraft, or other personal property. 
(b)  Signs or markers. The city manager may cause to be placed and maintained either on land or water such signs, notices, signal buoys, markers, or control devices as they may deem necessary to carry out the provisions of this article or to secure public safety and the orderly use of the lakes, waterways and retention ponds in the city. 
(c)  Penalties. The violation of, or failure to comply with this article shall constitute an offense against the city and the offender, upon conviction, is subject to punishment as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1991, § 28-119; Ord. No. 6-2004, § 1, 4-12-04)  
Chapter 30 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
County code cross reference— Peddlers and solicitors, § 42.211 et seq. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and certain other public property, ch. 38; registration of canvassers, § 42-169. 
State Law reference— Home solicitation sales, F.S. § 501.021 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable includes but is not limited to groups such as philanthropic, social service, benevolent, patriotic, civic, educational or religious organizations. 
Noncharitable includes canvassers, solicitors or salesmen who do not fall into the charitable category. 
Public rights-of-way includes but is not necessarily limited to streets, curbs, intersections, median strips or any islands between lanes of traffic. 
Soliciting and solicitation include but are not limited to advertising or selling, requesting donation of any kind, political support or contributions of any kind or selling goods of any kind either for money or in exchange for merchandise or service, or advertising any goods, wares or merchandise or accepting orders for same. 
Solicitor means a person who goes throughout the city for the purpose of asking for gifts, donations, political support or contributions; or for the purpose of selling goods or services; also begging. 
(Code 1991, §§ 30-101, 30-102) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-2. - Prohibitions. 
Peddling and soliciting on public property is prohibited.  
Sec. 30-3. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to route deliverymen who make deliveries on a regular periodic basis to regular customers and whose solicitation is only incidental to their regular deliveries, such as milk deliveries, newspaper deliveries, utility billing deliveries. 
(Code 1991, § 30-108)  
Secs. 30-4—30-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 30-36. - Required. 
No person shall engage in soliciting and/or canvassing within the city limits until he has registered with the city and obtained a permit; and such registration shall include the information as required by the city, including proof of county or state registration, if applicable. 
(Code 1991, § 30-103) 
State Law reference— Registration required for certain home solicitation, F.S. § 501.021 et seq.  
Sec. 30-37. - Issuance. 
(a)  Noncharitable. Permits shall be issued if proof is provided that the applicant has in his possession a county permit. Information provided on the application shall show that the applicant has not been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. The noncharitable permit issued shall be good for the period stated therein. Every solicitor shall carry on his person an identification card as credentials while engaging in soliciting and shall display same to any person who demands same while solicitor is so engaged. 
(b)  Charitable. A permit shall be automatically issued if the applicant has obtained a charitable solicitation permit from the county. 
(c)  Approval of city clerk. All permits are issued upon approval of the city clerk. 
(Code 1991, § 30-104)  
Sec. 30-38. - Fees. 
The fees on file in the city clerk's office shall be collected by the licensing officer prior to issuance of a noncharitable permit, which fees are nonrefundable. Such fees shall be charged to cover the cost of investigation and processing of the application. 
(Code 1991, § 30-105)  
Sec. 30-39. - Revocation. 
The city clerk or his designated agents shall revoke any permit issued under this article if he finds that the permittee has given false information or has knowingly withheld information in obtaining the permit or upon any violation of this article. A permit shall be revoked if persons make or perpetrate misstatements, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation. A permit shall be revoked if complaints are received by the city clerk or his designated agent that high-pressure salesmanship or any form of harassment are being exercised by the solicitor. 
(Code 1991, § 30-106)  
Sec. 30-40. - Prohibited acts. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Enter into or upon premises within the city under false pretenses to solicit. 
(2)  Remain in or on any premises after the owner or occupant has requested any such person to leave. 
(3)  Enter upon premises where a "No Soliciting" sign is displayed. 
(4)  Engage in the practice of soliciting in the city without a permit as provided in this article. 
(5)  Engage in the practice of soliciting while in or on a public right-of-way within the city. 
(Code 1991, § 30-107)  
Sec. 30-41. - Time for solicitations. 
No solicitations within the city shall be made except within the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 1991, § 30-109)  
Chapter 34 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 27-2008, adopted December 9, 2008, repealed former Ch. 34 and enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 34 to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 34 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 18; disposal of refuse in parks, § 26-38. 
State Law reference— Solid waste generally, F.S. § 403.702 et seq.; local government solid waste responsibilities, F.S. § 403.706; Florida Litter Law, F.S. § 404.413. 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Powers and adoption of contract. 
There is hereby created, pursuant to the authority of F.S. § 166.021(6), a municipal solid waste contract arrangement within the limits of the City of Seminole. The city council through a contract arrangement shall have all of the powers granted by law to the city for providing residential and non-residential waste collection and disposal, including without limiting the generality of the foregoing power, the following: 
(1)  To make contractual arrangements with any public, private, or municipal firm, person, or corporation for the furnishing of residential, commercial mobile home park, non-residential waste, and construction/demolition site collection and disposal within the city, or for any matter proper to effectuate the purposes of the city. The term "contractual arrangements" includes the power to grant exclusive franchises for residential and non-residential waste collection; 
(2)  To make and adopt, by resolution of the governing body, rules and regulations governing the collection and disposal of residential, commercial mobile home park, and non-residential waste within the city; 
(3)  To make and enter into all contracts and agreements as the governing body, in its discretion, may determine to be necessary or incidental to the performance of its duties and to the execution of its powers under this article; and 
(4)  To do all acts necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly granted in this article. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the solid waste contract arrangement is to promote the common interest of the people of Seminole by establishing, in this chapter and through separate contract agreements, rules, regulations and procedures for the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste materials from residential, commercial mobile home park, and non-residential units and property, and construction/demolition sites and to promote the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens and residents of Seminole by providing adequate waste collection and disposal services through the regulated services of a contractor(s) chosen because of demonstrated qualifications to provide such services to the citizens of Seminole by the most economical means. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Ashes. The residue from burned material. 
Biohazardous waste. Any solid waste or liquid waste which may present a threat of infection to humans. The term includes, but is not limited to, non-liquid human tissue and body parts; laboratory and veterinary waste which contain human disease causing agents; used disposable sharps; human blood, and human body products and body fluids; and other materials which in the opinion of the department of health and rehabilitative services represent a significant risk of infection to persons outside the generating facility. 
Bulky wastes. Large discarded items placed for disposal such as large boxes, barrels, crates, appliances, and large furniture but not including garden and yard trash and special waste items. 
Building materials. Any material such as lumber, brick, mortar, plaster, cement, wallboard, or other substances accumulated as a result of construction of a new building, demolition or removal of an existing structure, or generated from repairs or additions to existing buildings. 
City. The city, a Florida municipal corporation, acting through the city council or city manager or city representative, as the case may be. 
City representative. The employee or employees designated by the city manager to represent the city in the administration and supervision of this chapter. 
Collectable. Waste material not specified or specifically excluded herein. 
Collection point. The location where refuse is placed for pickup and haulage by the contractor. 
Commercial units. Identified as, but not limited to all businesses, office buildings, stores, filling stations, motels, laundries, hotels, public buildings, food service, lodging establishments, service establishments, light industry, heavy industry, schools, churches, clubs, hospitals and nursing homes. 
Commercial trash. Any and all accumulations of paper, rags, excelsior, wooden, paper or cardboard boxes or containers, sweepings, furniture, appliances, and other accumulations not included under the definition of refuse, generated by the operation of stores, offices, public buildings and other business places. Commercial trash shall also include all trash placed in public receptacles in public places for collection as provided by this chapter. 
Compost pile. A contained decomposing pile, consisting of grass clippings, tree and shrub trimmings, and other vegetative matter. 
Construction and demolition sites. A property, public or private, where a new structure is being erected, an existing structure demolished or moved, or where renovation or repair of an existing structure is taking place. 
Containers. 
(1)  Portable packing unit. A metal container not exceeding 4,500 pounds gross weight with four to six cubic yards capacity with self-packing mechanisms. 
(2)  Refuse container. 
a.  Plastic or galvanized metal container(s) provided by the owner, occupant, lessee, or tenant of a premise, of a type commonly sold as garbage/trash cans and of a capacity not greater than 32 gallons or less than ten gallons, which shall be free of jagged or sharp edges and shall be of impervious material, provided with a tight-fitting cover suitable to protect the contents from flies, insects, rats and other animals, fitted with two handles or a bail by which it may be lifted and which shall not have any inside structures such as inside bands or reinforcing angles or anything within that would prevent the free discharge of the contents. Such container may include plastic or paper disposable bags of substantial strength and of a quality approved by the city representative as suitable for containing refuse, a waterproof bag liner which can be safely and securely closed, and which is of a type approved by the city representative. 
b.  Metal containers varying in size from two to eight cubic yards in capacity normally used by commercial operations and capable of being serviced by a front-loading refuse collection vehicle (bulk container). 
(3)  Roll-off bulk container. A unit varying in capacity from 15 to 40 cubic yards which is used for collecting, storing, and transporting building materials. The unit may be of the open or enclosed variety. The distinguishing feature of the detachable container is that it is picked up by a specially equipped truck and becomes an integral part of the truck for transporting waste material to the disposal site. 
Cover. Any device, equipment, close-fitting tarpaulin, chain, rope, wire, or line used on vehicles or containers to prevent the contents of the container or any part of the vehicle's load from blowing, leaking, falling, or otherwise escaping. 
Curbside. That area within six feet from the known edge of the road on improved lots. Curbside also includes that are directly adjacent to residential units that may be unimproved. 
Disposal costs. The "tipping fees or landfill costs charged to the contractor by others for disposal of the garbage, refuse and industrial wastes collected by the contractor. 
Dump. To discard, throw, place, deposit or dispose of. 
Garbage. The byproduct of animal, fruit or vegetable matter than attends the preparation, use, cooking, and dealing in, or storage of, meats, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables, and any other matter, of any nature whatsoever which is subject to decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious and offensive gases or odors, or which, during or after decay may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects or rodents and/or to the germ carrying insects; bottles, cans, or other food containers which due to their ability to retain water may serve as a breeding place for mosquitoes or other water breeding insects. Human body wastes are excluded. 
Garbage bag. Plastic or paper disposable bags of substantial strength and of a quality approved by the city manager or city representative as suitable for containing refuse. 
Garden and yard trash (fine trash). Any and all accumulations of grass, palm fronds, leaves, branches, shrubs, vines, and other similar items generated by the maintenance of lawns, shrubs, gardens and trees. 
Hazardous waste. Wastes classified as hazardous under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC 1002, as amended, or under regulations promulgated thereunder or defined as hazardous under the Fla. Admin. Code Ch. 17-730. 
Household hazardous waste. Household and outdoor chemicals including but not limited to: Cleansers, fluorescent bulbs, furniture polish, household batteries, mercury thermometers, mercury thermostats, moth balls, nail polish or remover, paint (latex or oil), paint removers & thinners, shoe polish, solvents, automotive fluids such as antifreeze or brake fluid, fertilizers, flares, fungicides, gasoline, herbicides, insecticides, kerosene, lighter fluid and pesticides; and the following list of household electronics: camcorders, cassette players, CD players, cell phones, computers (including monitor, keyboard, CPU and mouse), computer accessories such as external drives, or power supplies, copy machines, digital cameras, DVD players, Fax machines, GPS units, laptop computers, marine depth finders, microwave ovens, pagers, PDAs, printer, projector, radios, scanners, speakers, stereos, telephones, televisions, toner cartridges, typewriters (electric), VCRs, video game players, and wireless devices. An electronic device is considered household hazardous waste if it contains any of the following: digital display, circuit board, or a rechargeable battery. 
Household trash. Any unused or abandoned tangible item such as paper, magazines, packaging, containers, sweepings, and all other accumulations of a nature other than garbage or garden and yard trash, which are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of a residence, including but not limited to all small appliances, small furniture, yard toys, and materials that accumulate as a result of residential do-it-yourself building projects or building alterations. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "household trash" shall not include abandoned or junked automobiles and parts thereof. Waste generated by building contractors, subcontractors, or tree surgeons rendering professional services is not to be considered as household trash. 
Industrial wastes. Any and all debris and waste products generated by canning, manufacturing, food processing (except restaurants), land clearing, building construction or alteration (except residential do-it-yourself projects) and public works type construction projects whether performed by a governmental unit or by contract. 
Junked or abandoned property. Wrecked or derelict property having no value other than nominal salvage value, if any, and shall include, but not be limited to, rusted, wrecked, inoperative, or partially dismantled boats, machinery, refrigerators, plumbing fixtures, furniture, and any other similar article which has no value other than nominal salvage value, if any, and which has been left abandoned and unprotected from the elements. 
Litter. Any can, bottle, box, container, paper, tobacco product, tire, inoperable appliance, mechanical equipment, tool, machinery, motor vehicle or motor vehicle part, vessel, aircraft, farm machinery or equipment, sewage from a vessel, sludge from a waste treatment facility, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, or substance in any form resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, agricultural or governmental operations, and building or construction materials and shall include all refuse. 
Litter receptacle. A container of a material and capacity as provided in this chapter and used as a depository for litter, refuse, commercial trash, garbage, garden and yard trash, household trash, industrial waste, junked or abandoned property, tree and shrubbery trimmings. 
Littering. The act of throwing, discarding, placing, depositing, or otherwise disposing of improperly along public highways, on public or private lands, or in public waters. "Littering" shall mean the same as "dump." 
Loading and unloading areas. Spaces or areas used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping, and transporting goods, wares, commodities, and persons, including waterside docks. 
Manager. The chief administrative officer of the city or his designee. 
Mechanical container. Containers for the deposit of refuse that may be emptied by mechanical means. 
Moving violations. Sources of violations that are non-stationary, including, but not limited to, violations by or from motorists, bicyclists, pedestrians, uncovered vehicles, railroad cars, and automobiles. 
Multiple dwelling units. Any building containing 16 or more permanent dwelling units, not including motels or hotels. 
Newspaper. Any periodical generally printed on newsprint and identified as a newspaper, either delivered door to door or by the United States Postal Service. 
Parkway. That portion of the street right-of-way paralleling any public thoroughfare between the curb line and abutting property line. If ditching bisects the property and thoroughfare, the term "parkway" includes the roadside of the ditch. 
Person. An individual, firm, company, corporation, association, or other entity. 
Plant life. Any plant which has no permanent, woody stem. 
Private property. Property owned by any person as defined herein (other than public property), including but not limited to yards, grounds, driveways, entrances, or passageways, parking areas, any body of water, vacant land, or private recreational facility. 
Public property. Any area that is used or held out for use by the public whether owned or operated by public or private interests including but not limited to highways, streets, alleys, parks, recreational areas, parking lots, sidewalks, medians, lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, canals, ditches, or other bodies of water. 
Quasi-public property. Property privately owned but open to the public, such as parking lots, for commercial, institutional, recreational, industrial, professional, educational and religious uses. 
Recyclable materials. Material which can be removed from the solid waste stream and reused in manufacturing, agriculture, power production or other processes and which for the purpose of this chapter are defined as: 
(1)  Newspaper (including inserts). 
(2)  Glass (all unbroken, clear, brown, and green glass containers). Blue and flat glass, window glass, dishes, crockery and other types of ceramics are expressly excluded from this definition. 
(3)  Metal cans (both aluminum and bimetal). 
(4)  Plastic containers HDPE (high density polyethylene, e.g., milk containers), and PET (polyethylene terephthalate, e.g., beverage containers, two-liter soda bottles only). Additional plastics may be added as the market becomes available for them. 
(5)  Aluminum foil and food containers. 
(6)  Construction and demolition debris that is specifically intended or mandated to be recycled. 
Recycling. Any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste, are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Recycling container. A plastic color-coded 11 gallon capacity container used for the storage and collection of recyclable material, or any other container identified and approved by the city manager for recyclable materials, storage and collection. 
Refuse. Garbage, garden and yard trash, household trash and commercial trash, but does not include hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, industrial waste, special waste, or recyclable materials that are separated as required herein. 
Residential unit. Any structure, shelter, trailer, or any party of a multi-dwelling building with fewer than 16 units used or constructed for use as a residence for one family. 
Solid waste. Garbage, refuse, garden and yard trash, clean debris, white goods, special waste, ashes, sludge, or other discarded materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, agriculture, governmental operations, or construction/demolition activities. 
Stationary violation. Sources of violation such as improper household and commercial trash putout, loading and unloading dock violations, construction or demolition site violations, or violations by institutions. 
Tree and shrubbery trimmings. Waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery cuttings or clippings, brush, or other debris usually created as trash from care of trees and shrubs and of a size that will not fit normal household waste disposal containers. 
Vehicles. Every device capable of being moved upon a public highway or railroad or public waterway and in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a public highway or railroad or public waterway. This shall include cars, trucks, boats, motorcycles, trains, buses, and other motorized means of conveyance. 
Waste. A useless or worthless item regarded or discarded as worthless and shall include ashes, biohazardous waste, bulky wastes, building materials, collectable, commercial trash, garbage, garden and yard trash, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, household trash, industrial wastes, junked or abandoned property, litter, plant life, recyclable materials, refuse, tree and shrubbery trimmings. 
Wire-mesh container. A functional container constructed of welded wire mesh, six inches by six inches, of sufficient size to contain on-site refuse. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-4. - Solid waste mandatory collection. 
(a)  All owners and/or tenants, agents, lessors, lessees, operators, of residential units, multiple-dwelling units, commercial units, and construction/demolition sites, occupied or unoccupied, operating and non-operating, shall be required to receive solid waste collection services and to subscribe and pay for the solid waste collection services provided for by the City of Seminole solid waste collection agent as part of an exclusive contract with the City of Seminole. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste containers, and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance, and disposal as shall be necessary, and to change and to modify the same, after notice as required by law, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-5. - Residential requirements. 
(a)  Maintenance of private property. All owners and/or tenants, agents, lessors, lessees, or occupants of property within the city shall maintain their property in a clean and litter-free condition including sidewalks, grass strips, and contiguous alleys, curbs, and rights-of-way to the edge of the pavement on any public street. 
(b)  Receptacles. It shall be the responsibility of the owners or occupants of all residential units to provide receptacles of sufficient size and in sufficient number to accommodate such garbage and trash as may accumulate. All receptacles designed to accommodate garbage or trash shall be kept clean, sanitary, tightly covered and in a good state of repair. In residential areas yard clippings from trees, shrubs, bushes and the like need not be deposited in receptacles, but may be bound into bundles; however, these bundles shall not exceed 48 inches × 30 inches × 30 inches. Containerized garbage, trash and refuse shall not weigh in excess of 60 pounds, gross weight. 
(c)  Placement. In residential areas where garbage and trash are collected from containers placed at curbside, it shall be unlawful to place such containers or bundled yard clippings at the curbside prior to 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding the day of collection. On the day of collection, all containers shall be removed from curbside not later than 9:00 p.m. 
Dumpster waste containers are not to be placed by private persons on city property, including streets, sidewalks and other rights-of-way. 
(d)  Size of containers. It shall be the responsibility of the city manager and the representative of the garbage collection contractor to designate the size of the containers to be used by all business, industrial and institutional establishments, including but not limited to stores, mobile home parks, motels, apartments, offices, markets, restaurants, and other commercial and non-residential establishments. It shall be the responsibility of the garbage collection contractor to ensure that containers supplied by the contractor are kept in a good state of repair. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to ensure that the containers are kept clean, sanitary and tightly covered at all times. 
(e)  Sweeping. No person shall sweep into or deposit on any street or sidewalk the accumulation of litter from any property or building. 
(f)  Hazardous household waste. Other than empty household chemical containers, household hazardous waste shall not be placed for collection. 
(g)  Prohibition of public nuisance. The accumulation of refuse within the city to the extent that such accumulation of refuse causes infestation by rodents or other wild animals, or breeding of mosquitoes and vermin, or threatens or endangers the public health, or adversely affects adjacent property is declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. A violation of this provision is subject to the enforcement provisions of this chapter and also the provisions of F.S. §§ 93.01 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-6. - Commercial, business, and institutional requirements. 
(a)  Commercial containerization. All commercial, business, and institutional establishments shall store their trash in containers so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about their establishment. Approved methods of containerization include refuse cans with lids, bulk or metal containers, portable packing units, and roll-off containers. All containers must have lids or covers. Covers must be kept closed at all times. Spillage and overflow shall be immediately cleaned up by the owner, occupant, or lessee of the business or commercial establishment. 
(b)  Maintenance of premises. All owners and/or tenants, agents, lessors, lessees, operators or occupants of a commercial, business, or institutional establishment shall maintain their property in a clean and litter-free manner, including sidewalks, parking lots, refuse containers, grass strips, and contiguous alleys, curbs, or rights-of-way up to the edge of the pavement of any public street. No person shall sweep into or deposit on any street or on any sidewalk the accumulation of litter from any building or property. 
(c)  Litter receptacles. All owners and/or tenants, agents, lessors, lessees, operators or occupants of a business, commercial, or institutional establishment where public parking is provided shall provide a sufficient number of litter receptacles to adequately contain on-site refuse. Such receptacles shall be weighed or secured to prevent spillage. For new commercial construction, the total quantity, type, and placement of receptacles shall be approved by the city representative. 
(d)  Removal of litter. The removal of litter from litter receptacles placed in publicly used parking areas shall be the duty of the owner, operator, tenant, or lessees of such property. Litter receptacles shall be emptied when full. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-7. - Preparation requirements. 
(a)  Refuse. All refuse, before being placed in refuse containers for collection, shall be drained of all free liquids and shall be containerized. No person shall place in containers such material as unwrapped razor blades, broken glass or similar materials, which could cause possible injury to collection personnel. Placement of non-containerized animal or human feces for pickup is forbidden. Non-containerized animal droppings, or any form of manure, are not to be considered as garbage. 
(b)  Tree and shrubbery trimmings. All tree and shrubbery trimmings shall be of such size that they can be readily loaded by one person. Tree limbs, palm fronds, brush, and other such objects shall be bundled for pickup. All tree and shrubbery trimmings shall be cut in lengths of no greater than four feet long and four inches in diameter. No bundle shall weigh more than 60 pounds. No paper bags may be used for tree and shrubbery trimmings storage/collection. 
(c)  Garden and yard trash (fine trash). All garden and yard trash (fine trash) shall be separated from all other household refuse and recyclable materials and may stored in reusable containers acceptable to the contractor and approved by the city representative for collection. No paper bags may be used for garden and yard trash storage/collection. 
(d)  Bulk items. Bulk items such as furniture, appliances, yard toys and building materials from do-it-yourself projects, not to exceed 20 cubic yards per project, shall be placed at the curbside or beside service alley, if available. Bulk items may require special containers or pickup. 
(e)  Household trash. Household trash shall be placed in a refuse container at a single collection point within six feet of the curbside. No such refuse containers shall exceed 50 pounds in weight. No such bundle shall exceed a size four feet in length and 24 inches in diameter and a weight of 60 pounds. Refuse which was generated off the premises or which results from a business/commercial activity not located on the premises shall be properly and legally disposed of by the owner at a permitted solid waste disposal facility. 
(f)  Used oil. No person may place for refuse pickup or mix used oil with refuse nor may any person dispose of used oil in any manner which endangers the public health or welfare. Proper and legal disposal through authorized collection centers is the responsibility of the owner. 
(g)  Ashes. Ashes shall be placed in metal containers only. Ash containers shall have a capacity of ten gallons maximum and a total gross weight not to exceed 50 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-8. - Collection requirements. 
(a)  Residential mandatory collection. 
(1)  All refuse and recyclable materials shall be placed within six feet of the curb (edge of the street surface); or edge of alley; or at the rear/side door if handicapped and approved for such service by the city representative; or in circumstances where no parkway or lawn area is available, adjacent to the driveway and no further than 40 feet from the street. In all cases, all items for collection must be placed at a location accessible to collection personnel and equipment. Refuse shall not be placed in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise restrict the use of sidewalks by the general public, and shall not be placed within 15 feet of any fire hydrant nor on top or over any water meter. 
(2)  a.  All garbage and household trash shall be collected two times a week, with collection being made at least three days apart. Garden and yard trash, tree and shrubbery trimmings shall be collected one time per week. 
b.  All residents, owners and/or tenants, agents, lessors, lessees, operators, occupants of premises within the city, shall deposit refuse and recyclable materials, and the like, at the designated collection point prior to 6:00 a.m. on the scheduled day of collection, but not prior to 5:00 p.m. on the day before collection. Empty containers must be removed from curbside on the day of collection. 
(b)  Commercial mandatory collection. 
(1)  All refuse from the commercial unit shall be placed in mechanical containers for removal. All refuse mechanical containers regardless of the siting on the property, shall be screened on at least three sides by masonry wall, or wooden fencing, or other materials, with all four sides at least six feet in height, and a screened gate for the other side, as approved by the city, which renders the view of the mechanical container opaque from adjacent properties. 
(2)  No mechanical containers shall be located on any road right-of-way or parking setback. All multiple dwelling areas of 16 units or more must have a mechanical container, with a minimum size of two cubic yards, for garbage and household trash collection and disposal. No garden and yard trash, tree and shrubbery trimmings shall be placed in mechanical refuse containers together with garbage and household trash or recyclable materials. Lids on mechanical containers must be kept closed at all times; multiple dwelling units with less than 16 units may use containers emptied by mechanical means at the owner's discretion. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-9. - Construction/demolition sites. 
(a)  Refuse disposal. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, all building contractors and persons acting in the capacity of a building contractor, engaged in building or remodeling operations shall certify in writing that they shall make the necessary arrangements to provide for cleanup and legal disposal of all trash and refuse as required by this chapter. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any residential, commercial, or industrial building, both a statement from the building division that the provisions of this chapter have been complied with and verification of compliance with this chapter must be provided to the building division. 
(b)  Receptacles required. It shall be unlawful for any construction and/or demolition contractor to fail to make provision for the use of roll-off bulk containers, dump trailers, dump trucks, metal refuse containers, or anchored wire mesh container(s) on the construction/demolition site sufficient for the storage and collection of loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap material, and other trash produced by those working on the construction/demolition site. All such material shall be containerized. The number of containers required at the work site, and the frequency of disposal shall be determined by the volume of refuse produced. 
(c)  Adjacent areas. Dirt, sand, construction materials, or other debris cast or scattered upon any adjacent public or private property as a result of construction or demolition activities shall be removed by the construction/demolition site contractor no later than the end of the work day of the incident or earlier if the materials shall cause a public nuisance. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Enforcement shall occur through the building division when the site is not clean. When notified by the building division, the contractor shall have 24 hours to clean the site or all inspections may be stopped. A re-inspection fee of $50.00 shall be paid to determine compliance and to authorize inspections. The fee for a second re-inspection shall be $100.00. The fee for each subsequent re-inspection shall be $200.00. Re-inspections shall be counted based on the life of the permit. 
(2)  The presence of a container that is in violation of the city's solid waste contract shall carry the same enforcement provisions as stated above. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-10. - Acts prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, throw, discard, place or deposit litter in any manner or amount: 
(1)  In or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or any other public lands, except in containers or areas lawfully provided for litter or trash collection. When any litter is thrown or discarded from a motor vehicle, the operator or owner of the motor vehicle, or both, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  In or on any freshwater lake, river, stream, fountain, pond, tidal, or coastal water of the state or other body of water. When any litter is thrown or discarded from a boat, the operator or owner of the boat or both, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-11. - Commercial vehicles. 
(a)  Proper vehicle loading. No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any roadway in the city unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking, blowing, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped only for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on the road surface for cleaning or maintenance purposes. 
(b)  Covering loads on vehicles. It is the duty of every owner and driver, jointly and severally, of any vehicle hauling upon any public road or highway in the city, dirt, sand, gravel, silica, or other similar aggregate, refuse, garbage, debris, or yard trash, and tree branches, to prevent such material from falling, blowing, or in any way escaping from such vehicle. Covering and securing loads with a close-fitting tarpaulin or other appropriate cover of adequate size is required. All loads shall be covered when vehicle is in motion. 
(c)  Vehicular spillage. Any person operating a vehicle traveling on a public right-of-way from which any objects have fallen or escaped causing unsightly litter, potential obstruction to motorists, or damage to vehicles, or physical damage, shall immediately cause the public property to be cleaned of debris or litter or shall pay for any clearing costs incurred by the city. 
(d)  Vehicular identification. All commercial vehicles which transport yard trash, construction materials, and other loose materials such as dirt and sand within the city must be identified by lettering on both sides of the vehicle showing the name of person or company, address, and phone number of owner. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-12. - Violations; state litter law adopted by reference. 
Violations of this chapter which are also violations of the state litter law, F.S. § 403.413, as hereafter amended, may be enforced in accordance with those powers outlined in the litter law, which law is incorporated herein by this reference. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-13. - Accumulation of debris declared nuisance. 
Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises in the city is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse, within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-14. - Unlawful deposit of waste. 
It shall be deemed unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited any waste as defined herein upon any lot, parcel of land, public or private, whether vacant or improved, occupied or unoccupied, or upon any other premises, street, alley, roadway, park, stream, canal, or other waterway within the city, without first obtaining all required and necessary city, state and federal licenses and permits to do so. Compost piles on private property shall be excluded from the provisions of this subchapter. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-15. - Removal of garbage and the like. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate, burn or bury any garbage, refuse, building materials or garden and yard trash, on any private or public property in the city and such person must arrange for the removal of same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, to a designated disposal facility, at no cost to the city, except that total land clearing debris and pasture improvement may be burned on site upon obtaining a written permit from the fire chief or designee and the division of forestry under the provisions of F.S. §§ 33.40 et seq. and F.S. §§ 33.55 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-16. - Flammable or explosive refuse. 
Highly flammable or explosive materials such as ammunition, dynamite, and the like, shall not be placed in containers for regular collection. Such disposal shall be at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-17. - Hazardous waste and household hazardous waste. 
No hazardous waste or household hazardous waste shall be placed in any receptacle for collection. The cost of disposal for such hazardous waste or household hazardous waste shall be borne by the owner or possessor. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-18. - Biohazardous waste. 
No person shall dispose of any hypodermic syringe or hypodermic needle before breaking, disassembling, destroying, or otherwise rendering inoperable such instrument. Hypodermic instruments shall be wrapped or secured before being put out for collection to avoid injury to collection personnel and/or utilize a container so designated for collection of sharps. All commercial account businesses shall dispose of hypodermic instruments and other biohazardous waste in accordance with all federal and state regulations. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-19. - Recyclable materials. 
(a)  All glass, plastic, aluminum, cans and newspapers, before being placed in the recycling containers, shall be drained of all free liquids. 
(b)  Recyclables shall be sorted and placed in recycling containers. Residents receiving curbside service shall place recycling containers at curbsides separate and apart from any other containers on specified collection days. Multifamily residents shall place recyclables in special containers provided specifically for the storage/collection of such materials. The abuse or use of recycling containers for purposes other than as provided herein is prohibited. 
(c)  Recyclable materials placed in recycling containers for collection shall become the property of the city. Recyclable materials placed in any container in or at any parks, picnic areas, golf courses, property owned, leased and controlled by the city shall become the property of the city to own and sell. 
(d)  Any person(s) who shall knowingly, without proper authorization remove recyclable materials or recycling bins or both from place of collection, with the intent to, either temporarily or permanently deprive the city of the right or benefit of such recyclable materials or recycling bins, shall be guilty of theft under F.S. § 812.014 and shall be punished in accordance with F.S. §§ 775.082 and 775.083. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-20. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, business, agent, or other entity violating any provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. §§ 775.082 or 775.083. This provision shall not apply to delinquent bills. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-21. - Severability. 
If for any reason a provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, group of persons, or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity shall not effect other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of the ordinance are severable. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 34-22. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its adoption, as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 27-2008, 12-9-08)  
Chapter 38 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND CERTAIN OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(5); any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(8); any ordinance establishing or prescribing the street grades of any street in the city saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 18; parks and recreation, ch. 26; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 30; development standards, ch. 58; natural resources, ch. 62; signs, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 70. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Alcoholic beverages. 
The consumption of alcoholic beverages on any city property or facility is prohibited. The city manager shall have the specific authority to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages for special events. 
(Code 1991, § 28-116)  
Sec. 38-2. - Weapons prohibited. 
No person other than law enforcement officers shall bring into any public facility, park or building a weapon that is potentially harmful to wildlife or the human safety. Weapon shall be as defined in state law, and shall also include BB guns, air or gas operated guns, and projectile weapons. 
(Code 1991, § 28-117; Ord. No. 03-2011, § 2, 10-25-2011) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of firearms, F.S. § 790.33.  
Secs. 38-3—38-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 
 
Sec. 38-36. - Landscaping and maintenance of unpaved public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the city to protect and preserve the appearance, character and value of surrounding neighborhoods, and to promote the general welfare of the community by providing for the landscaping and the maintenance in neat and orderly appearance of plantings in unpaved public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Responsibility of city. Landscaping and maintenance of plantings in median strips and traffic islands between the curblines of public streets and highways is the responsibility of the city. 
(c)  Rights and duties of owner, tenant and agent. The owner, the tenant and their agent, if any, of any real property abutting upon any public right-of-way: 
(1)  May landscape the unpaved portion of such right-of-way using plant materials that will not adversely affect public safety or obstruct the public use of the right-of-way. All such plant materials shall become property of the city when placed in the unpaved portion of the right-of-way. A city permit shall not be required for such landscaping; however, all other requirements of this section apply. 
(2)  Shall be required to keep that portion of the unpaved right-of-way, except established drainage ditches and swales, in a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and free from refuse and debris. 
(d)  Rights of city. The city may require the removal of any landscaping that adversely affects public safety or obstructs the public use of the right-of-way. The city reserves the right to remove, trim or destroy such plantings that are found to adversely affect public safety or to obstruct the public use of the right-of-way. 
(Code 1991, § 27-101)  
Sec. 38-37. - Cutting or destroying shade trees along public roads. 
The city council may prescribe that the public roads in this city shall not be less than 30 feet wide; and it shall be unlawful for any person to belt, cut or destroy any shade trees on any public road or right-of-way without authority from the superintendent of public roads, supervisor or overseer of the district in which such trees are situated. 
(Code 1991, § 27-120) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 861.11.  
Secs. 38-38—38-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY VEHICLE PRE-EMPTION EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 38-51. - Emergency vehicle pre-emption equipment. 
(a)  All new or modified traffic signals within the city limits of the city shall be equipped with 3M brand Opticom Priority Control Equipment. 
(b)  The pre-emption equipment shall be installed, per manufacturer recommendations, in sufficient quantity to provide emergency vehicle pre-emption of the traffic signal from all directions so that each direction of traffic will move independently, allowing for protected left turn movements. 
(c)  Any modification to the pre-emption equipment installed shall be "state of the art" and compatible with existing emergency vehicle pre-emption equipment. 
(d)  All residential communities consisting of five or more homes and golf courses currently enclosed by security gates or other areas previously accessed by key or electronically coded systems shall be required to install Opticom equipment which is 100 percent compatible with the 3M brand Opticom Priority Control Equipment installed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 33-2001, §§ 1—4, 8-28-01)  
Secs. 38-52—38-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DRIVEWAY APPROACHES AND STREET IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 38-60. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as set forth and shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apron means the portion of the driveway approach extending from the property side of the curb to the sidewalk section and lying between the end slopes of the driveway approach. 
Curbline means the inside edge of the top of the curb. In areas where no curb is required, it is the edge of the pavement. 
Curb return means the curved portion of a street curb at street intersections or the curved portion of a curb in the end slopes of a driveway approach. 
Driveway means an area on private property where automobiles and other vehicles are operated or allowed to stand. 
Driveway approach means an area, construction or improvement between the roadway of a public street and private property intended to provide access for vehicles from a public street to a definite area of the private property, such as a parking area, a driveway or a door at least seven feet wide, intended and used for the ingress and egress of vehicles. The component parts of the driveway approach are termed the apron, the end slopes or the curb return, and the sidewalk section. 
End slopes means the portions of the driveway approach which provide a transition from the normal curb and sidewalk elevations to the grade of the apron, either by means of a sloping surface or by means of a curb return together with the area between the projected tangents of the curb return. 
Property frontage means and includes approach areas directly in front of property owned or under the control of the applicant, and such area as may be directly in front of adjoining property which is used for approach purposes by right of easement or agreement with the adjoining property owner. 
Sidewalk section means the portion of the driveway approach lying between the back, or property edge of the sidewalk and the end slopes measured at the front, or street, edge of the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 10-14-08)  
Sec. 38-61. - Permit—Required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall remove, alter or construct any curb, sidewalk, driveway approach, gutter, pavement or other improvement in any public street, alley or other property owned by or dedicated to or used by the city and over which it has jurisdiction to, without first obtaining a permit from the city building division, and no permit shall be granted until the applicant files with the city building division for its approval a copy of a drawing showing the location and size of all such proposed improvements to serve the property affected. 
(Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 10-14-08)  
Sec. 38-62. - Permit—Application. 
Application for permits to construct such improvements shall be made to the city building division on forms provided for that purpose. The city has the authority to promulgate required specifications and details that may be included as part of a permit application. 
(Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 10-14-08)  
Sec. 38-63. - Permit—Approval and issuance. 
Before approving the drawing of such improvement and issuing the permit, the public works director shall establish that the proposed improvement is in conformance with the provisions and standards hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 10-14-08)  
Sec. 38-64. - Public property use restrictions. 
City road rights-of-way may not be used for the private or commercial purpose of meeting the Code's minimum parking requirements, and a permit for the construction of a driveway approach shall not be issued unless all vehicles to be used, served, or serviced can be parked entirely within the private property lines. 
(Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 10-14-08)  
Sec. 38-65. - Prohibited locations. 
(a)  At street intersections no portion of any driveway approach, including end slopes, shall be permitted within the intersection curb return. 
(b)  At street intersections in noncommercial or residential areas, no portion of any driveway approach, including end slopes, shall be permitted within 50 feet of the intersection curb return. 
(Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 10-14-08)  
Sec. 38-66. - Driveway approach standards. 
The following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Single-family, duplex: 
a.  Minimum width, ten feet (20 feet minimum width for single duplex drive). 
b.  Maximum width, 24 feet on collector and arterial roads; 30 feet on local subdivision roads. 
c.  Fifteen feet minimum radii required for rural section. 
d.  Department of transportation standard flares required for a road that has urban curb and gutter section. (No curbs for driveway permitted within right-of-way; wheelchair access to be provided.) 
e.  Where a driveway crosses a ditch, a six-foot minimum stabilized shoulder, with three-fourths-inch to one foot slope, each side of driveway pavement will be required. 
f.  On a driveway where a culvert is to be installed, the end of the culvert shall not extend beyond the side of property line prolonged. If the end of the culvert creates a hazardous condition in relation to the end of an existing culvert, the proposed culvert should be extended and connected to the existing culvert with a ditch bottom inlet or junction box. 
g.  Culverts shall be a minimum of 15 inches R.C.P. or hydraulic equivalent (galvanized asphalt-coated corrugated metal pipe will be acceptable only on residential and duplex driveways). 
h.  Culvert length (L) to be determined by the following: 
L = Pavement width plus total shoulder width (12-foot min.) plus two times (four times the depth of the ditch), or L = Pavement Width + Shoulder Width + 2 (4d) 
i.  Mitered end sections are required on all culvert installations, as per state department of transportation standard detail index 273. 
j.  Justifications for size of culvert must be submitted, along with flow line elevations (inverts). 
k.  A minimum flow of 2.5 feet per second must be maintained as a cleansing velocity in all culverts. 
l.  Driveway construction from edge of pavement to the property line shall consist of the following: 
1.  One-inch PC-3 asphalt surface, six-inch limerock base compact to 98 percent density. 
2.  Six-inch thick 3,000 psi concrete, with six-inch by six-inch no. 10 welded wire mesh. (Existing sidewalk to be replaced where it does not meet this criteria.) 
3.  Gravel or shell driveways will be allowed subject to compliance with all applicable standards listed above and the following stipulations: 
i.  The Public Works Director shall reserve the right to refuse use of a non-suitable material. 
ii.  A pad for the protection of existing pavement shall be constructed. 
m.  Driveway construction which requires removal of a vertical curb (raised curb) shall have pavement saw cut at curbline prior to removing existing curb and replaced with a header curb or valley in accordance with existing type. 
n.  Driveway construction where Miami type curb (mountable) exists must tie to the back of the curb. 
o.  If culvert is to be installed the entire length of the property, underdrains shall be installed (six-inch minimum PVC perforated), (inlets to be installed every 120 feet or less). 
p.  Frontage of 50 feet or less shall be limited to one driveway. Not more than two driveways shall be permitted for any one property fronting on the same road. Sides of multiple road frontage lots may also have driveway approaches in conformity with the provisions of this section, notwithstanding that such lots have driveway approaches on their frontage area. 
Relief from this subsection may be approved by the public works director as deemed appropriate. 
(2)  Multi-family and non-residential. 
a.  Minimum width 24 feet (16 feet if driveway is signed and marked as one-way). 
b.  Maximum width 40 feet (plus radii and/or flares). 
c.  Entrance radii (rural section): 
1.  Thirty-five feet minimum entrance radius required. 
2.  Twenty-five feet minimum exit radius required. 
d.  Addition of pavement for acceleration/deceleration lanes and additional pavement for case III through case VI to arterial, collector and commercial roads must comply with county standards. 
e.  Case I and II entrances are to be overlayed with one and one-half inches of PC-3 asphalt to the center of the road, including the addition (feather edge at center of road). 
f.  Case III, IV and VI, entrances and modifications thereof, are to be overlayed the entire width of the road with one and one-half inches of PC-3 asphalt. 
g.  Department of transportation standard flares are required for urban curb and gutter sections unless radii are otherwise specified by traffic engineering. 
h.  A six-foot shoulder, each side of pavement, will be required. 
i.  On driveways where a culvert is to be installed, the end of the culvert shall be no closer than six feet to side property lines. If the end of the proposed culvert creates a hazardous condition in relation to the end of an existing culvert, the proposed culvert shall be extended and connected to the existing culvert with a D.B.I. (except common driveway). 
j.  On driveways where culvert is not to be installed, a six-foot setback from the side property line extended, measured from where the radius, or flare, meets the existing pavement, is required. 
k.  Culverts shall be a minimum of 15 inches RCP (corrugated metal pipe will not be allowed for commercial driveways). 
l.  Culvert length (L) to be determined by the following: 
L = pavement width plus shoulder width (12 feet minimum) plus two times (four times the depth of the ditch), or L = Pavement Width + Shoulder Width + 2 (4d). 
m.  Mitered end sections are required on all culvert installations (miter to begin at edge of six-foot shoulder). 
n.  Justification for size of culvert must be submitted, along with flow line elevations (inverts). 
o.  A minimum flow of two and one-half feet per second must be maintained as a cleansing velocity. 
p.  Driveway and turn lane construction shall conform to pavement specifications for arterial, collector, industrial and residential streets as set forth in the City Code. 
q.  If culvert is to be installed the entire length of the property, underdrain shall be installed (inlets to be installed every 120 feet or less). 
r.  Frontages of 50 feet or less shall be limited to one driveway. Not more than two driveways shall be permitted for any one property fronting on the same road. 
s.  Access from public streets to parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  On collector roads there shall be a minimum of 50 feet from the edge of right-of-way to the first internal intersection or drive. 
2.  On arterial roads there shall be a minimum of 75 feet from the edge of right-of-way to the first internal intersection or drive. 
Relief from this subsection may be approved by the public works director as deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 10-14-08)  
Sec. 38-67. - Driveway approaches near alleys. 
Driveway approaches located within five feet of the existing curb return at an alley intersection may be merged with the alley intersection pavement, thus requiring the removal of the existing curb return: the total apron length plus the alley width, measured at the curbline of the apron to the opposite alley line, shall not exceed 40 feet, except when there is a driveway approach on both sides of an alley, then the maximum apron length plus alley, width shall not exceed 60 feet. 
(Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 10-14-08)  
Sec. 38-68. - Driveway approaches in areas of limited street improvements. 
(a)  Where standard gutters and curbs have been installed the permit may authorize the applicant to construct the driveway approach of hard, stable and regular surface materials that are compliant with Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) Section A 4.5.1. Such driveway approach shall be constructed to established grade and shall be adequate and suitable for the traffic to be carried by it. 
(b)  Where standard gutters and curbs have not been installed, the apron widths set forth in section 38-66 shall be measured along the property line and there shall be not less than 16 feet of frontage between driveway approaches serving any one property, and the permit may authorize the applicant to construct the driveway approach of hard, stable and regular surface materials that are compliant with Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) Section A 4.5.1. Such driveway approach shall be constructed to established grade and shall be adequate and suitable for the traffic to be carried by it. 
(c)  Pursuant to the permit provided for in section 38-61, the applicant may surface the driveway approaches or other areas within the right-of-way by extending the same type of paving used on the applicant's premises so that it merges with the street pavement, provided the applicant's paving is of hard, stable and regular surface materials that are compliant with Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) Section A 4.5.1. Such driveway approach shall be constructed to established grade and shall be adequate and suitable for the traffic to be carried by it; and is adequate and suitable for the traffic to be carried; such extended paving and sidewalk between the property line and the street pavement shall be to established grade or other slope fixed by the public works department to provide for proper runoff. Such paving between the property line and the street pavement may meet the street pavement at a point ahead of the curb opening in order to provide for safe deceleration of vehicles turning into the applicant's premises. If the applicant's paving is extended beyond the property line into a street right-of-way at an intersection or crossroad, the public works department may require the applicant to construct a suitable traffic island or curb to provide for the protection of such city facilities as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 10-14-08)  
Sec. 38-69. - Construction details. 
(a)  All driveway approaches between the curbline and the property line shall be constructed of hard surface materials. If concrete is used for a driveway approach, including a sidewalk section, it shall be at least six inches thick for all such approaches. 
(b)  A concrete sidewalk section of a driveway approach, if applicable, shall be finished and scored as specified by the public works director. Apron and end-slope areas of the driveway approach shall be finished, after toweling smooth and scoring, with a fiber push-broom drawn over the surface parallel to the curbline. 
(c)  All construction shall be compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(d)  Additional required specifications and details may be included as part of a permit application. 
(Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 10-14-08)  
Sec. 38-70. - Violation—Civil remedies. 
Whether subject to a permit or not, anything constructed, or any activity conducted, in the public right-of-way shall be maintained or conducted so as to be in compliance with the city's national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit. In case a driveway or driveway approach is constructed or proposed to be constructed, maintained, repaired, altered or used in violation of this article, such violation shall constitute a nuisance and the city may institute proceedings to prevent, enjoin, temporarily or permanently abate, remove or correct the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 10-14-08)  
Chapter 39 - MOTOR VEHICLE, TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law, F.S. ch. 316; powers of local authorities, F.S. §§ 316.007, 316.008. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 39-1. - Duties of law enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the authorized law enforcement officers of the city to enforce the provisions of this Code and the state criminal laws, decriminalized and vehicular laws applicable to traffic in the city, to make proper arrests for violation thereof, to assist in the prosecution of persons charged with such violations, to investigate accidents, to cooperate with the public works director and other officials of the city in the administration of the traffic regulations and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed by this Code and any other ordinances of the city. 
Code enforcement inspectors of the city are hereby authorized to enforce and to issue citations for violations of the provisions of this chapter concerning parking in designated restricted/handicapped spaces and parking in or obstructing a fire lane, safety lane, fire hydrant or water connection. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-1, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-2. - Speed zones. 
(a)  Maximum limits enumerated. The maximum speed limit allowable within the city limits shall be 35 miles per hour. The speed limit on any city street shall be 25 miles per hour, unless otherwise indicated by appropriate signage. 
(b)  School zones. Established school speed limit zones shall be properly identified and appropriately signed as 15 miles per hour at designated times during the day. The location of these school speed limit zones shall be established by the public works department utilizing the design criteria and warrants established by the Florida Department of Transportation. The only exception to this section shall be where an approved traffic signal exists, the posted speed limit may be observed. 
(c)  Identification and signing of certain zones. Speed limit zones other than 25 miles per hour shall be properly identified and appropriately signed utilizing guidelines established in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the Federal Highway Administration. 
(d)  State speed limits shall prevail in case of conflict. All speed limit zones including the 25 mile-per-hour zones shall be lawful on all roads, highways and streets within the city limits, except where speed limit zones are established and prescribed exclusively by the state. Locations where speed limit zones, established and prescribed by the state, are in conflict with this section, those state speed limit zones shall prevail until such time as they are amended and appropriately designated by the state to conform with this section. 
(e)  Amendment. All speed limit zones established by this section, except those subject to the special conditions in subsection (d), shall be lawful until such time as they are amended by the city council. No amendment to those provisions shall be enacted by the city council without first conducting engineering analysis procedures that are in conformance with the Florida Department of Transportation criteria for establishing speed limit zones as stated in F.S. ch. 316. 
(f)  Existing speed limits lawful until appropriate signing is installed. All existing speed zones and signing shall remain in effect until such times as existing signing is removed and appropriate signing, where applicable, is installed in conformance with this section. Existing speed zones and signing on state roadways shall remain lawful until such time as said zones are amended and appropriate signing is installed by the Florida Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-2, 4-24-01)  
Secs. 39-3—39-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2009, § 1, adopted June 23, 2009, added the division title, "Division 1. General Standards." See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 39-31. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article prohibiting the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-3, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-32. - Manner of parking—Generally. 
(a)  Except where angle parking or parking on one-way streets is permitted by this article or any other ordinance of the city, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a street where there is an adjacent curb shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb. 
(b)  No person driving or in charge of any motor vehicle, except a licensed delivery truck or other delivery vehicle, shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the key. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-4, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-33. - Angle parking. 
Upon those streets which have been signed or marked by public works for angle parking, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-5, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-34. - Loading or unloading at an angle. 
No persons shall stop or park any vehicle at right angles to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading of merchandise, without a permit issued by the public works director or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-6, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-35. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
Whenever a vehicle equipped with all reflectors required by law is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within the city, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-7, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-36. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited—In certain specified places. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a law enforcement officer, firefighter, or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  In front of, so as to obstruct in any way, or within 15 feet of a fire hydrant or marked fire department connection. 
(5)  On, within the boundaries of, or so as to obstruct any crosswalk. 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(7)  Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the public works director indicates a different length by signs or markings. 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad or bridge. 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a roadway opposite the entrance to any fire station, or within 75 feet of such entrance when properly signposted. 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street or highway excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or within a street tunnel. 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking. 
(15)  Within a properly identified fire lane. 
(16)  Such that any public roadway, street, or private access road used for emergency vehicle access is completely obstructed for passage of vehicular traffic. 
(17)  So as to obstruct any properly identified handicapped-accessible crosswalk. 
(18)  In a drive aisle of a commercial, office or industrial use parking lot; except, that a driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily in such drive aisle for the expeditious purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading, unloading, or delivery of passengers or materials, and in no event for more than 15 minutes. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-8, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 21-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 39-37. - Stopping, standing or parking—In alleys. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in a business district, except for the expeditious loading or unloading of materials, and in no event for a period of more than 20 minutes, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any other alley in such a manner, or under such conditions, as to leave available less than 12 feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway or entrance to any abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-9, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-38. - Stopping, standing or parking in bus and taxicab stands. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed; except, that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in expeditious loading or unloading of passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stop, stand or park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively; except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping, standing or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while engaged in the expeditious unloading or loading of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-10, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-39. - Stopping, standing or parking in restricted/handicapped parking zones. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time in any restricted/handicapped parking zone, including the access area for said parking zone, other than for the purpose to which parking in such zone is restricted; except, that a driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily in such zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle which is waiting to enter or about to enter the zone for the purpose of parking in accordance with the purpose to which parking is restricted. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-11, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 31-2001, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 39-40. - Parking prohibited—For certain purposes. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or public street right-of-way for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale, rent, or lease. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(3)  Displaying advertising, merchandise, or services. 
(4)  Selling merchandise from such vehicle. 
(5)  Storage, or as junk or dead storage for more than 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-12, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-41. - Parking prohibited—At all times at certain places. 
No person shall park a vehicle at any time on any of the following parts of streets, road rights-of-way, sidewalks, or sidewalk areas, where signs are erected giving notice thereof: 
(1)  In front of the entrance to any place or area of public assembly. 
(2)  In front of the entrance or exit [of] any building where signage prohibits such parking for public safety. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-13, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-42. - Parking prohibited—At all times on certain streets. 
Where "no parking" signs are erected, no person shall park a vehicle at any time. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-14, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-43. - Parking prohibited—All-night; exceptions. 
No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park a vehicle on any street marked to prohibit all-night parking and giving notice thereof, for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-15, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-44. - Parking limited on certain streets. 
When signs are erected limiting parking for certain users, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for longer than the time designated by such signs at any time, on any day, except Sundays and legal holidays. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-16, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-45. - Parking—Obstructing traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave less than 12 feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-17, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-46. - Parking on one-way streets and roadways. 
(a)  When appropriate signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of any one-way street in violation of any such sign. 
(b)  In the event a street includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway, unless signs are erected to permit such parking. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-18, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-47. - Parking—Loading zones. 
No person shall park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such passenger curb loading zone are effective, except for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers and then only for a period not to exceed five minutes. 
No person shall park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect, except for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-19, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-48. - Parking—Designated fire or safety zones. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, obstruct, or park a vehicle for any purpose at any location marked and designated as a fire and/or safety lane. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at such a location while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers. Such stop must leave the driver in actual physical control of the vehicle at all times while so stopped and shall not exceed two minutes in duration. Such driver must move immediately upon being instructed to do so by an authorized law enforcement officer, fire inspector, or code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-20, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-49. - Moving and impounding of illegally parked vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever any law enforcement officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or alley in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or improved or main-traveled part of such street or alley. 
(b)  Whenever any law enforcement officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street, bridge or causeway or in any tunnel within the city, where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle in accordance with this Code and the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-21, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 39-50. - Parking prohibited—Areas designated for landscaping or drainage retention. 
No person shall park, nor shall any owner, operator, or tenant allow any person to park, any vehicle on any portion(s) of a lot or parcel or a common area on a lot or parcel, when such area(s) of the lot or parcel or common area on a lot or parcel, are designated on an approved site plan to be landscaped or utilized as drainage retention areas. 
(Ord. No. 09-2007, § 1, 8-14-07)  
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2009, § 2, adopted June 23, 2009, added the division title, "Division 2. Requirements in Residential Zones." See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 39-51. - Generally. 
Parking in any residential zoning district shall meet the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1991, § 6.02.05; Ord. No. 11-2009, § 3, 6-23-09) 
Note— Formerly § 58-166.  
Sec. 39-52. - Overnight parking within the public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Overnight parking of recreational vehicles, vessels, watercraft, trailers, commercial motor vehicles, cargo vehicles rated in excess of three-quarter ton carrying capacity, truck tractors, or semi-trailers within the public rights-of-way that serve single-family, duplex and triplex uses is prohibited. Overnight is defined as the time period between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The city manager, or his designee, is authorized to administer a no-fee permit process for the issuance of temporary parking permits for recreational vehicles, for such time period as determined by the city council. 
(b)  Overnight parking of commercial trucks or cargo vehicles rated in excess of three-quarter ton or of truck tractors is prohibited in residential districts. 
(Code 1991, § 6.02.05 A.; Ord. No. 11-2009, § 3, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 12-2009, § 1, 6-23-09) 
Note— Formerly § 58-167.  
Sec. 39-53. - Recreational vehicles, parking of vehicles, vessels, and trailers. 
(a)  Recreational vehicles when parked in any residential district, except established recreational vehicle parks, shall not be used for any dwelling purpose. 
(b)  No more than two of the following, in any combination: vessel, recreationally related vehicle, or non-vessel related trailer, shall be permitted to be parked between the public right-of-way and the front building line of a residential single-family, duplex, or triplex used property. Such parking shall only be permitted when the placement of such equipment in no way creates a visual barrier to the safe access or egress for neighboring properties or blocks a visibility triangle on a corner lot. Otherwise, the parking of such equipment must be behind the front building line of the residential property. All vessels shall be placed on a trailer and all trailers and vehicles that are parked in the front yard must be parked perpendicular to the street except when parking on a semi-circular or multi-angle driveway, and no part of the vessel, recreationally related vehicle or trailer shall extend into the public right-of-way. 
(c)  The following definitions shall be used for this division: 
(1)  Vehicle means a device for transporting persons or things, and includes passenger and recreationally related vehicles. 
(2)  Vessel means a boat and includes every description of watercraft, barge, and airboat, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation and or recreation on the water. 
(3)  Watercraft means all boats, ships, yachts, rafts, barges, jet skis, personal watercraft, houseboats, windsurfers, sailboards, sailing vessels or other floating structures; and this term shall be synonymous with the term "boat," as referenced in section 1(b), article VII, of the state constitution, irrespective of whether or not the watercraft is motorized or not. 
(4)  Passenger vehicle means any motor vehicle designed, used and maintained primarily for the transportation of persons for noncommercial purposes. A passenger vehicle does not include a motor vehicle designed and equipped for human habitation, excepting a motor vehicle to which a camper shell has been attached. 
(5)  Recreationally related vehicle shall mean those vehicles as defined by state law, and all other vehicles of a similar nature. 
(6)  Trailer means any vehicle without motive power designed to be coupled to or drawn by a motor vehicle and constructed so that no part of its weight or that of its load rests upon the towing vehicle; 
(7)  Semi-trailer means any vehicle without motive power designed to be coupled to or drawn by a motor vehicle and constructed so that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
(8)  Commercial motor vehicle shall mean those vehicles as defined by state law. 
(Code 1991, § 6.02.05 B.; Ord. No. 11-2009, § 3, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 13-2009, § 1, 6-23-09) 
Note— Formerly § 58-168.  
Sec. 39-54. - Inoperative vehicles. 
Inoperative motor vehicles or boats, either unregistered or partially dismantled, shall not be parked or maintained in any residential district unless such vehicle or boat is within a fully enclosed structure. 
(Code 1991, § 6.02.05 C.; Ord. No. 11-2009, § 3, 6-23-09) 
Note— Formerly § 58-169.  
Sec. 39-55. - Location. 
Parking spaces for all dwellings shall be located on the same lot or parcel with the main structure to be served. Parking spaces for nonresidential uses shall be provided on the same lot or parcel with the use served and not more than 500 feet distant, as measured along the nearest pedestrian walkway. 
(Code 1991, § 6.02.05 D.; Ord. No. 11-2009, § 3, 6-23-09) 
Note— Formerly § 58-170.  
Secs. 39-56—39-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARADES, PROCESSIONS, OVERSIZED VEHICLES AND SOUND TRUCKS 
 
Sec. 39-81. - Permits required. 
(a)  No procession or parade, except the forces of the United States armed services, the military forces of this state and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, mark or proceed along any street or roadway, except in accordance with a permit issued by the director of public works, with the approval of the fire chief, and law enforcement, and such other regulations as are set forth in this Code or F.S. ch. 316. 
(b)  No sound truck or other vehicle equipped with amplifier or loudspeaker shall be driven upon any street for the purpose of selling, offering for sale or advertising in any fashion, except in accordance with a letter of authorization issued by the city manager. 
(c)  No oversized or overweight vehicle or equipment may be driven, occupy or proceed upon any street or roadway, except in accordance with a permit issued by the director of public works and such other regulations as are set forth in this Code or F.S. ch. 316. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-22, 4-24-01)  
Secs. 39-82—39-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINES AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF THIS CHAPTER 
 
Sec. 39-111. - Fines and penalties. 
For a violation of parking prohibitions, the following fines shall be imposed: 
(1)  Unauthorized parking in properly designated restricted/handicapped spaces, including the access area ..... $250.00 
(2)  Parking in or obstructing a fire lane, safety lane, fire hydrant or handicapped crosswalk ..... 50.00 
(3)  Parking in no parking zone ..... 25.00 
(4)  Parking in loading zone ..... 25.00 
(5)  All other improper parking ..... 20.00 
(6)  Parades, processions, oversized vehicles and sound trucks ..... 250.00 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 39-23, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 31-2001, 8-14-01)  
Chapter 40 - COMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY ACT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 27-2001, adopted July 10, 2001, set out provisions pertaining to communication facilities in the city's right-of-way. To maintain the numeric sequencing, said ordinance provisions have been included as §§ 40-26—40-45 at the discretion of the editor to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 40-1—40-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY ACT 
 
Sec. 40-26. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the City of Seminole Communications Rights-of-Way Act. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-27. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent of the city to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by: Providing for the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way within the city; adopting and administering reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with state and federal law, including F.S. § 337.401, (2000), as it may be amended, the city's home-rule authority, and in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and other federal and state law; establishing reasonable rules and regulations necessary to manage the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way by all communications services providers; and minimizing disruption to the public rights-of-way. In regulating its public rights-of-way, the city shall be governed by and shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-28. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given. Where not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined shall be construed to mean the common and ordinary meaning. 
Abandonment shall mean the permanent cessation of all uses of a communications facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used. By way of example, and not limitation, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used, shall not be "abandonment" of a facility in public rights-of-way. 
City shall mean the City of Seminole, Florida. 
Communications services shall mean the transmission, conveyance or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, by or through any electronic, radio, satellite, cable, optical, microwave, or other medium or method now in existence or hereafter devised, regardless of the protocol used for such transmission or conveyance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of this chapter "cable service", as defined in F.S. § 202.11(2), (2000), as it may be amended, is not included in the definition of "communications services," and cable service providers may be subject to other ordinances of the city. 
Communications services provider shall mean any person including a municipality or county providing communications services through the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. "Communications services provider" shall also include any person including a municipality or county that places or maintains a communications facility in public rights-of-way but does not provide communications services. 
Communications facility or facility or system shall mean any permanent or temporary plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, fiber optics, poles, antennae, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults, drains, surface location markers, appurtenances, and other equipment or pathway placed or maintained or to be placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way of the city and used or capable of being used to transmit, convey, route, receive, distribute, provide or offer communications services. 
FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
In public rights-of-way or in the public rights-of-way shall mean in, on, over, under or across the public rights-of-way. 
Ordinance shall mean this chapter. 
Person shall include any individual, children, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, organization or legal entity of any kind, successor, assignee, transferee, personal representative, and all other groups or combinations, and shall include all city, county, state or other public entities to the extent the said public entities acts as a communications services provider. 
Place or maintain or placement or maintenance or placing or maintaining shall mean to erect, construct, install, maintain, place, repair, extend, expand, remove, occupy, locate or relocate. A communications services provider that owns or exercises physical control over communications facilities in public rights-of-way, such as the physical control to maintain and repair, is "placing or maintaining" the facilities. A person providing service only through resale or only through use of a third party's unbundled network elements is not "placing or maintaining" the communications facilities through which such service is provided. The transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of the public rights-of-way does not constitute "placing or maintaining" facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
Public rights-of-way shall mean a public right-of-way, public utility easement, highway, street, bridge, tunnel or alley for which the city is the authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to pursuant to applicable law, and includes the surface, the air space over the surface and the area below the surface. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include private property. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal city property except as described above and shall not include city buildings, fixtures, poles, conduits, facilities or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
Registrant shall mean a communications services provider that has registered with the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Registration or register shall mean the process described in this chapter whereby a communications services provider provides certain information to the city. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-29. - Registration for placing or maintaining communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  A communications services provider that desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the city shall first register with the city in accordance with this chapter. Subject to the terms and conditions prescribed in this article, a registrant may place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(b)  A registration shall not convey any title, equitable or legal, to the registrant in the public rights-of-way. Registration under this chapter governs only the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public rights-of-way. Other ordinances, codes or regulations may apply to the placement or maintenance in the public rights-of-way of facilities that are not communications facilities. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before locating its facilities on the city's or another person's facilities. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider from complying with all applicable city ordinances, codes or regulations, including the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Each communications services provider that desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the city shall file a single registration with the city, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's primary contact person in connection with the registration, and the person to contact in case of an emergency; 
(3)  For registrations submitted prior to October 1, 2001, the applicant shall state whether it provides local service or toll service or both; 
(4)  Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this article and acknowledgment that registrant has received and reviewed a copy of the Seminole Communication Right-of-Way Act, which acknowledgment shall not be deemed an agreement; and 
(5)  The number of the applicant's certificate of authorization or license to provide communications services issued by the Florida Public Service Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or other federal or state authority, if any. 
For an applicant that does not provide a Florida Public Service Commission certificate of authorization number, if the applicant is a corporation, proof of authority to do business in the State of Florida, such as the number of the certificate from or filing with the Florida Department of State. 
(d)  The city shall review the information submitted by the applicant. Such review shall be by the building official or his designee. If the applicant submits information in accordance with subsection (c) above, the registration shall be effective and the city shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of registration in writing. If the city determines that the information has not been submitted in accordance with subsection (c) above, the city clerk shall notify the applicant of the non-effectiveness of registration, and reasons for the non-effectiveness, in writing. The city shall so reply to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of registration information from the applicant. Non-effectiveness of registration shall not preclude an applicant from filing subsequent applications for registration under the provisions of this section. 
(e)  A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the city stating that it will no longer place or maintain any communications facilities in public rights-of-way within the city and will no longer need to obtain permits to perform work in public rights-of-way. A registrant cannot cancel a registration if the registrant continues to place or maintain any communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(f)  Registration does not in and of itself establish a right to place or maintain or establish a priority for the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way within the city but shall establish for the registrant a right to apply for a permit, if permitting is required by the city. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this chapter and further subject to any additional city ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted. 
(g)  A registrant shall renew its registration with the city by April 1 of even-numbered years in accordance with the registration requirements in this chapter, except that a registrant that initially registers during the even-numbered year when renewal would be due or the odd-numbered year immediately preceding such even-numbered year shall not be required to renew until the next even-numbered year. Within 30 days of any change in the information required to be submitted pursuant to subsection (c), a registrant shall provide updated information to the city. If no information in the then-existing registration has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure to renew a registration may result in the city restricting the issuance of additional permits until the communications services provider has complied with the registration requirements of this chapter. 
(h)  A communications services provider that has registered with the city pursuant to section 40-29 that desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way must obtain a permit. An effective registration shall be a condition of obtaining a permit. Notwithstanding an effective registration, permitting requirements shall apply. A permit may be obtained by or on behalf of a registrant having an effective registration if all permitting requirements are met. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-30. - Notice of transfer, sale or assignment of assets in public rights-of-way. 
If a registrant transfers, sells or assigns its assets located in public rights-of-way incident to a transfer, sale or assignment of the registrant's assets, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the terms of this chapter. Written notice of any such transfer, sale or assignment shall be provided by such registrant to the city within 20 days after the effective date of the transfer, sale or assignment. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee is not required to re-register. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is not a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee shall register as provided in section 40-29 within 60 days of the transfer, sale or assignment. If permit applications are pending in the registrant's name, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall notify the city clerk that the transferee, buyer or assignee is the new applicant. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-31. - Placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  A registrant shall at all times comply with and abide by all applicable provisions of the state and federal law and all city ordinances, codes and regulations in placing or maintaining a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(b)  A registrant shall not commence to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way until all applicable permits, if any, have been issued by the city or other appropriate authority, except in the case of an emergency. The term "emergency" shall mean a condition that affects the public's health, safety or welfare, which includes an unplanned out-of-service condition of a pre-existing service. Registrant shall provide prompt notice to the city of the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the event of an emergency and shall obtain an after-the-fact permit if a permit would have originally been required to perform the work undertaken in public rights-of-way in connection with the emergency. Registrant acknowledges that as a condition of granting such permits, the city may impose reasonable rules or regulations governing the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. Permits shall apply only to the areas of public rights-of-way specifically identified in the permit. The city may issue a blanket permit to cover certain activities, such as routine maintenance and repair activities, that may otherwise require individual permits. 
(c)  The communications service provider wishing to obtain a permit shall submit an application for permit containing the following: 
(1)  Plans showing the location of the proposed facilities, including a description of the facilities to be installed, where the facilities are to be located, and the approximate size of facilities that will be located in public rights-of-way; 
(2)  A description of the manner in which the facility will be installed (i.e. anticipated construction methods or techniques); 
(3)  A maintenance of traffic plan for any disruption of the public rights-of-way; 
(4)  Information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed facility, if available (such information shall be provided without certification as to correctness, to the extent obtained from other persons); 
(5)  If appropriate given the facility proposed, an estimate of the cost of restoration to the public rights-of-way; 
(6)  The timetable for construction of the project or each phase thereof, and the areas of the city which will be affected; and 
(7)  Such additional information as the city finds reasonably necessary with respect to the placement or maintenance of the communications facility that is the subject of the permit application to review such permit application. 
(d)  To the extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional communications facilities within a particular area of public rights-of way. 
(e)  All communications facilities shall be placed or maintained so as not to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the public and with the rights and convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the public rights-of-way. The use of trenchless technology (i.e., directional bore method) for the installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way as well as joint trenching or the co-location of facilities in existing conduit is strongly encouraged, and should be employed wherever feasible. The director of public works or city engineer may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations concerning the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way consistent with this chapter and other applicable law. 
(f)  All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry practices and standards shall be used during the placement or maintenance of communications facilities. 
(g)  After the completion of any placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way or each phase thereof, a registrant shall, at its own expense, restore the public rights-of-way to its original condition before such work. If the registrant fails to make such restoration within 30 days, or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required under the circumstances, following the completion of such placement or maintenance, the city may perform restoration and charge the costs of the restoration against the registrant in accordance with F.S. § 337.402, as it may be amended. For 12 months following the original completion of the work, the registrant shall guarantee its restoration work and shall correct any restoration work that does not satisfy the requirements of this chapter at its own expense. 
(h)  Removal or relocation at the direction of the city of a registrant's communications facility in public rights-of-way shall be governed by the provisions of F.S. § 337.403 and 337.404, Florida Statutes, as they may be amended. 
(i)  A permit from the city constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities in public rights-of-way in accordance with this chapter, and does not create a property right or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way. 
(j)  A registrant shall maintain its communications facility in public rights-of-way in a manner consistent with accepted industry practice and applicable law. 
(k)  In connection with excavation in the public rights-of-way, a registrant shall, where applicable, comply with the Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act set forth in F.S. ch. 556, as it may be amended. 
(l)  Registrant shall use and exercise due caution, care and skill in performing work in the public rights-of-way and shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard work site areas. 
(m)  Upon request of the city, and as notified by the city of the other work, construction, installation or repairs referenced below, a registrant may be required to coordinate placement or maintenance activities under a permit with any other work, construction, installation or repairs that may be occurring or scheduled to occur within a reasonable time frame in the subject public rights-of-way, and registrant may be required to reasonably alter its placement or maintenance schedule as necessary so as to minimize disruptions and disturbance in the public rights-of-way. 
(n)  A registrant shall not place or maintain its communications facilities so as to interfere with, displace, damage or destroy any facilities, including but not limited to, sewers, gas or water mains, storm drains, pipes, cables or conduits of the city, Pinellas County or any other person's facilities lawfully occupying the public rights-of-way of the city. 
(o)  The city makes no warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability, or availability of city's public rights-of-way for the registrant's communications facilities and any performance of work, costs incurred or services provided by registrant shall be at registrant's sole risk. Nothing in this article shall affect the city's authority to add, vacate or abandon public rights-of-way, and city makes no warranties or representations regarding the availability of any added, vacated or abandoned public rights-of-way for communications facilities 
(p)  The city shall have the right to make such inspections of communications facilities placed or maintained in public rights-of-way as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(q)  A permit application to place a new or replace an existing communications facility in public rights-of-way shall include plans showing the location of the proposed installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way. If the plans so provided require revision based upon actual installation, the registrant shall promptly provide revised plans. The plans shall be in a hard copy format or an electronic format specified by the city, provided such electronic format is maintained by the registrant. Such plans in a format maintained by the registrant shall be provided at no cost to the city. 
(r)  The city reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage, communications, and other types of facilities, cables or conduit, and to do, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the city in public rights-of-way occupied by the registrant. The city further reserves without limitation the right to alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation, relocation, or width of the public rights-of-way within the limits of the city and within said limits as same may from time to time be altered. 
(s)  A registrant shall, on the request of any person holding a permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its communications facilities to permit the work authorized by the permit. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of facilities shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the registrant shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The registrant shall be given not less than 30 days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary relocation. 
Wireless facility: A wireless facility that is a portion of a communication facility, such as an antenna ("wireless facility(ies)"), which is attached to a legally maintained vertical structure in the public rights-of-way, such as a light pole or utility pole ("vertical structure(s)"), shall be subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  Such wireless facilities may not extend more than ten feet above the highest point of the vertical structure; 
(2)  Such wireless facilities that are attached to a vertical structure located in public rights-of-way that is five feet or less in width and is located adjacent to real property used as a single-family residence shall be flush mounted to the vertical structure; 
(3)  Such wireless facilities shall not have any type of lighted signal, lights, or illuminations unless required by an applicable federal, state, or local rule, regulation or law; 
(4)  Such wireless facilities shall comply with any applicable Federal Communications Commission Emissions Standards; 
(5)  The design, construction, and installation of such wireless facilities shall comply with any applicable building codes; 
(6)  No commercial advertising shall be allowed on such wireless facilities; and 
(7)  Any accessory equipment and related housing in the public rights-of-way that are used in conjunction with such a wireless facility shall comply with any applicable local rules, regulations, ordinances, or laws governing the placement and design of such equipment. 
Vertical structures, such as towers, whose sole purpose is to serve as a mounting device for antennae, are expressly prohibited from being placed in the public rights-of-way unless applicable zoning and land use laws or regulations allow such structures to be placed within the zoning district in which such public rights-of-way are located or to which they are adjacent. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-32. - Suspension of permits. 
The city may suspend a permit for work in the public rights-of-way for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of permit conditions, including conditions set forth in the permit, this article or other applicable city ordinances, codes or regulations governing placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Misrepresentation or fraud by registrant in a registration or permit application to the city; 
(3)  Failure to properly renew or ineffectiveness of registration. 
(4)  Failure to relocate or remove facilities as may be lawfully required by the city. The building official shall provide notice and an opportunity to cure any violation of (1) through (4) above, each of which shall be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-33. - Appeals. 
Final, written decisions suspending or denying a permit, denying an application for a registration or denying an application for renewal of a registration are subject to appeal. An appeal must be filed with the city manager within 30 days of the date of the final, written decision to be appealed. Any appeal not timely filed as set forth above shall be waived. The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer or special master to consider the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-34. - Involuntary termination of registration. 
(a)  The city may terminate a registration if: 
(1)  A federal or state authority suspends, denies, or revokes a registrant's certification or license to provide communications services; 
(2)  The registrant's placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way presents an extraordinary danger to the general public or other users of the public rights-of-way and the registrant fails to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written notice; or 
(3)  The registrant ceases to use all of its communications facilities in public rights-of-way and has not complied with section 40-31 of this chapter. 
(b)  Prior to termination, the registrant shall be notified by the building official with a written notice setting forth all matters pertinent to the proposed termination action, including which of (1) through (3) above is applicable as the reason therefore, and describing the proposed action of the city with respect thereto. The registrant shall have 60 days after receipt of such notice within which to address or eliminate the reason or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the building official to accomplish the same. If the plan is rejected, the building official shall provide written notice of such rejection to the registrant and shall make a recommendation to the city manager regarding a decision as to termination of registration. A decision by a city to terminate a registration may only be accomplished by an action of the city manager. A registrant shall be notified by written notice of any decision by the city manager to terminate its registration. Such written notice shall be sent within seven days after the decision. 
(c)  In the event of termination, the former registrant shall: (a) notify the city of the assumption or anticipated assumption by another registrant of ownership of the registrant's communications facilities in public rights-of-way; or (b) provide the city with an acceptable plan for disposition of its communications facilities in public rights-of-way. If a registrant fails to comply with this subsection the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including but not limited to taking possession of the facilities where another person has not assumed the ownership or physical control of the facilities or requiring the registrant within 90 days of the termination, or such longer period as may be agreed to by the registrant, to remove some or all of the facilities from the public rights-of-way and restore the public rights-of-way to its original condition before the removal. 
(d)  In any event, a terminated registrant shall take such steps as are necessary to render safe every portion of the communications facilities remaining in the public rights-of-way of the city. 
(e)  In the event of termination of a registration, this section does not authorize the city to cause the removal of communications facilities used to provide another service for which the registrant or another person who owns or exercises physical control over the facilities holds a valid certification or license with the governing federal or state agency, if required for provision of such service, and is registered with the city, if required. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-35. - Existing communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
A communications services provider with an existing communications facility in the public rights-of-way of the city has 60 days from the effective date of this chapter to comply with the terms of this chapter, including, but not limited to, registration, or be in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-36. - Insurance. 
(a)  A registrant shall provide, pay for and maintain satisfactory to the city the types of insurance described herein. All insurance shall be from responsible companies duly authorized to do business in the State of Florida and having a rating reasonably acceptable to the city. All liability policies shall provide that the "City of Seminole" is an additional insured as to the activities under this article. The required coverages must be evidenced by properly executed certificates of insurance forms. The certificates must be signed by the authorized representative of the insurance company and shall be filed and maintained with the city annually. Thirty days advance written notice by registered, certified or regular mail or facsimile as determined by the city must be given to the city of any cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in the policy coverages. The insurance requirements may be satisfied by evidence of self-insurance or other types of insurance acceptable to the city. 
(b)  The limits of coverage of insurance required shall be not less than the following: 
(1)  Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance: 
Worker's compensation—Florida statutory requirements 
Employer's liability—$500,000.00 limit each accident 
$500,000.00 limit per accident 
$500,000.00 limit per each employee 
(2)  Comprehensive general liability: 
Bodily injury and property damage 
$1,000,000.00 combined single limit each occurrence 
(3)  Automobile liability: 
Bodily injury and property damage 
$500,000.00 combined single limit each accident 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-37. - Indemnification. 
(a)  A registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City of Seminole, its officials, boards, members, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses incurred by the City of Seminole arising out of the placement or maintenance of its communications system or facilities in public rights-of-way, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article, provided, however, that a registrant's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the negligence, gross negligence or wanton or willful acts of the City of Seminole. This provision includes, but is not limited to the city's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings. City of Seminole agrees to notify the registrant, in writing, within a reasonable time of city receiving notice, of any issue it determines may require indemnification. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city or its insurers from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and at its own cost if in the city's reasonable belief there exists or may exist a conflict, potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted: (a) as denying to either party any remedy or defense available to such party under the laws of the State of Florida; or (b) as a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in F.S. § 768.28, as it may be amended. 
(b)  The indemnification requirements shall survive and be in effect after the termination or cancellation of a registration. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-38. - Construction bond. 
(a)  Prior to issuing a permit where the work under the permit will require restoration of public rights-of-way, the city may require a construction bond to secure the restoration of the public rights-of-way. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a construction bond hereunder may only be required to the extent that the cost of the restoration exceeds the amount recoverable against the security fund as provided in section 40-39. 
(b)  Twelve months after the completion of the restoration in public rights-of-way in accordance with the bond, the registrant may eliminate the bond. However, the city may subsequently require a new bond for any subsequent work in the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a rating reasonably acceptable to the city; shall be subject to the approval of the city manager; and shall provide that: "For twelve (12) months after issuance of this bond, this bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty (60) days after receipt by the City of Seminole, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(d)  The rights reserved by the city with respect to any construction bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the city may have under this chapter, or at law or equity. 
(e)  The rights reserved to the city under this section are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved in this chapter, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the construction bond will affect any other right the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-39. - Security fund. 
At or prior to the time a registrant receives its first permit to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way after the effective date of this chapter, the registrant may be required to file with the city for the city manager's approval, an annual bond, cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit in the sum of $100,000.00 or other appropriate amount having as a surety a company qualified to do business in the State of Florida, and acceptable to the city manager, which shall be referred to as the "security fund." The security fund shall be maintained from such time through the earlier of: (a) transfer, sale, assignment or removal of all communications facilities in public rights-of-way; or (b) 12 months after the termination or cancellation of any registration. The security fund shall be conditioned on the full and faithful performance by the registrant of all requirements, duties and obligations imposed upon registrant by the provisions of this chapter. The security fund shall be furnished annually or as frequently as necessary to provide a continuing guarantee of the registrant's full and faithful performance at all times. In the event a registrant fails to perform its duties and obligations imposed upon the registrant by the provisions of this chapter, subject to section 40-30 of this chapter, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the security fund, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal, relocation or abandonment of any facilities of the registrant in public rights-of-way, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the security fund. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may in its discretion not require a security fund or may accept a corporate guarantee of the registrant or its parent company. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-40. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  A registrant's failure to comply with provisions of this article shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the registrant to the code enforcement provisions and procedures of the city Code. 
(b)  Failure of the city to enforce any requirements of this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the city's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-41. - Abandonment of a communications facility. 
(a)  Upon abandonment of a communications facility owned by a registrant in public rights-of-way, the registrant shall notify the city within 90 days. 
(b)  The city may direct the registrant by written notice to remove all or any portion of such abandoned facility at the registrant's sole expense if the city determines that the abandoned facility's presence interferes with the public health, safety or welfare, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, a determination that such facility: (a) compromises safety at any time for any public rights-of-way user or during construction or maintenance in public rights-of-way; (b) prevents another person from locating facilities in the area of public rights-of-way where the abandoned facility is located when other alternative locations are not reasonably available; or (c) creates a maintenance condition that is disruptive to the public rights-of-way's use. In the event of a situation described in subsection (b) above, the city may require the third person to coordinate with the registrant that owns the existing facility for joint removal and placement, where agreed to by the registrant. 
(c)  In the event that the city does not direct the removal of the abandoned facility, the registrant, by its notice of abandonment to the city shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by the city or another person at such third party's cost. 
(d)  If the registrant fails to remove all or any portion of an abandoned facility as directed by the city within a reasonable time period as may be required by the city under the circumstances, the city may perform such removal and charge the cost of the removal against the registrant. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-42. - Force majeure. 
In the event a registrant's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this article is prevented by a cause or event not within the registrant's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result, provided, however, that such registrant uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this chapter, causes or events not within a registrant's control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within registrant's control, and thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, registrant's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of registrant's directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-43. - Reservation of rights and remedies. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to amend this article as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers. 
(b)  This article shall be applicable to all communications facilities placed in the public rights-of-way on or after the effective date of this Act and shall apply to all existing communications facilities in the public rights-of-way prior to the effective date of this Act to the full extent permitted by state and federal law. 
(c)  The adoption of this chapter is not intended to affect any rights or defenses of the city or a communications service provider under any existing franchise, license or other agreements with a communications services provider. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter shall affect the remedies the city or the registrant has available under applicable law. 
(e)  Any person who uses the communications facilities of a registrant, other than the registrant that owns the facilities, shall not be entitled to any rights to place or maintain such facilities in excess of the rights of the registrant that places or maintains the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-44. - Severability. 
It is declared to be the intent of the city council of the city that if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or provision of this chapter is held invalid, or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall be construed as not having contained said section, subsection, sentence, clause or provision and shall not be affected by such holding. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Sec. 40-45. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after approval of same by the city council of the city and executed by the mayor or ten days after passage, whichever date occurs earlier. 
(Ord. No. 27-2001, 7-10-01)  
Chapter 42 - TAXATION AND FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed, or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(2); any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(6); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes, charges, rates or fees saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(11); administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 10. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 42-31—42-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY INSURANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to levy property damage insurance premium tax, F.S. § 175.101. 
 
Sec. 42-51. - Assessment. 
There is hereby assessed and imposed on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or who shall hereinafter engage in or carry on the business of property insurance, as shown by the records of the department of insurance of the state, an excise or license tax in addition to any lawful license or excise tax now levied by the city, amounting to 1.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies covering property within the city. 
(Code 1991, § 31-101)  
Sec. 42-52. - Use of funds. 
All money derived from the taxes imposed by this division is hereby appropriated to the pension trust fund of the fire rescue department, which shall be payable and collected in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 175.101. 
(Code 1991, § 31-102)  
Secs. 42-53—42-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to levy public service tax, F.S. § 166.231 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-86. - Tax levied, amount; payment to be collected from purchaser; when payments to be made. 
(a)  Electricity and metered or bottled gas. 
(1)  There is hereby levied by the city, within the corporate limits of the city, a public service tax in the amount of six percent on each and every purchase of electricity and metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured) by residential users and a public service tax in the amount of nine percent on each and every purchase of electricity and metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured) by commercial users. 
(2)  The tax imposed under subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not be applied against any fuel adjustment charge, and such charge shall be separately stated on each bill. "Fuel adjustment charge" shall mean all increases in the cost of utility services to the ultimate consumer resulting from an increase in the cost of fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973. 
(b)  Local communications service tax rate. 
(1)  The city hereby establishes the communications service tax conversion rate as provided for in F.S. § 202.20(1)(a), at five and one-half percent which is the maximum rate as determined under the provisions of section 13, Enrolled CS/CS/SB 1878. This tax rate shall be effective beginning October 1, 2001 and ending September 30, 2002 as provided in section 13, Enrolled CS/CS/SB 1878. 
(2)  Further, the city hereby establishes the communications service tax conversion rate of five and one-tenths percent as provided under F.S. § 202.20(1)(b) which is the maximum rate for municipalities that have elected not to require or collect permit fees for communication services. This tax rate shall be effective beginning October 1, 2002. 
(c)  Payment. The taxes levied under this section shall, in every case, be paid by the purchaser, for the use of the city, to the seller of such electricity, metered or bottled gas, and telecommunications services at the time of paying the charge therefor to the seller, but no less often than monthly. 
(Code 1991, § 31-111; Ord. No. 9-97, § I, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 01-98, 1-27-98; Ord. No. 29-2001, § 2, 7-24-01)  
Sec. 42-87. - Purchasers exempt from the payment of tax. 
The United States of America, the political subdivisions and agencies, boards, commissions and authorities thereof, recognized churches used exclusively for church purposes and county and municipal governments are hereby exempted from payment of the tax imposed and levied by section 42-86 upon the services used by such governmental agencies. 
(Code 1991, § 31-111; Ord. No. 9-97, § II, 7-1-98) 
State Law reference— Mandatory exemptions for churches, F.S. § 166.231.  
Sec. 42-88. - Duty of seller to collect tax; computation of tax; liability for failure to collect; discontinuance of service. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured) and telecommunications service, in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the city, to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax imposed and levied by section 42-86 at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for the utility service, and to file a return and remit all such taxes imposed, levied and collected to the finance director of the city on or before the 20th day of the calendar month following the month in which the monies were collected. The city finance director shall also have the authority to require the submittal of a standardized tax return with all remittances. 
(b)  Upon approval by the city finance director, remittance of taxes on a basis other than monthly, but not less than quarterly, may be established. 
(c)  Each seller of telecommunications service may deduct and retain one percent of the amount of the tax collected and due to the city as compensation for records keeping and the collection and remittance of such tax. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any seller of such service to collect the price of any sale of electricity, metered or bottled gas and telecommunications service without, at the same time, collecting the tax imposed and levied in section 42-86, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay the tax without collecting such tax from the purchaser. Any seller of a service upon which a tax is imposed by this section who fails to collect the tax at the same time of collecting the price of the service, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay the tax, shall be liable to the city for the amount of the tax in the same manner as if the tax had been actually paid by the purchaser thereof to the seller, and the city manager shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and shall take such proceedings in the name of the city as may be necessary for the collection or recovery of the tax; however, the seller of the service shall not be liable for the payment of the tax upon uncollected charges. 
(e)  Any seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (manufactured or natural) and telecommunication service failing to remit to the city on or before the 20th day of each calendar month all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding month shall be liable for interest on the unpaid amount of tax at the rate of one percent per month from the date the tax was due until paid. In addition, penalties will be assessed at a rate of five percent per month of the delinquent tax, not to exceed a total penalty of 25 percent, except that in no event will the penalty for failure to file a return be less than $15.00. In the case of a fraudulent return or a willful intent to evade payment of the tax, shall be liable for a specific penalty of 100 percent of the tax. Interest and penalties shall be computed on the net tax due after application of any overpayment. The interest and penalties shall accrue from the due date until the date such taxes are paid; provided, however, that the city may settle or compromise any interest or penalties due pursuant to this section as deemed reasonable under the circumstances. 
(f)  If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax hereby imposed and levied and as hereby required on account of the purchase for which the charge is made, the city manager shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and shall take such proceedings in the name of the city as shall be necessary for the collection or recovery of the tax. 
(Code 1991, § 31-111; Ord. No. 9-97, § III, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 01-98, 1-27-98)  
Sec. 42-89. - Records to be kept by seller; inspection of records; transcripts. 
(a)  Each and every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured), and telecommunications service shall keep complete records showing all sales in the city of such commodities or services, which records shall show revenue by account category, the price charged upon each sale, the date thereof, the date of payment thereof and the date such tax was remitted to the city. Additional records shall be maintained as necessary to substantiate sales and tax collected. 
(b)  To assure proper administration of the provisions of this chapter, the city may, where possible and practical, conduct a periodic audit of such sales records of all businesses in connection with which the tax is imposed and levied under this section. Failure to conduct such an audit will not eliminate the liability of the seller for collection and remittance of such tax. 
(c)  Pursuant to F.S. § 166.234, the city may, during the seller's normal business hours at the official location of the seller's books and records, conduct an audit of the records of any seller of a service that is taxable under F.S. §§ 166.231 and 166.232. Each seller must provide to the city, upon 60 days' written notice of intent to audit from the city, access to applicable records for such service, except an extension of this 60-day period must be granted if reasonably requested by the seller. The seller may, at its option, waive the 60-day notice requirement. If either the city or the seller requires an additional extension, it must give notice to the other no less than 30 days' before the existing extension expires, except in cases of bona fide emergency or waiver of the notice requirement by the other party. For purposes of the audit, the seller is liable only for its taxable accounts collected which correspond to the information provided to it by the city pursuant to F.S. § 166.233(3). As used in this section, the term "applicable records" means records kept in the ordinary course of business which established the collection and remittance of taxes due. Such applicable records may be provided to the city on an electronic medium if agreed to by the seller and the city. In accordance with F.S. § 166.231(9)(c), any information received by the city or its agent in connection with such audit is confidential and is exempt from the provisions of F.S. § 119.07(1). 
(Code 1991, § 31-111; Ord. No. 9-97, § IV, 7-1-98)  
Sec. 42-90. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Pursuant to section 1-15, any purchaser willfully failing or refusing to pay the tax imposed by this article, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller, or any officer, agent or employee of any seller, willfully violating the provisions of this article may, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-15 for each and every violation as may be lawfully imposed by a court with jurisdiction. The city may further bring suit to restrain, enjoin or otherwise prevent the violation of this article, and to collect such unpaid taxes, and shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees and costs if it prevails in such suit. 
(Code 1991, § 31-111; Ord. No. 9-97, § V, 7-1-98)  
Secs. 42-91—42-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local Business Tax Act, F.S. ch. 205. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 42-121—42-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 42-141. - Generally. 
(a)  Inspections. 
(1)  The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to conduct inspections of businesses to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Reports of inspections. The city manager or his designee inspecting local business tax receipt recipients, their businesses or premises as authorized in this article, shall report all violations of this article. 
(b)  Order to comply. 
(1)  When the city manager or his designee has reported a violation of this article, the city manager or his designee shall issue to the affected person an order to comply. Alternately, the city manager or his designee may issue citations to be referred to the code enforcement board for a hearing on the charge, in accordance with the provisions of section 2-106 et seq. 
(2)  Nature of notice. Such orders and all other notices issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing and shall contain the following: 
a.  Such notice shall inform the local business tax receipt recipient of the specific violation and his right to contest the same at a hearing before the code enforcement board or a court of competent jurisdiction, as appropriate. 
b.  Such notice shall be either personally delivered or deposited in the United States mail for delivery, addressed to the local business tax receipt recipient whose name appears on the local business tax receipt. 
c.  In the absence of the person affected or his agent or employee, a copy of such notice shall be affixed to some structure on the premises to comply with notification. 
(3)  Period for compliance. The order to comply shall require compliance within a reasonable time period set by the city manager or his designee. Extensions of time may be granted by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  Penalties. In addition to any delinquency fees provided under section 42-176, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished with a fine not to exceed the requirements as set forth in section 2-106 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-104), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-142. - Revocation of local business tax receipt. 
(a)  If the city determines that a person in possession of a current local business tax receipt is conducting any business that violates one or more provisions of this Code or is so adverse to the public health, safety and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance, or makes a false statement on the application for a local business tax receipt, the local business tax receipt officer shall have the authority to issue such person a notice stating that if the violation is not eliminated or corrected within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice, the local business tax receipt shall be revoked. Such notice shall advise the local business tax receipt recipient of the nature of the violation and shall advise the recipient of the right to a hearing as provided for in this subsection. If a person [who] possesses a current local business tax receipt for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment shall violate the provisions of this article, the provisions of section 10-31 et seq. shall be applicable. 
(b)  If the local business tax receipt recipient does not eliminate or correct such violation within the required time, the local business tax receipt shall be automatically revoked and no new local business tax receipt shall be issued until such violations are corrected. Upon revocation of the local business tax receipt, the local business tax receipt recipient shall immediately cease doing business at any location listed in the local business tax receipt; and no further business may be conducted at that location until such violations are corrected and a new application for a local business tax receipt is submitted to the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  At any time prior to the expiration of the 30-day period for compliance, the local business tax receipt recipient may file a written request with the city clerk requesting an appeal of the violation notice. Upon the city clerk's receipt of a written request for an appeal, the city manager or his designee shall direct that a hearing be held on the appeal within 20 days from the date of receipt of the request for an appeal. The local business tax receipt recipient shall receive a minimum of five days' written notice of the hearing. 
(d)  The hearing shall be conducted at the designated time and place before a hearing committee consisting of the city manager and two other city employees not working under the supervision or control of the city's local business tax receipt or building inspection departments. The local business tax receipt officer may be represented at the hearing by the city attorney, and the local business tax receipt recipient may be represented by legal counsel of his choice at his own expense. 
(e)  The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner, and the formal rules of evidence courts of law shall not apply. 
(f)  The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded on tape by the city clerk, and shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  The local business tax receipt official shall present testimony and other evidence. 
(2)  The local business tax receipt recipient shall then present testimony and other evidence. 
(3)  The local business tax receipt official and the local business tax receipt recipient shall have the right of cross examination. 
(4)  The hearing committee shall have the right of inquiry. 
(5)  The local business tax receipt official and the local business tax receipt recipient shall have the right to present rebuttal evidence. 
(6)  Upon completion of the presentation of the testimony and evidence, the hearing shall be closed and the hearing committee shall analyze all testimony and evidence so presented. 
(7)  The hearing committee shall, by majority vote, render a decision either affirming or denying the determination of the local business tax receipt official. The hearing committee's decision shall be reduced to writing within 20 days after the hearing, and copies thereof shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law. Copies thereof shall be furnished to the parties. The hearing committee's decision shall be final. 
(g)  Upon the filing of a written decision confirming the determination of the local business tax receipt officer, the local business tax receipt shall stand automatically and immediately revoked and no new local business tax receipt shall be issued. Upon revocation, the local business tax receipt recipient shall immediately cease doing business in any location listed in the local business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-104), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Secs. 42-143—42-165. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LEVY AND COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 42-166. - Levy. 
The city council does hereby levy a local business tax for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession or occupation within the city. The local business tax is levied on: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office in the city, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business in the city. 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office in the city, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation in the city. 
(3)  Any person who does not qualify under subsection (1) or subsection (2) and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce, if the local business tax is not prohibited by § 8, art. I of the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, F.S. § 205.042.  
Sec. 42-167. - Local business tax receipt required. 
Unless exempted by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person to either directly or indirectly conduct any business without first having obtained or registered a current local business tax receipt as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-101 A.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-168. - One act shall constitute doing business. 
(a)  Any person shall be deemed to be conducting business when he does any of the following: 
(1)  Sells any goods or service(s). 
(2)  Solicits business and/or offers goods or service(s) for sale, for hire, for lease, or for rent. 
(3)  Acquires or uses any vehicle, premises, machine or device in the city for business purposes. 
(4)  Performs a trade service for any owner, tenant or person in possession or in charge of any land or building, including any part thereof. 
(5)  Holds oneself out to the public at a given location, by sign, printed matter, classified section, telephone directory, city directory, word of mouth, or otherwise, as being engaged in business or as offering for sale to the public services, personal property, or the personal property of others, regardless of whether such person actually transacts any business or practices a profession; provided these provisions shall not apply to the sale by a family or an individual of personal property acquired by the family or individual and actually used as part of the household. 
(b)  Any person doing business within the city is subject to the requirements of this article, including payment of all local business tax and permit fees, penalty charges, or any other charges and fees established in this article. 
(c)  No local business tax receipt or business registration shall be issued nor shall any business operate in any commercial, industrial or residential/office/retail zoning districts unless business is conducted or operated from or within a permanent building. Charitable organizations are exempt from this provision. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-101 B.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-169. - Regulatory registration. 
All canvassers, contractors and property maintenance services conducting business within the city who do not maintain a permanent place of business or branch establishment within the city shall be required to register a current local business tax receipt issued by the governmental authority in which they maintain their primary location. The annual fee for such registration shall be $20.00. All such registrations shall expire on September 30 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-101 C.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07) 
Cross reference— Peddlers and solicitors, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Regulatory authority, F.S. § 166.221.  
Sec. 42-170. - Agents responsible for obtaining local business tax receipt. 
Agents or other representatives of nonresidents who are doing business in the city shall be personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of the business(es) they represent with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-101 D.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-171. - Branch establishments. 
Each branch establishment or business location shall be treated as a separate business and shall require a separate local business tax receipt; however, warehouses and distribution plants used in connection with and incidental to a business that is licensed under the provisions of this article, shall not be deemed a separate place of business or branch establishment. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-101 E.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-172. - More than one business at the same location. 
(a)  Any person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location, each of which has been designated in the schedule as a separate business, occupation or profession, shall require a separate local business tax receipt for each such designated business, occupation or profession. 
(b)  The operator of a flea market shall purchase a blanket local business tax receipt, the tax for which shall be calculated based on the number of stalls or rental spaces available at the flea market. 
(c)  A flea market is defined as the sale or bartering of new or used merchandise or goods to the public, whether conducted indoors or outdoors, by more than one vendor. The sale of services shall not constitute a flea market, and anyone selling or bartering services shall obtain the appropriate local business tax receipt as required in this article. If the merchandise or goods remain at the flea market for more than seven consecutive days, the same shall not be deemed a flea market; and anyone selling or bartering such merchandise or goods shall obtain the appropriate local business tax receipt as required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-101 F.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-173. - Renewals. 
(a)  Full local business tax. For each local business tax receipt renewed and for each new local business tax receipt issued between October 1 and March 31 of each year, the full amount of the local business tax imposed by this article shall be paid. 
(b)  Half local business tax. For each local business tax receipt issued to a business commencing operation on or after April 1 of each year, half the total amount of the local business tax hereby imposed shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-103(2), (3)), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-174. - Applications. 
All persons required to obtain a local business tax receipt from the city shall submit a signed, completed application to the code administrator or his designee on a form supplied by the city. No local business tax receipt shall be issued unless the applicant provides his federal employer identification number or social security number, as appropriate. Applications for any adult entertainment establishment shall comply with the requirements of section 10-31 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-101 G.1.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-175. - Issuance and expiration date. 
All local business tax receipts required in this article shall be available for sale to the public beginning August 1 of each year. All local business taxes, except as otherwise expressly provided in this article, shall be due and payable on or before September 30 of each year. If September 30 should fall on a weekend or holiday, the local business taxes shall be due and payable on or before the first business day following September 30. All local business tax receipts shall expire on September 30 of the succeeding year unless revoked or abandoned prior to that date. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-101 G.2.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-176. - Delinquency fee. 
(a)  If a local business tax shall not be paid on or before September 30, the same shall be considered to be in default. 
(b)  Local business taxes in default shall be subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent during the month of October, plus an additional five percent for each additional month of default provided that the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent of the local business tax for the delinquent establishment. The payment of this tax shall not be in lieu of other charges imposed for violation of provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any person doing business without first obtaining or registering a local business tax receipt as required by this article shall pay a penalty of 25 percent of the required local business tax. The payment of this tax shall not be in lieu of other charges imposed for violation of provisions of this article. 
(d)  Any person doing business without first obtaining or registering a local business tax receipt as required by this article, who does not pay the required local business tax within 150 days after the initial notice of the local business tax being due, shall be subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorney's fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-101 G.3.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-177. - Transfer of local business tax receipt. 
(a)  A local business tax receipt may be transferred to a new owner, when there is a bona fide sale of the business, upon payment of a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual local business tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00, and presentation of the original local business tax receipt and evidence of the sale. 
(b)  A local business tax receipt may be transferred from one location to another location within the city upon payment of a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual local business tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00, and presentation of the original local business tax receipt and evidence of the business location. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-101 H.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-178. - Display of license. 
(a)  Every person required to have a city local business tax receipt shall at all times from the issuance of the local business tax receipt by the city conspicuously display the local business tax receipt in his place of business. 
(b)  Where the licensee does not have a place of business, the licensee shall be prepared at all times while engaged in his occupation to present his local business tax receipt for inspection by any authorized city employee when requested to do so. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-101 I.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-179. - Prerequisites for issuance of local business tax receipts. 
(a)  No local business tax receipt shall be issued or renewed unless the person or business listed below submits a current state certificate, registration or license, or proof of copy of the same: 
(1)  First-time applicants who practice a profession regulated by the department of business and professional regulation, or any board or commission thereof, shall exhibit an active state certificate, registration or license from the department of business and professional regulation. When applying for a local business tax receipt, no local business tax receipt shall be renewed by the city for any person so regulated whose license has been suspended, revoked or inactivated by the department of business and professional regulation unless such person can exhibit an active state certificate, registration or license. 
(2)  Operation of a pharmacy shall require a current permit issued by the board of pharmacy. No local business tax receipt shall be required in order to practice the profession of pharmacy. 
(3)  Operation of an adult congregate living facility regulated under F.S. ch. 400, pt. III, shall require a license issued by the department of health and rehabilitative services for such facility at the specified location or locations. 
(4)  Operation of any pest control business regulated under F.S. ch. 482 shall require a current license from the department of agriculture and consumer services for each of its business locations in the city. 
(5)  Operation of a health studio regulated under F.S. §§ 501.012—501.019, or a ballroom dance studio regulated under F.S. § 501.143, shall require a current license, registration or letter of exemption from the department of agriculture and consumer services. 
(6)  Operation of a travel agency or other travel business regulated under F.S. ch. 501, pt. IV, § 559.927, shall require a current registration or letter of exemption from the department of agriculture and consumer services. 
(7)  Operation of a telemarketing business regulated under F.S. ch. 501, pt. IV, shall require a current license, registration or affidavit of exemption from the department of agriculture and consumer services. 
(b)  All applicants shall fully satisfy the terms of this article, including but not limited to section 42-176. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-101 J.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-180. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Generally. The persons or businesses given in subsections (b)—(i) of this section are exempt from either obtaining a local business tax receipt or paying a tax to obtain a local business tax receipt. 
(b)  Motor vehicles. Vehicles used by any person licensed under this article for the sale or delivery of tangible personal property from their place of business on which a local business tax receipt is paid shall not be construed to be separate places of business, and no local business tax receipt shall be required for such vehicles or the operators thereof as provided under F.S. § 205.063. 
(c)  Farm products. No local business tax receipt shall be required of any person for the selling of farm products manufactured therefrom, except alcoholic beverages as defined and regulated under this Code when such products were grown or produced by such person, as provided under F.S. § 205.064. 
(d)  Nonresident persons regulated by the department of business and professional regulation. No person engaged in or managing a business, profession or occupation regulated by the department of business and professional regulation that performs work or services on a temporary or transitory basis in the city, when that person has paid for a local business tax receipt for the current year to the county or municipality in the state where their permanent business location or branch office is maintained, shall be required to register or obtain a local business tax receipt from the city as provided under F.S. § 205.065. 
(e)  Certain disabled persons, the aged and widows with minor dependents. All disabled persons physically incapable of manual labor, widows with minor dependents and persons 65 years of age or older, with not more than one employee or helper and who use their own capital only, not in excess of $1,000.00, shall be allowed to obtain a local business tax receipt without paying the required tax. Proof of such exemption, as provided for under F.S. § 205.162, shall be furnished to the city. The local business tax receipt issued by the city shall plainly state such exemption and the reason for such exemption. The exemption provided under this subsection shall not apply to the selling of alcoholic beverages as defined and regulated under this Code. 
(f)  Disabled veterans. All disabled veterans or the unremarried spouses of a deceased disabled veteran engaged in any business or occupation that may be carried on mainly through the personal efforts of the local business tax receipt recipient as a means of livelihood shall be allowed to obtain a local business tax receipt without paying the required tax when such tax does not exceed the sum of $50.00. When the tax exceeds the sum of $50.00, the remainder in excess of $50.00 shall be paid by the local business tax receipt recipient. Proof of such exemption, as provided for under F.S. § 205.171, shall be furnished to the city. The local business tax receipt issued by the city shall be marked across the face thereof "Veterans Exempt Local Business Tax Receipt" - "Not Transferable." The exemption provided under this subsection shall not apply to the selling of alcoholic beverages as defined and regulated under this Code. 
(g)  Churches, temples and similar religious institutions. No local business tax receipt shall be required for practicing the religious tenets of any church or other religious institution as provided under F.S. § 205.191. 
(h)  Charitable sales, fundraising. No local business tax receipt shall be required of charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic, service or other such organizations' occasional sales or fundraising, as provided under F.S. § 205.192. 
(i)  Mobile home setup operations. No local business tax receipt shall be required of a duly licensed mobile home dealer or a duly licensed mobile home manufacturer, or an employee of such dealer or manufacturer, who performs setup operations, as provided under F.S. § 205.193. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-102), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-181. - Classifications. 
The 1987 edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, as published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, pertaining to the divisions and standard industrial classification of establishments (hereinafter "SIC") and a copy of which is on file with the city manager or his designee is hereby adopted and incorporated in this article by reference. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-103 A.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 42-182. - Basis of tax. 
Local business taxes for any SIC establishment shall be based upon the square footage of floor area for the establishment, the acreage of the premises of the establishment, and/or the number of units/locations at the establishment unless the amount calculated shall exceed the maximum increase allowed by F.S. § 205.0535. 
(1)  Square footage of floor area. Every person doing business in the city where the amount of the local business tax to be paid is dependent upon the square footage of floor area of the establishment shall file a statement at the time payment is made setting forth the total square footage of floor area of the establishment. 
(2)  Acreage of premises. Every person doing business in the city where the amount of the local business tax to be paid is dependent upon the acreage of the premises of the establishment shall file a statement at the time payment is made setting forth the acreage of the premises of the establishment. 
(3)  Number of units/locations. Every person doing business in the city where the amount of the local business tax to be paid is dependent upon the number of units (e.g., vendor spaces, rental units, agents, trucks, buses, airplanes) or locations shall file a statement at the time payment is made setting forth the number of units and/or locations. 
a.  Real estate agents. Each agent working for a broker who has a primary location within the city limits shall pay a flat tax for a city local business tax receipt. This in no way relieves the primary location from obtaining a city local business tax receipt based on the square footage of the location. 
b.  Mobile home parks. Every mobile home park doing business within the limits of the city shall purchase a local business tax receipt based upon the number of units located on the premises, notwithstanding those parks for whom exception had to be made in accordance with F.S. § 205.0535. 
c.  Retirement centers/nursing homes. Each retirement center or nursing home shall obtain a local business tax receipt as set forth herein. For those buildings existing and new on September 12, 1995, that under F.S. ch. 26 would have had a local business tax of $250.00, no initial local business tax receipt shall cost more than $500.00 provided the time has not expired whereby the city has increased the cost of the local business tax receipts by five percent as allowed by F.S. § 205.0535. 
d.  Apartment buildings. Every apartment building doing business within the limits of the city shall purchase a local business tax receipt based upon the number of rental units located on the premises, notwithstanding those buildings for which exception had to be made in accordance with F.S. § 205.0535. 
e.  Insurance companies. Each insurance company having a physical location within the city limits shall pay a local business tax based upon the calculation table adopted herewith and made a part hereof. Each insurance company writing any class of insurance upon any person residing in the city or any property located within the city, whether or not a location office or agent is maintained per F.S. § 205.042(3), shall pay a flat fee of $125.00. 
f.  Carnivals and special events. Carnivals and special events shall pay a local business tax of $25.00 for each event. This fee is not subject to the half-year reduction. 
(4)  Change in floor area, acreage or units/locations after issuance of local business tax receipt. Any change in the square footage of floor area of the establishment, acreage of the premises of the establishment or in units/locations at the establishment after the issuance of a local business tax receipt shall require the local business tax receipt recipient to update that information on a local business tax receipt. Any change that increases the local business tax, as set forth in table 1 of this article, shall require the local business tax receipt recipient to pay for the increase. It shall be the responsibility of the local business tax receipt recipient to ensure accuracy of the information on file with the city. Any reduction in the floor area, acreage or units/locations will be adjusted in the succeeding year's local business tax and will not result in a refund to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 9-95, § 1(26-103 C.1.), 9-12-95; Ord. No. 24-2007, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Secs. 42-183—42-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 42-216—42-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Mandatory procedure for adoption of budget, F.S. § 200.065. 
 
Sec. 42-241. - Annual budget. 
(a)  On or before June 1 of each year, the city manager shall make and submit to the city council a projected capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year and the next four years. On or before July 1 of each year, he shall submit to city council the first draft of the annual budget, in which he shall set forth an estimate of the expenditures and revenues of the city for the ensuing fiscal year. This budget submission shall be compiled from detailed information, and in its arrangement the classification of expenditures and revenues shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main sources of revenue and for the functional departments of the city and shall give in parallel columns the following information: 
(1)  A proposed line item budget request illustrating the expenses associated with each department of the city. 
(2)  Expenditures for corresponding items for the prior fiscal year. 
(3)  Expenditures to date for corresponding items for the current fiscal year. 
(4)  Increases or decreases of requests compared with corresponding appropriation for the current year, with reasons for such increases or decreases. 
(5)  An itemized statement of estimated revenues for the proposed budget year. 
(6)  An itemization of anticipated revenue from other sources. 
(7)  Such other information as the city council may require. 
(b)  The proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall be supported with information giving the reasons for same in such detail as may be necessary to afford the city council a comprehensive understanding of the needs and requirements of the various departments of city government for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Code 1991, § 24-101)  
Sec. 42-242. - Number of copies. 
Sufficient copies of the proposed budget shall be prepared so that there may be copies on file in the office of the city clerk for inspection by the public. 
(Code 1991, § 24-102)  
Sec. 42-243. - Actions of council; hearings; notice. 
(a)  The city council shall meet and carefully consider the proposed budget as provided in F.S. § 200.065. The council shall use the city manager's proposed budget as a basis but shall have the authority to increase or decrease the amount of any line item. 
(b)  In accordance with the rules and regulations of F.S. § 200.065 compliance requirements, the city council shall conduct public hearings for the adoption of the ad valorem tax and the budget. Advertisements for the public hearings shall be in accordance with F.S. § 200.065. 
(c)  The city council shall have the right to amend or change the budget for the city as provided in F.S. § 200.065. 
(Code 1991, § 24-103)  
Sec. 42-244. - Amendment. 
All city council action adopting or amending the budget shall be by ordinance. 
(Code 1991, § 24-104)  
Sec. 42-245. - Appropriations; transfer of funds. 
(a)  The adoption of the budget by the city council shall constitute an approval for all city services and establish a total appropriation for such services, which shall be administered by the city manager. 
(b)  Within each department, the city manager may transfer any part of the balance of an appropriation remaining after the purposes of the appropriation have been satisfied or abandoned to any other item or items in the same department for which the current year's appropriation has proved insufficient provided such transfer violates no legal restriction. 
(c)  Upon request of the city manager the city council may, by ordinance, transfer funds to any department whose appropriation has proven insufficient from: 
(1)  Another department where they are not needed, committed or legally restricted; or 
(2)  Any current revenue not appropriated, or any unencumbered funds from the previous fiscal year. 
(Code 1991, § 24-105)  
Sec. 42-246. - Use of city funds. 
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except pursuant to appropriations approved by the city council. The action of the council in adopting the annual budget shall constitute an appropriation of funds for the expenditures listed in the budget. Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned. The purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
(Code 1991, § 24-106)  
Secs. 42-247—42-265. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ACCOUNTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform accounting practices, F.S. § 218.33. 
 
Sec. 42-266. - Accounting requirements. 
The finance director shall keep accounts showing the financial transactions of all departments and offices of the city. The forms of all such accounts and the financial reports rendered to or by the finance director shall be prescribed and approved by the city manager. The accounts and accounting procedure of the city shall be adequate to record all cash receipts and disbursements, all revenue accrued and liabilities incurred and all transactions affecting the acquisition, custody and disposition of items of value. Monthly financial reports illustrating expenditures and revenue shall be prepared and distributed to the city council, city manager and department heads, and shall be made available to the public. Line item accounts shall be kept for each specific item of appropriation approved by the city council, and every warrant on the treasury shall state specifically against which of the items the warrant is drawn. Each account shall show in detail the appropriations approved thereto by the city council, the amount drawn thereon, the unpaid obligations charged against it, and the unencumbered balance to the credit thereof. 
(Code 1991, § 24-107)  
Sec. 42-267. - Withdrawal procedure. 
Any two of the following officers, the city manager, the city clerk, the finance director and the mayor are hereby designated and empowered to sign all warrants (checks/drafts) for the payment of city funds and to make all withdrawals of city funds from city accounts. All transactions require two signatures. All funds withdrawn from city accounts shall be deposited in a city checking account for lawful purposes as established by the budget, the Charter and the Laws of Florida. 
(Code 1991, § 24-108)  
Secs. 42-268—42-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PROCUREMENT 
 
Sec. 42-291. - Purchase order required. 
A purchase of any single item or group of items ordinarily comprising one transaction shall be made with one purchase order. 
(Code 1991, § 24-109(1))  
Sec. 42-292. - Requisitions authorized. 
Purchase requisitions may be issued for expenditures in amounts less than $200.00 upon the approval of the department head. Purchase orders issued for expenditures in the amount of $200.00 and greater shall require the approval of the finance director. Normal and routine expenditures such as utility costs may be processed without the issuance of a purchase order with the approval of the finance director. 
(Code 1991, § 24-109(2))  
Sec. 42-293. - Credit card use. 
Credit card use shall require the approval of the finance director. All city credit cards shall be held by the finance director in a manner to ensure proper security. 
(Code 1991, § 24-109(3))  
Sec. 42-294. - Price quotes; sealed bids; exceptions. 
(a)  For any materials, supplies, equipment or items costing more than $2,500.00, the department head shall first secure two or more written price quotes, if possible, before a purchase order is issued. 
(b)  No purchase of materials, supplies or equipment exceeding $10,000.00 in value shall be made unless advertisement for sealed bids has been published in a newspaper within the county. The city council shall be advised of all bid purchases. 
(c)  The following are exceptions from the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) above: 
(1)  When such proposed expenditure may be consummated through use of state, county or other municipal contract lists, the bidding procedure shall be waived. 
(2)  Where there is only one available supplier or company capable of supplying subject matter to be purchased and such supplies, materials or equipment are the only such commodities that can be used by the city for its public purpose, competitive bids shall not be required. However, the city manager shall do all within his power to see that such supplies, materials and equipment are obtained for the city at a fair and reasonable price. 
(3)  Personal and professional service contracts, which shall be awarded as provided in section 42-295. 
(4)  Emergency purchases, which shall be awarded as provided in section 42-296. 
(5)  Purchases of used equipment, which shall be awarded as provided in section 42-297. 
(Code 1991, § 24-109(4)(a))  
Sec. 42-295. - Personal and professional services. 
Contracts and engagement of personal and professional services may be obtained and entered into by the city council without competitive bidding. The fixing and payment of salaries to city employees and contracts for the services of court stenographers, attorneys at law, auditors and other personal and professional services shall not be subject to the requirement for competitive bids where doing so does not conflict with state or federal law. 
(Code 1991, § 24-109(4)(b)) 
State Law reference— Certain architectural and engineering services are to be awarded pursuant to F.S. § 287.055.  
Sec. 42-296. - Emergency purchases. 
In the case of an emergency where it is essential to the health, safety or welfare of the people that immediate action be taken, competitive bids shall not be required before the purchase of supplies, equipment, or materials or the entering into of a contract for public works. 
(Code 1991, § 24-109(4)(c))  
Sec. 42-297. - Purchase of used equipment. 
The requirements of this division may be waived by the city manager when purchasing used or surplus equipment provided that such a purchase is in the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 24-109(4)(d))  
Sec. 42-298. - Approval of contracts. 
Prior to the time any contract is entered into on behalf of the city, the city attorney shall review and endorse thereon approval or disapproval of the form, sufficiency and correctness of the contract. No contract with the city shall take effect until it has been so endorsed as approved by the city attorney. The contract then must be approved by the city council. Such approval shall be recorded in the official minutes of the city council. Each contract after approval by the city council shall be signed by the city manager and attested to by the city clerk. 
(Code 1991, § 24-110)  
Sec. 42-299. - Records. 
The finance office shall keep a record of all purchase orders used for city business. Purchase orders shall consist of a prenumbered four-part form, original to the vendor, one copy to the department head, one copy to be attached to the paid invoice, and one copy to be filed in a numerical file. 
(Code 1991, § 24-111)  
Sec. 42-300. - Insurance on city-owned vehicles. 
The city shall carry a minimum of liability insurance on all of the city-owned motor vehicles in the following amounts: 
(1)  No less than $100,000.00 coverage for any one individual sustaining injury. 
(2)  No less than $300,000.00 total coverage for damages sustained in any particular incident. 
(Code 1991, § 24-112)  
Secs. 42-301—42-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR SENIOR CITIZENS 
 
Sec. 42-331. - Authority and purpose. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the specific authority of Section 6(f), Art. VII of the Florida Constitution, and F.S. § 196.075, and the city's Home Rule powers granted by Chapter 166, Florida Statutes, and the city's Charter. 
(Ord. No. 06-2005, § 1, 4-12-05)  
Sec. 42-332. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings, unless clearly indicated otherwise: 
Department of Revenue means the Department of Revenue for the State of Florida. 
Household means a person or group of persons living together in a room or group of rooms as a housing unit, but the term does not include persons boarding in or renting a portion of the dwelling. 
Household income means the adjusted gross income, as defined in Section 62 of the United States Internal Revenue Code, of all members of a household. 
Property appraiser means the Pinellas County Property Appraiser. 
65 years of age means a person who has attained the age of 65 prior to January 1st of the tax year for which the additional homestead exemption is sought. 
(Ord. No. 06-2005, § 1, 4-12-05)  
Sec. 42-333. - Entitlement to additional homestead exemption. 
(a)  Any person: 
(1)  Sixty-five years of age or older, 
(2)  Who has legal or equitable title to real estate located with the city; 
(3)  Who maintains thereon his or her permanent residence; 
(4)  Who qualifies for and receives homestead exemption pursuant to Section 6(a), Article VII of the Florida Constitution, and F.S. § 196.075, and whose household income does not exceed $20,000.00 or such amount as is adjusted pursuant to section 42-334 herein shall be entitled to make application to the Property Appraiser of Pinellas County for an additional homestead exemption of $25,000.00 as approved in this article. 
(b)  The additional homestead exemption, if granted by the Property Appraiser of Pinellas County shall be applicable to all ad valorem tax millage levied by the city; and, if applicable, shall be subject to the provisions of F.S. §§ 196.075, 196.131 and 196.161. If title to the property is held jointly with right of survivorship, the person residing on the property and otherwise qualifying for the additional homestead exemption may receive the entire amount of the additional homestead exemption provided herein. 
(c)  The additional homestead exemption provided herein shall be available to qualified persons beginning with the year 2007 tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 06-2005, § 1, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 13-2006, § 1, 9-12-06)  
Sec. 42-334. - Annual adjustment of income. 
Beginning January 1, 2005, and continuing every January 1st thereafter, the $20,000.00 income limitation shall be automatically adjusted by the percentage of change in the average cost-of-living index in the period of January 1st through December 31st of the prior year as compared to the same period for the year prior to that year, in accordance with F.S. § 196.075(3). 
(Ord. No. 06-2005, § 1, 4-12-05)  
Sec. 42-335. - Requirements for claiming additional homestead exemption. 
(a)  Every person claiming the additional homestead exemption pursuant to this article must file an application with the Pinellas County Property Appraiser no later than March 1st of each year for which such exemption is claimed. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the Florida Department of Revenue and shall include a sworn statement of household income for all members of the household. On or before June 1st of each year, each applicant must file supporting documentation with the property appraiser, including copies of all federal income tax returns, wage and earning statements (W-2 forms), and such other documentation as may be required by the property appraiser, including documentation necessary to verify the income received by all members of the household for the prior year. The applicant's statement shall attest to the accuracy of all documentation provided, and the property appraiser shall not grant the exemption without the required documentation. 
(b)  Failure to file the application and sworn statement by March 1st or failure to file the required supporting documentation by June 1st of any given year shall constitute a waiver of the additional exemption privilege for that year. 
(Ord. No. 06-2005, § 1, 4-12-05) 

SUBPART B LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE

Chapter 46 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 14, 2014, amended Ch. 46 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 46, §§ 46-4—46-6, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1991, §§ 1.00.00, 1.01.00, 1.02.02, 1.03.02, 1.04.02; Ord. No. 23-2003, § 1, 9-9-03. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Title. 
This subpart B shall be known as the "City of Seminole Unified Land Development Code" and may be referred to herein as the "land development code" or "Code." 
( Ord. No. 06-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 46-2. - Authority. 
(a)  This land development code is enacted pursuant to the requirements and authority of Florida Statutes, the Community Planning Act, the City Charter and the general powers in F.S. ch. 166. 
(b)  This land development code establishes authority to the city council, developmental review board and city manager, including but not limited to, receiving and reviewing required applications, and making recommendations and decisions on such applications and the requirements and standards established by this code. References in this code to city manager authorized designee, means the city staff authorized by the city manager to perform such duties as described in this Code. 
(c)  No applications for development permits, site plans, variances, development agreements, special events, or building permits shall be accepted, nor shall any approvals or permits be issued for a property, which has been issued a code enforcement notice of violation; or, which has a city recorded, unpaid, code enforcement lien; or, which has outstanding, unpaid, development review fees that have remained unpaid after the city has notified by certified mail the party responsible for the fees and said property owner that such fees remain unpaid. These restrictions shall not apply to applications submitted to correct a code enforcement violation; a federal, state or other agency violation; a Florida Building Code violation; a Florida Fire Prevention Code violation; or, an imminent life safety, health or welfare condition as determined by the building official, fire marshal, or other applicable city official. 
(d)  In accordance with the Florida Building Code, Section 110.2, the city manager or city manager authorized designee shall have the authority to direct the building official to withhold of a certificate of occupancy for any construction or development that is in violation of the applicable sections of the city's land development code, or specific terms or conditions of a development order, a development agreement, a site plan, or a development permit, which govern(s) or otherwise conditions the construction or development beyond the requirements of the Florida Building Code as part of a building permit issued for the construction or permit. 
( Ord. No. 06-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 46-3. - Applicability and vested rights. 
(a)  General applicability. Except as specifically provided in this section, the provisions of this land development code shall apply to all lots, parcel, and development in the city; and no development or redevelopment shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to this land development code. 
(b)  Previously issued development permits. The provisions of this land development code and any amendments thereto shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and effective development permit if: 
(1)  The development activity is authorized by a building permit issued prior to date of amendment; and 
(2)  The development activity continues without interruption (except that which may be caused by war or natural disaster) until the development is complete. If the development or building permit expires, any further development on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this land development code. 
(c)  Previously approved development orders. Projects with valid final development orders issued prior to date of adoption and on which development activity has commenced or does commence and proceeds according to the time limits in the regulations under which the development was originally approved must meet only the requirements of the regulations in effect when the development plan was approved. If the development plan expires or is otherwise invalidated, any further development on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this land development code. 
(d)  Vested property right shall mean the right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a site specific development plan and shall be created only when such plan has been approved by the city. Such right shall be vested and subject to any expiration period defined in any approval or as such approval or expiration date may be amended by the city. Possession of a valid, unexpired building permit, certificate of occupancy, development order or development agreement approval shall presumptively vest the development approved under such permit or development order, and not be subject to any subsequent amendments to the comprehensive plan and/or land development code, unless such approval has expired and as further defined pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) above. 
( Ord. No. 06-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 46-4. - Incorporation by reference. 
(a)  Zoning map. The zoning map, consisting of the map sections identified hereafter and contained in the county zoning atlas, is hereby incorporated into this land development code by reference. The official zoning map shall be maintained on display in the city hall. 
Map Section
Identification 
S-1/2 15-30-15 
N-1/2 16-30-15 
S-1/2 16-30-15 
S-1/2 17-30-15 
N-1/2 20-30-15 
S-1/2 20-30-15 
N-1/2 21-30-15 
S-1/2 21-30-15 
N-1/2 22-30-15 
S-1/2 22-30-15 
S-1/2 23-30-15 
S-1/2 25-30-15 
N-1/2 26-30-15 
S-1/2 26-30-15 
N-1/2 27-30-15 
S-1/2 27-30-15 
N-1/2 28-30-15 
S-1/2 28-30-15 
S-1/2 26-30-15 
N-1/2 33-30-15 
N-1/2 34-30-15 
S-1/2 34-30-15 
N-1/2 35-30-15 
S-1/2 35-30-15 
N-1/2 36-30-15 
S-1/2 36-30-15 
N-1/2 01-31-15 
S-1/2 01-31-15 
N-1/2 02-31-15 
S-1/2 02-31-15 
N-1/2 03-31-15 
S-1/2 03-31-15 
(b)  Flood insurance study. The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Seminole, Florida, dated December 1, 1980, and subsequently revised effective September 16, 2002, and the revised Flood Insurance Rate Maps, panels #: 12103C0177G, 12103C0179G, 12103C0181G, 12103C0182G, 12103C0183G, 12103C0G184, and 12103C0G192, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, effective September 3, 2003, and as may be subsequently revised, are hereby incorporated into this land development code by reference. 
( Ord. No. 06-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 46-5. - Rules of interpretation. 
(a)  Generally. In the interpretation and application of this land development code, all provisions shall be liberally construed in favor of the objectives and purposes of the city and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. More specific provisions of this land development code shall be followed in lieu of more general provisions that may be more lenient than or in conflict with the more specific provision. Where there is a conflict between the land development code and the city's comprehensive plan, the comprehensive plan shall govern. Where there are any conflicting provisions within this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. Where there is a conflict between text and numbers or graphics, text shall be deemed to be controlling. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code, all applicable state, federal and other regulatory agency regulations shall also apply to development within the city. 
(b)  Interpretation. 
(1)  Responsibility. If any question arises concerning the application of regulations, standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of this land development code, community development director shall be responsible for interpretation and shall look to the comprehensive plan and/or the city attorney for guidance. Responsibility for interpretation by the community development director shall be limited to standards, regulations and requirements of this land development code, and/or other relevant resources as may be appropriate to assist in the interpretation but shall not be construed to include interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in this land development code, nor be construed as overriding the responsibilities given to any commission, board or official named in other sections or articles of this land development code. Such interpretations shall be provided in writing and kept on file with the community development department, and when appropriate, incorporated into this code. 
(2)  Zoning district boundaries. Interpretations regarding boundaries of zoning districts shall be made in accordance with the following: 
a.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any street shall be construed as following the centerline of the street. 
b.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any platted lot line or other property line shall be construed as following such line. 
c.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following section lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
d.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following natural features shall be construed as following such features. 
( Ord. No. 06-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 46-6. - Enforcement. 
In addition to enforcement as provided in chapter 1, section 1-15, the land development code is enforceable as provided in chapter 2, articles IV and V, by the code enforcement special magistrate. Any person may report a violation of this Code to the community development department, which has the authority to implement, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Authority of inspectors. Inspectors for the community development department, its successor or other designees of the city manager shall have the authority to investigate alleged violations of this land development code. 
(2)  Basis of investigations. Investigations may be based upon statements of complaints or upon inspections performed by city departmental personnel. 
(3)  Methods of investigations. In conducting investigations of alleged violations, departmental inspectors shall have the authority, where otherwise lawful, to inspect property, obtain the signed statements of prospective witnesses, photograph violations, and do such other gathering of evidence as is necessary for the complete investigation of an alleged zoning violation. 
(4)  Stop work order. Where violations are found to exist during the course of any construction or other activity requiring a permit, a stop work order may be issued by the community development department; and work shall thereafter cease until the violation is corrected. 
(5)  Contact with violators. Where it is determined that a violation of this land development code exists, the community development department or its successor shall attempt to contact the violator and direct compliance with this land development code. With or without such notice, the community development department or its successor may refer the matter to the code enforcement special magistrate or state attorney for proper legal action. 
(6)  Responsible parties. The owners of property subject to this land development code shall be responsible for compliance with this land development code with respect to their property. Enforcement action taken by the city may be brought against the owners and/or persons or entities in control of the property, including a contractor working on the property. 
(7)  Enforcement. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction of a city ordinance or code and upon conviction or adjudication thereof, may be punished per chapter 1, section 1-15 or chapter 2, section 2-201. Each day a violation continues to exist constitutes a separate offense. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city or state from bringing an appropriate civil action to ensure compliance with this land development code. 
(8)  General provisions. Where this land development code provides for permitted uses or activities, a violation of the particular section which provides for the permitted use or activity shall occur if dissimilar uses or activities are existing on the subject property. Failure to obtain a permit, site plan or clearance from the city as required in this chapter, shall be considered a violation of the particular provision requiring the permit, site plan or clearance. 
( Ord. No. 06-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 46-7. - Definitions. 
(a)  All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed so as to implement its intents and purposes and for implementation of the mandates of the comprehensive plan. Terms used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall have the meanings prescribed by reference to generally accepted engineering, planning, or otherwise professional terminology if technical; and otherwise, according to common usage. Except as otherwise noted, all other words shall have the meaning normally attributed to them. 
(b)  References in this Code to Florida Statutes (F.S.) and Administrative Codes (F.A.C.) or codes of other regulatory agencies means as said statutes or codes exist, and as may be amended. Further, references to multiple review agency requirements means the more restrictive rules shall apply and all development shall be held to the applicable minimum requirements of said agencies. 
(c)  References to regulatory agencies include, but are not limited to, Pinellas County, the Southwest Florida Water Management District (SWFWMD), Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT), United States Army Corp of Engineers (ACOE) and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
( Ord. No. 06-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 46-8. - Appeal of city decisions. 
(a)  In addition to appeal procedures provided for by this Code, the city shall also recognize private property rights and dispute resolution procedures pursuant to F.S. § 70.001 (Bert J. Harris, Jr. Private Property Rights Protection Act) and F.S. § 70.51 (Land Use and Environmental Dispute Resolution Act). 
( Ord. No. 06-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Chapter 50 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 14, 2014, amended Ch. 50 in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Ch. 50 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1991, §§ 10.00.00, 10.01.01—10.01.03, 10.02.01—10.02.03, 11.00.01—11.00.03, 11.01.01—11.01.04, 11.02.01, 11.03.01—11.03.03, 22-165; Ord. No. 24-2000, § 2, 8-22-00; Ord. No. 18-2005, § 1, 4-11-06; Ord. No. 01-2006, § 1, 4-11-06; Ord. No. 01-2008, § 1, 2-12-08. See also the Code Comparative Table for a detailed listing of repealed sections. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 50-31—50-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENTAL REVIEW BOARD 
 
Sec. 50-51. - Created. 
There is hereby created a board to be called the developmental review board. The board shall consist of five members with a quorum of three members and one alternate member, none of whom shall be an employee or an elected official of the city. The alternate member shall serve on the developmental review board only when required to provide a quorum. The community development director of the city shall act in an advisory capacity to the developmental review board without vote on matters before the board. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-52. - Terms. 
Appointments approved by the city council to the developmental review board shall be for terms of two years, with terms commencing on April 1 of the year in which an appointment is made; except an appointment to a vacancy occurring during the unexpired term of a member with more than 90 days remaining in the term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term. Three members shall serve on terms that commence in odd-numbered years, and two members and the alternate member shall serve on terms that commence in even-numbered years. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-53. - Responsibilities. 
The developmental review board shall have the responsibility to: 
(1)  Recommend to the city council regarding changes that need to be made with respect to land development code, changes to site specific land use and/or zoning and special exception uses within the city. 
(2)  Coordinate with the state, the Tampa Bay Regional Planning Council, and the county with respect to planning that affects the city and to report on those matters to the city council. 
(3)  Consider and render decisions on applications for variances, special exceptions and appeals from administrative opinions and decisions concerning interpretations of the land development code. 
(4)  Act as the "land development regulation commission" per F.S. § 163.3164(25), as amended, to develop and recommend to the city council, land development code amendments which implement the adopted comprehensive plan and to review the land development code, or amendments thereto, for consistency with the adopted plan and report to the city council regarding its findings. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-54. - Local planning agency. 
Pursuant to and in accordance with F.S. § 163.3174, the developmental review board is designated and established as the local planning agency for the city for those site specific applications in which the city council considers comprehensive plan and comprehensive plan future land use map amendments. Rezonings that would, if approved, increase residential density, a school board representative is hereby designated as a non-voting member of the local planning agency. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 50-55—50-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-86. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abut means to physically touch or border upon, or to share a common property line. 
Adversely affected person means any person who is suffering or will suffer an adverse effect to an interest protected or furthered by the local government comprehensive plan, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Interests related to health and safety; 
(2)  Police and fire protection services; 
(3)  Densities or intensities of development; 
(4)  Transportation facilities; 
(5)  Recreational facilities; 
(6)  Educational facilities; 
(7)  Environmental or natural resources. 
The alleged adverse effect may be shared in common with other members of the community at large but must exceed in degree the general interest in community good shared by all persons. 
Department means the community development department. 
Developer means any person who engages in or proposes to engage in a development activity either as the owner or as the agent of an owner of property. 
Development or development activity means any of the following activities, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Construction, clearing, filling, excavating, grading, paving, dredging, mining, drilling or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil of a site. 
(2)  Building, installing, enlarging, replacing or substantially restoring a structure, impervious surface, or water management system, including the long-term storage of materials. 
(3)  Subdividing land into three or more parcels. 
(4)  Installing landscaping or tree removal for which authorization is required under this land development code. 
(5)  Erection of a permanent sign unless expressly exempted by this land development code. 
(6)  Alteration of an historic property for which authorization is required under this land development code. 
(7)  Development as defined in F.S. § 163.3221, as amended. 
(8)  Construction, elimination or alteration of a driveway onto a public street. 
(9)  Any activity on a site, lot or parcel, irrespective of whether or not a permit is required for said activity, that would have the effect of causing stormwater to flow onto adjacent properties when the flow of stormwater is not contained within a dedicated drainage system or drainage easement. 
Development order means an order granting, denying or granting with conditions an application for approval of a development project or activity. The development order authorizes the project, whereas the development permit authorizes specific components of the project, such as building construction, parking lot installation, landscaping, and the like. For purposes of this land development code, development orders include minor site plans, major site plans, final subdivision plats, and special exceptions. 
Development permit. For purposes of this land development code, a development permit is that official city document that authorizes the commencement of construction or land alteration without need for further application and approval. Development permits include, but are not limited to all types of construction permits (plumbing, electrical, foundation, mechanical, in addition to the building permit itself), grading and clearing permits, tree removal permits, and sign permits. 
Director means the community development director. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-87. - Purpose. 
This article sets forth the application and review procedures required for obtaining development approvals, including site plans, and other permits. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-88. - Withdrawal of applications. 
An application for development approval may be withdrawn at any time so long as no notice has been given that the application will be reviewed at a public hearing. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 50-89—50-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
 
Sec. 50-100. - Uses which require site plan review. 
The following uses require site plan review: 
(1)  All new construction (including parking lots, mobile home subdivisions and parks) except single-family, when a single family home is constructed on an individual lot or parcel. This provision does not exempt these uses from complying with other codes, regulations and ordinances that may require site plan review. Pursuant to chapter 59, all non-residential and residential as part of a mixed-use development exterior modifications that involve an enlargement or expansion may require submittal and approval of a site plan. 
(2)  Additions to existing uses if deemed appropriate and necessary by the city manager or city manager authorized designee. Applicants for such additions may be required to submit preliminary plans containing information required in section 50-103 for approval prior to receiving a zoning and site plan approval for construction. 
(3)  All subdivisions, as defined by F.S. ch. 177. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-101. - Preliminary site plan review approval process. 
(a)  A preliminary site plan review shall be the first step in obtaining site plan approval unless an applicant opts to submit directly for a final site plan review (section 50-104). 
(b)  Applications for site plan review shall be completed and submitted to the community development department and shall include all items as required in section 50-103. Such plans shall be reviewed in accordance with the requirements of the Code. It is strongly suggested that all applicants for site plan review meet with the community development department to determine specific requirements prior to submittal of a site plan. Persons requesting preliminary site plan review shall submit five copies of the preliminary site plan as outlined in section 50-103, to the community development department for review. 
(c)  The community development department shall distribute copies of the preliminary plan to the city engineer and the fire department for review and comment, with all comments being returned to the community development department. Comments returned shall pertain to the reviewer's area of specific authority and shall contain specific requirements upon which approval of the site plan shall be based. These may include but not be limited to requirements of the city's adopted comprehensive plan and the city's land development regulations and other similar laws, ordinances, codes or regulations properly affecting the use or development of land. These may also include any policy, manual, directive or standard for good site design adopted through resolution or ordinance of the city council. Following receipt of the comments from the various reviewers, the community development department shall prepare a project review to be submitted to the owner or representative of the project or may prepare a project review to be submitted to the city manager, or designee, for approval. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-102. - Final site plan review approval process. 
(a)  Persons wishing final site plan review shall submit all necessary copies of the final site plan and submittal requirements, pursuant to section 50-104, to the community development department for review. 
(b)  The community development department shall distribute copies of the final site plan to the city engineer, and the fire department, as needed, for comment with all comments being returned to the community development department. 
(c)  Following receipt of the comments from the various departments, the community development department shall prepare a project review to be submitted to the city manager, or city manager designee, for approval, approval with conditions or denial. 
(d)  Any person who has received a denial on the final site plans may request a direct appeal of such denial to the city council by submitting a request for an appeal in writing to the city manager, and stating the reasons justifying the appeal. 
(e)  Unless approved by appeal, all final site plans shall be approved by the city manager or city manager designee. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-103. - Preliminary site plan submittal requirements. 
The applicant shall submit one original and three copies of the signed and notarized application and the appropriate number of copies of all other materials as required on the city's site plan application form to the community development department. The materials that may be required to be submitted, as delineated on the site plan application, includes but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Signed and sealed site plans (existing conditions and proposed development). 
(2)  Applicant, property owner and agent information. 
(3)  Proposed development information. 
(4)  Proof of ownership. 
(5)  Site data table information. 
(6)  Preliminary site plan information. 
(7)  Landscape plan/tree survey. 
(8)  Stormwater plan information. 
(9)  Building elevations (if applicable). 
(10)  Signage plan (if applicable). 
(11)  Traffic impact study, if required. 
(12)  Water/sewer capacity and availability. 
(13)  Fire flow calculations/water study, if required. 
(14)  Environmentally sensitive lands information. 
(15)  Supplemental material. 
(16)  Signature block. 
(17)  Affidavit to authorize agent, if necessary. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-104. - Final site plan submittal requirements. 
The applicant shall submit all necessary copies, as outlined in the site plan application, containing all data and information required as follows, to the community development department. 
(1)  All data and information required on the preliminary site plan as set out in section 50-103. 
(2)  Any previous preliminary site plan review comments made by the city. 
(3)  An analyses addressing concurrency pursuant to chapter 54, including but not limited to, a statement from the servicing utility companies that supply water, sewer and electric service indicating that utility service is available for the proposed development. If water or sewer service is not available, please contact the community development department for resolution of this issue. However, in no case shall the community development department allow septic tank use. 
(4)  Written approval from the city's solid waste provider regarding the proposed size and location of the proposed solid waste receptacle. 
(5)  A traffic concurrency analysis pursuant to chapter 54 or as applicable, a statement from Pinellas County and/or FDOT that adopted levels of service are being met or if not, what mitigation measures are required. 
(6)  Any outstanding state, county or city permit approvals, such as right-of-way permits and water management district permits. 
(7)  Any other information as requested by the city that is considered necessary for project approval. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-105. - Adherence to approved site plans. 
All development shall be constructed in strict compliance with the approved final site plan. Any additional site/development alteration shall require further site plan review and approval. All land or water areas required to remain in a natural condition shall not be altered in any way from such natural condition except by further site plan review and approval. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-106. - Time limits on site plans. 
(a)  Preliminary site plan. 
(1)  It is intended that a preliminary site plan review shall only remain valid for a period of 180 calendar days. If no revised preliminary or final site plan is submitted within 180 calendar days of the date of the preliminary site plan review, the preliminary site plan shall become void. 
(2)  It is intended that when site plan comments are provided to a preliminary site plan applicant, the applicant shall have 90 calendar days from the date when the comments were forwarded by the city to the applicant in which to revise and submit a site plan in compliance with comments to the city for further review. Site plans not revised and received within the 90-day period shall be reviewed for compliance with city requirements in effect on the date of the city receives the resubmission. When received within 90 days, the plan shall be reviewed under the requirements provided to the applicant in the city's previous review or report. 
(3)  Failure to resubmit a preliminary site plan pursuant to city comments will increase the time required to review and comment. The applicant will be responsible for additional charges for further preliminary review. 
(b)  Final site plan. 
(1)  For single-phase projects. The site plan approval shall only remain valid for a period of one year from the issuance date of a development order unless a building permit or construction plan approval for subdivisions is obtained within one year from the date of site plan approval (issuance of a development order), and construction of the project continues in good faith thereafter, in accordance with the approved site plan and permits. 
(2)  For multi-phase or multi-building projects. The site plan shall only remain valid for a period of one year from the issuance date of a development order unless a building permit or construction plan approval for subdivisions is obtained for the first phase or building within one year from the date of the site plan approval and construction continues in good faith thereafter, in accordance with the approved site plan and permit. Each subsequent phase or building to be constructed must receive a building permit within one calendar year of the site plan anniversary date of the preceding phase or building (for which a permit was obtained and for which construction has continued in good faith) and construction continues in good faith thereafter in accordance with the approved site plan and permit, and permits for all subsequent phases or buildings issued pursuant to this original site plan. Any site plan for which construction has not commenced pursuant to these requirements shall become void, and a new site plan meeting all current standards required for site plan approval must be submitted and approved prior to further development being authorized. 
(3)  It is intended that when site plan comments are provided to a final site plan applicant, the applicant shall have 90 calendar days in which to revise and submit a site plan in compliance with the reports or review, to the city for further review. Site plans not revised and received within the 90 calendar day period shall be reviewed for compliance with city requirements in effect on the date of resubmission. When received within 90 calendar days, the plan shall be reviewed under requirements provided to the applicant in the city's previous review or report. 
(4)  Any final site plan not approved within one calendar year from the date of initial submittal shall become void and must be resubmitted and reviewed for compliance with all site plan requirements in effect on the date of resubmission of such plan. 
(5)  Any approved final site plan upon which no construction has begun within one year shall become void and require resubmission. The applicant will be responsible for additional charges for the final review. Any previously approved final site plan which has been superseded by a revised final site plan shall become void. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-107. - Fees. 
Fees for site plan review applications shall be by resolution by the city council. A schedule of fees is available in the community development department. Notwithstanding the adopted fee schedule, applicants shall be financially responsible for costs incurred by city for the use of outside review consultants or engineers that are required by the city. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 50-108—50-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Secs. 50-121—50-140. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Land Use Permits 
 
Sec. 50-141. - Required. 
No use of any land or structure shall be commenced until such time as the approval has been issued according to the provisions of this subdivision; however this subdivision shall not require approval for any use existing as of the date of adoption of this land development code. 
(1)  The proposed use must conform to all of the requirements of this land development code, including all of the specific requirements of the particular zoning district within which the use is proposed. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of any business tax receipt to any new applicant for a business tax receipt or to any applicant who wishes to change the location of any existing receipted occupation, the community development director shall first determine that the use applied for conforms to all requirements of this land development code. 
(3)  Approval shall be issued by the community development department of the city. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 50-142—50-160. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Development Permit 
 
Sec. 50-161. - Application. 
No application for a development permit shall be approved unless the application conforms to the following: 
(1)  All of the requirements of this land development code for the zoning district in which the improvement is proposed. 
(2)  The requirements and/or conditions of the approval. 
(3)  All other applicable requirements of this land development code. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-162. - Prerequisites and concurrency related to issuance of development permit. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 50-163, a development permit may not be issued unless the proposed development activity is authorized by a development order issued pursuant to this land development code. Further that a condition of permit issuance shall require that all other applicable county, regional regulatory agency, state or federal permits be obtained before development commences and that the issuance of a development permit does not in any way create any right on the part of an applicant to obtain a permit from a state or federal agency and does not create any liability on the part of the city for issuance of the permit if the applicant fails to obtain requisite approvals or fulfill the obligations imposed by a state or federal agency or undertakes actions that result in a violation of state or federal law. 
(b)  Developments or redevelopments requiring the use of potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, or drainage facilities shall receive development orders subject to: 
(1)  The public facilities being in place at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy; or 
(2)  The provision of the facilities being guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220, or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, to be in place at the time of certificate of occupancy issuance. 
(c)  Developments or redevelopments requiring the use of park and recreation facilities shall receive development orders subject to: 
(1)  The facilities and services are in place or under construction at the time of development order issuance; or 
(2)  Dedications of land and facilities or fees in lieu are committed by the time of certificate of occupancy issuance; or 
(3)  The development order is issued conditioned on the necessary facilities and services scheduled to be in place or under construction not more than one year after certificate of occupancy issuance as provided in the schedule of capital improvements; or 
(4)  The necessary facilities are subject to a binding agreement which requires them to be in place or under construction not more than one year after certificate of occupancy issuance; or 
(5)  When the development order is issued, the facilities and services are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement stipulating that they will be in place or under construction not more than one year after certificate of occupancy issuance. 
(d)  Developments or redevelopments requiring the use of roads shall receive development orders subject to: 
(1)  The public facilities being in place or under construction at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy; or 
(2)  The development order is issued conditioned on the necessary facilities and services will be in place or under construction not more than three years after certificate of occupancy issuance as provided in the schedule of capital improvements. 
(3)  The development order is issued pursuant to a development agreement. 
(e)  Developments or redevelopments shall be considered to have de minimis impact related to levels of service provided they comply with all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The proposed increase in density or intensity is less than or equal to twice the density or intensity of the existing development, or for the development of a vacant parcel of land, at a residential density of less than four dwelling units per acre or for nonresidential uses, at an intensity of less than 0.1 floor area ratio. 
(2)  Isolated vacant lots in predominantly residential areas, where single-family homes would be suitable, may be developed for single-family residential under the de minimis exemption even if smaller than one-quarter acre in size. 
(3)  The transportation impact of the development alone does not exceed one percent of the maximum service volume at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
(4)  The cumulative total transportation impact from the de minimis exceptions does not exceed three percent of the maximum service volume at the adopted level of service standard if the facility does not meet the minimum level-of-service standard. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-163. - Exceptions to requirement of a development order. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, the development activity shall conform to this land development code and any technical construction standards established by the city. 
(b)  A development permit may be issued for the following development activities in the absence of a development order issued pursuant to this land development code: 
(1)  Development activity necessary to implement a valid site plan on which construction commenced prior to the adoption of this land development code, as amended. Compliance with the development standards in this land development code is not required if in conflict with the previously approved plan. 
(2)  The construction or alteration of a one-, two- or three-family dwelling on a lot in a valid recorded subdivision approved prior to the adoption of this land development code, as amended. Compliance with the development standards in this land development code is not required if in conflict with the previously approved plat. 
(3)  The alteration or remodeling of an existing building or structure so long as no change is made to its gross floor area, its use, or the amount of impervious surface on the site. 
(4)  The erection of a sign or the removal of protected trees on a previously developed site and independent of any other development activity on the site. 
(5)  The resurfacing of a vehicle use area that conforms to all requirements of this land development code. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-164. - Post-development order or post-permit changes. 
After a development order or permit has been issued, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of the development order or permit without first obtaining a modification of the development order or permit. A modification may be applied for in the same manner as the original development order or permit. A written record of the modification shall be entered upon the original development order or permit and maintained in the files of the department. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 50-165—50-195. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 50-196. - Generally. 
The procedures in this article shall be followed in amending this land development code, the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan future land use map and the zoning map. This article supplements the mandatory public hearing and notice requirements of state law, F.S. chs. 163 and 166. Approval of said amendments by the city council shall be by ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-197. - Application for change of future land use map designation or rezoning. 
Any property owner, the developmental review board, the city council, or the city manager or city manager designee, may initiate an application for a change in the comprehensive plan future land use designation, and/or the rezoning of real property by filing written application with the community development department. The community development director shall refer such applications to the developmental review board for its recommendation. The application shall contain, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The signature of the property owner and/or, where applicable, the signature of the chairman of the developmental review board or of the mayor of the city council, or the city manager or city manager designee. If the property owner is represented by an agent, proof of the agency shall be made a part of the application. 
(2)  The names and addresses of all owners of the property sought to be affected by the change. 
(3)  An accurate legal description of the property to be sought to be affected by the change. 
(4)  The comprehensive plan future land use map designation and the zoning map classification of the property at the time of the application. 
(5)  The comprehensive plan future land use map designation and/or the zoning map classification proposed for the property. 
(6)  The names and addresses of the owners of other properties lying within 300 feet of the property. 
(7)  When the application is initiated by the property owner, a certification of ownership stating that the applicant is the title holder of record of the property described in the application. The certification shall be signed by a duly licensed attorney at law. 
(8)  Statement of reasons for granting the requested change in the comprehensive plan future land use map plan designation and/or zoning classification. The reasons may include but are not to be limited to: 
a.  Change of conditions in the area. 
b.  Community need for additional lands with the comprehensive plan future land use map designation and/or zoning classification proposed. 
c.  Benefits to the community. 
(9)  Failure of an applicant or applicant's representative to be present at a scheduled proceeding shall be sufficient cause to deny the request on the basis of lack of evidence or without prejudice. 
(10)  Withdrawal of an application must be made in writing over the signature of the applicant. Any fees paid by the applicant will be retained by the city. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-198. - Amending land development code and/or comprehensive plan. 
The developmental review board, the city council, the city manager, city manager designee or private individual may initiate an application to change the land development code or comprehensive plan (except as noted in section 50-197). The community development director shall refer applications to amend this land development code or comprehensive plan to the developmental review board for comment. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-199. - Developmental review board review. 
(a)  General requirements. The developmental review board, acting in its capacity as the land development commission or as applicable, the local planning agency, shall hold a public hearing on each application to amend this land development code or the comprehensive plan, or rezoning applications, and thereafter, submit to the city council a written recommendation, which: 
(1)  Identifies any provisions of the land development code, comprehensive plan, or other law relating to the proposed change and describes how the proposal relates to them. 
(2)  States factual and policy considerations pertaining to the recommendation, including consideration of the standards for review for amendments to the comprehensive plan, including the amendments to the future land use plan map, contained in the comprehensive plan future land use element, which includes, but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Consistency of the proposed change with the goals, objectives and policies in the comprehensive plan and its affect on the internal consistency of the plan. It is not the intent of this criteria that consistency with all comprehensive plan goals, objectives and policies must be required, but rather a balancing of relevant goals, objectives and policies applicable to the review and the overall benefit to the city. 
b.  Consistency with the countywide rules, if applicable. 
c.  Appropriateness and compatibility with surrounding existing uses and development patterns relative to intensity, density and scale (the relationship of a development in terms of size, height, bulk and aesthetics to its surroundings). This shall include providing an appropriate transition of land uses adjacent to existing residential development and natural resources. 
d.  Appropriateness and compatibility with surrounding designated future land use categories relative to intensity, density and scale (the relationship of a development in terms of size, height, bulk and aesthetics to its surroundings). This shall include providing an appropriate transition of land uses adjacent to future residential development and natural resources. 
e.  Impact on public facilities/services including, but not limited to the evaluation of the availability of, and actual and anticipated demand on, public facilities and levels of services serving or proposed to serve the subject property. The facilities and services required for analysis include parks and recreation, potable water, public transportation, sanitary sewer, schools, solid waste, stormwater, and the transportation network. 
f.  Impact on natural resources/features including, but not limited to: 
1.  Location of flood zones and the demonstration that the proposed land uses in flood-prone areas are suitable to the continued natural functioning of the floodplain; 
2.  Impact on on-site or adjacent environmentally sensitive lands, and 
3.  Impact on energy efficient land use patterns. 
g.  Consideration of the above factors relative to the impact of the proposed amendment on the future land use plan and the surrounding area, the appropriateness of the timing of the proposed amendment and establishment of any precedent. 
(3)  Considers all direct testimony and evidence whether favorable or unfavorable to the application. 
(4)  Makes a recommendation to the city council on the land development code and comprehensive plan amendments, based on pertinent testimony and evidence presented at the hearing. 
(b)  Notice requirements for comprehensive plan future land use map or land development code amendments, and rezoning applications. Notice requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Notice of the matter shall be published two times by legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The first advertisement shall be published at least ten calendar days, and the second advertisement shall be published at least three calendar days before the scheduled meeting date. 
(2)  Subject property shall be posted with notice of the scheduled developmental review board meeting at least 14 calendar days prior to the scheduled meeting date. 
(3)  A notice letter prepared by the community development director shall be mailed by the city to all abutting/adjacent property owners at least 14 calendar days prior to the public hearing date. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-200. - City council review. 
(a)  Generally. The city council shall hold public hearings as required by this article and F.S. §§ 163.3184, 163.3187 and 166.041 as may be required by said statutes, on a proposed amendment to the land development code, the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan future land use plan map, or rezoning. 
(b)  Changes to the comprehensive plan future land use plan map designation and/or text amendments. 
(1)  Applications concerning or involving a proposed change in comprehensive plan future land use designation shall be considered by the city council at two public hearings duly noticed as required by F.S. §§ 163.3184 and 166.041 and as hereinafter required. 
(2)  At the first public hearing, the city council shall receive the recommendations of the developmental review board, hear testimony and receive evidence from concerned public, and decide the comprehensive land use plan proposal to be submitted to the county planning council, the countywide planning authority, and state, if applicable, for review, recommendation, and/or approval. City council action shall be: 
a.  To approve the application as requested; 
b.  To modify the application requested to a less intensive land use classification or modify the text amendment, and approve the modified change; or 
c.  To deny the application, which shall be the final action thereon. 
(3)  The city council at the second public hearing shall consider the recommendations of the developmental review board and other review agencies, hear testimony and receive evidence from the public. City council action shall be: 
a.  Adopt the application as proposed; 
b.  Amend the proposed application to accord with the approval of the countywide planning authority and comments and recommendations received from the state land planning agency and adopt the amended change, and submit the change to the state for review, if required; or 
c.  Determine that it will not adopt or amend the proposed change and deny the application, which shall be the final action thereon. 
(c)  Rezoning application or amendment to the land development code. 
(1)  Applications for amendment to the land development code or change in zoning classification of real property that do not include or involve a change in the comprehensive plan future land use designation of that property shall be decided by the city council at two public hearings, duly noticed and scheduled in conformance with the requirements of state law, F.S. § 166.041 and as further required herein. 
(2)  Rezoning cases involving ten acres or less of land area notice of the required public hearing shall be given by mail to the owner of subject property, or his designated agent and to all other owners of property within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property within at least 14 calendar days prior to the date set for public hearing. In the public hearing, the city council shall receive the recommendations of the developmental review board and hear testimony and receive evidence from the public. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the city council action shall be: 
a.  To approve the requested change in zoning classification and to initiate an ordinance effecting the requested rezoning of the property concerned; 
b.  To modify the requested zoning classification to a less intensive use classification and to initiate an ordinance effecting the modified rezoning of the property concerned; or 
c.  To deny the application, which shall be the final action thereon. 
(3)  Rezoning cases involving more than ten acres of land area, or amendments to the land development code, the city council shall hold two public hearings, duly noticed and scheduled in conformance with the requirements of state law, F.S. § 166.041 and chapter 50. 
a.  At the first scheduled public hearing, the city council shall consider the recommendations of the developmental review board and testimony and evidence from concerned public. City council action shall be: 
1.  To approve and continue the application unchanged for consideration and decision at the second scheduled public hearing, concurrently passing at first reading an ordinance to effect rezoning of the property concerned; 
2.  To modify the zoning classification requested to a less intensive use classification or modify the land development code amendment, approving and continuing the modified application for consideration and decision at the second public hearing, concurrently amending and passing on first reading an ordinance to effect the modified rezoning of the property concerned; or 
3.  To deny the application which shall be the final action on the application, concurrently canceling the scheduled second public hearing. 
b.  At the second scheduled public hearing, the city council shall receive and consider testimony and evidence from the concerned public. City council action shall be: 
1.  To approve the application as continued from the first scheduled public hearing concurrently adopting on second reading the ordinance effecting rezoning of the subject property or land development code amendment; 
2.  To modify the change in zoning classification as continued from the first scheduled public hearing to a less intensive use classification concurrently amending the ordinance to effect rezoning of the property concerned or modify the land development code amendment and continuing the modified application and amended ordinance to a further public hearing before the city council; or 
3.  To deny the application and concurrently reject the ordinance, which shall be final action on the application. 
(d)  Records and proceedings. 
(1)  All records of any proceedings shall be filed with the city clerk to be held as a part of the public records of the developmental review board. 
(2)  All hearings shall be recorded in the following manner: 
a.  Minutes shall be kept in which applications, findings of fact, recommendations and all decisions shall be recorded. 
b.  Whenever possible, all hearings shall be recorded by electronic recording device. 
(3)  Any person may request a verbatim transcript. The person so requesting shall furnish a reporter to take such transcript, bear the cost thereof, and shall deliver a certified copy of the transcript to the city clerk, who shall file it with the records of other proceedings on the application. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 50-201—50-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMANCES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-231. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide mechanisms for obtaining relief from the provisions of this land development code where hardship would otherwise occur. Two forms of hardship are addressed: 
(1)  This article addresses hardship that would be caused if nonconforming development were required to immediately come into compliance with this land development code. 
(2)  Section 50-291 et seq. addresses the hardship that may be caused in particular cases by the imposition of the land development code's development design standards and the hardship that may be caused in particular cases by the land development code's resource protection standards. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 50-232—50-254. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EXISTING NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 50-255. - Definition, purpose and intent. 
This article will provide for the regulation and restriction of use, structures, lots and parcels, or combinations thereof that were lawfully established prior to zoning regulations adopted May 30, 1991, or those uses that were in compliance with the applicable zoning regulations subsequent to the above date and prior to the adoption of this chapter (or lawfully established prior to the act which created the nonconformity) and continued thereafter, but which would be prohibited, restricted, or regulated under the terms of this chapter or future amendments thereto. 
It is the intent of this article to permit the continuance of such nonconformities until they are removed or ceased. However, it is specifically not the intent of this article to encourage the continuation of such nonconformities in perpetuity. It is further the intent of this article that nonconformity shall not be used as grounds for addition of other prohibited uses or structures on the site or in the area nor the enlarging by means of extension or expansion, except as specifically provided by this article. All the rights and obligations associated with a nonconforming status run with the land and are not personal to the present ownership or tenant of the land, and are not affected by a change in ownership or tenancy unless the nonconformity is abandoned or discontinued. This article also addresses nonconformities caused by the adoption of the comprehensive land use plan adopted pursuant to state law and eminent domain proceedings. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-256. - Defined. 
Nonconforming development is development (buildings, structures, uses and site/lot) that does not conform to the land development code, which includes, but is not limited to, use regulations and development standards in chapter 70, the development design and improvement standards in chapter 58, the commercial corridor architectural standards in chapter 59, the natural resource standards in chapter 62, or the sign standards in chapter 66. Nonconformities may include by way of illustration, but not limited to, inadequate lot area and dimensions, and noncompliance with building/sign setbacks and height, floor area ratio, impervious surface area, parking and loading facilities, landscaping, lighting and stormwater. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-257. - Continuation of. 
Subject to the provisions of section 50-258 for terminating nonconforming development, such development may, if otherwise lawful and in existence on the date of enactment of this land development code, as amended, remain in use in its nonconforming state. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-258. - Termination of nonconforming building, structures and uses. 
(a)  Generally. Nonconforming buildings, structures and/or uses must be brought into full compliance with the use regulations and development standards in chapter 70, the development design and improvement standards in chapter 58, the commercial corridor architectural standards in chapter 59, the natural resource standards in chapter 62, or the sign standards in chapter 66 in conjunction with the following activities: 
(1)  A nonconforming structure damaged or destroyed in excess of 51 percent or more of its assessed value as determined by the property appraiser's database, by any means, method, or event may not be reconstructed or restored for use except in compliance with the requirements of this land development code. An independent appraisal may be submitted for consideration in determining the structure's value. 
(2)  Any nonconforming building or structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by a the building official may be restored to a proper condition, except when its deterioration is in excess of 51 percent of its assessed value, as determined by the property appraiser's database, then such building or structure may not be reconstructed or restored for use except in compliance with the requirements of this land development code. An independent appraisal may be submitted for consideration in determining the structure's value. 
(b)  Alterations and repairs. 
(1)  A nonconforming building or structure occupied by a nonconforming non-residential use may not be reconstructed or structurally altered during its life to an extent that such alterations exceed in aggregate cost 25 percent of the full valuation of the building or structure, as determined by the property appraiser's database, exclusive of the value of land, unless the building or structure is changed to a conforming use and is in compliance with the requirements of the land development code. 
(2)  A nonconforming building or structure containing a residential use may be altered in any way to improve interior livability provided that no structural alteration shall be made that would increase the nonconformity with regard to the number of dwelling units or the bulk of the building or structure. 
(3)  Normal maintenance repairs and incidental alteration of a building or structure containing a nonconforming use shall be permitted provided the repair and alterations do not extend the volume or area occupied by the nonconforming use or such alterations as may be required by law or the Florida Building Code or fire code requirements. 
(4)  Where a conforming use is in a nonconforming building or structure, as to setbacks, additions to such building or structure may be made provided the addition meets setback and any other applicable requirements of the land development code. 
(c)  Special provisions for specific nonconformities. 
(1)  Nonconformity with stormwater management requirements. In addition to the activities listed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, an existing development that does not comply with the stormwater management requirements of this land development code must be brought into full compliance when any proposed use of the development as part of a formal site plan submittal increases the impervious surface area. When any proposed use of the development does not require a formal site plan submittal, but increases the impervious surface area, then only compliance with the regulations of the Southwest Florida Water Management District shall be required. The city manager or city manager designee in their discretion shall determine if a formal site plan submittal is required. 
(2)  Nonconformity with parking and loading requirements. In addition to the activities listed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, full compliance with the requirements of this land development code shall be required where the seating capacity or other factors controlling the number of parking or loading spaces required by this land development code is proposed to be increased, as part of a formal site plan submittal. The city manager or city manager designee in their discretion shall determine if a formal site plan submittal is required. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-259. - Expansions prohibited. 
Structures or uses of land that are nonconforming shall not be increased in floor area, extended or enlarged so as to occupy additional land area on the same or any other lot or parcel. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-260. - Abandoned or discontinued nonconforming use. 
When a nonconforming use of land or nonconforming use of a building or structure has been abandoned, including but not limited to, vacating of a premises or building, discontinuance of utility service, or non-operative status (such as "closed for business" or expired business tax receipt), for more than 180 consecutive days, its future use shall conform to the uses permitted in the district in which the land is located. The land shall not thereafter be occupied by any nonconforming use that would violate the land development code and/or comprehensive plan. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-261. - Conversions to conforming use. 
Provisions of this article shall not apply to any construction, structural alteration, extension, addition or repair where such work, as proposed, would convert a nonconforming use into a use that conforms with all the pertinent requirements of the land development code. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-262. - Nonconforming lots or parcels 
(a)  When an individual vacant lot or parcel has building site area requirements smaller than the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot or parcel of record when this chapter was adopted, the permitted uses of the zoning district will be allowed providing that: 
(1)  Lot/parcel zoning district setback, maximum impervious surface ratio and maximum building coverage requirements are met. This subsection shall not apply where two or more lots or parcels under single ownership adjoin as described in subsection (b). 
(b)  If two or more lots, or combination of lots, or portions of lots with continuous frontage and single ownership are of record at the time of the proposal for development or use, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the building site area requirements, the lands involved shall be combined as an undivided parcel to meet the requirements of this chapter. No portion of such parcel shall be used or developed in a manner which diminishes the degree of compliance with the building site area requirements established with the land development code. 
(c)  Where a structure exists on a lot or parcel of substandard dimensions, and such structure was constructed prior to the adoption of the land development code, as amended, or was given a zoning clearance under the provisions of a previous zoning regulation, additions may be made to such structures provided lot/parcel zoning district setback and minimum building site area requirements are met. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-263. - Nonconforming lots and/or buildings created by eminent domain proceedings. 
(a)  Any lot/parcel and/or building that is made nonconforming to minimum lot area, lot width, building setbacks, density, floor area ratio and/or impervious surface area ratio after the original effective date of this land development code as a result of eminent domain proceedings instituted by the city or other governmental agency, or through a voluntary conveyance by such lot or parcel owner in lieu of formal eminent domain proceedings, which lot/parcel and/or building, except for such eminent domain or voluntary conveyance, would be an otherwise conforming lot/parcel or building, shall be deemed to be a conforming lot/parcel or building for all purposes under the land development code. 
(b)  Where an eminent domain proceeding creates a nonconformity or increases the degree of nonconformity to land development code requirements, except as provided above, such nonconformities shall be reviewed pursuant to the variance (article VI) or development agreement (article VII) process. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-264. - Grandfathering of certain nonconforming uses. 
(a)  The city council is authorized to adopt an ordinance to grandfather any site specific use that was rendered nonconforming through the adoption of the comprehensive plan by Ordinance No. 3-99, as amended, and consistent with Policy 1.7.1 of the Future Land Use Element, subject the following limitations: 
(1)  A grandfathered nonresidential or residential use may not be expanded, i.e., no expansion of additional floor area, residential capacity or additional dwelling units is allowed. 
(2)  Should a building or structure containing a grandfathered nonresidential or residential use be destroyed, it shall be reconstructed in compliance with the requirements of the Florida Building Code and the land development code. 
(3)  Repairs and maintenance of a structure containing a grandfathered nonresidential or residential use are permitted irrespective of the cost of such repairs or maintenance. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening, altering or restoring to a safe condition of any structure, or part thereof, containing a grandfathered nonresidential or residential use. 
(b)  Any affected property owner may initiate the process for grandfathering by filing written application with the city. The contents of the application shall be in accordance the criteria found in section 50-197, as applicable. 
(c)  The fee for such an application shall be that fee charged for a variance, in accordance with the most recently adopted fee schedule. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 50-265—50-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 50-291. - Developmental review board and administrative authority. 
(a)  The developmental review board shall have the power and may grant a variance from the strict application of any provision of this land development code, except provisions in chapter 70 pertaining to enumerated land uses within zoning districts; chapter 54 pertaining to consistency and concurrency; chapter 59 pertaining to the commercial corridor architectural standards; and, chapter 66 pertaining to the setbacks, if the procedures in this article are followed and findings made. 
(b)  The developmental review board shall have the power and may recommend approval of a special exception to the city council in accordance with this article pursuant to the public hearing notice requirements in section 50-199. In recommending a special exception, the board shall base its recommendation on the review criteria pursuant to chapter 70, section 70-191 et seq. 
(c)  The developmental review board shall have the authority to adopt rules of procedure, including a procedure to approve, modify or revoke a previously granted variance or special exception use. 
(d)  Administrative variance authority. Pursuant to this chapter, certain administrative variances may be granted by the city manager or authorized designee to the code (with or without notice to abutting property owners) in order to protect environmentally sensitive lands, existing protected trees and address minor waivers to code requirements. Administrative variances may be granted in consideration of required findings pursuant to section 50-294 with or without conditions for the following: 
(1)  Front and rear yard setback encroachment up to five feet. 
(2)  Side yard setback encroachments up to two feet. 
(3)  Decrease landscape buffer width requirements up to two feet. 
(4)  Decrease parking requirement up to ten percent. 
(5)  Decrease parking lot dimensional requirements up to two feet, except for ADA required parking width. 
(6)  Increase wall/fence height up to two feet. 
(7)  Variances to accommodate ADA requirements. 
An appeal of an administrative denial of a variance shall be by the applicant submitting a variance application to the developmental review board. 
No administrative variance shall be granted for required setbacks related to signs. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-292. - Variances to be considered as part of development review. 
Any person desiring to undertake a development activity not in conformance with this land development code may apply for a variance in conjunction with the application for development review. A development activity that might otherwise be approved by the community development director must have the approval of the developmental review board if a variance is sought. The variance shall be granted or denied in conjunction with the application for development review. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-293. - Initial determination. 
The community development director shall first determine whether the need for the proposed variance arises out of the physical surroundings, shape, topographical condition, or other physical or environmental conditions that are unique to the specific property involved. If so, the developmental review board shall make the required findings stated in section 50-294 based on the granting of the variance for that site alone. If, however, the condition is common to numerous sites so that requests for similar variances are likely to be received, the board shall make the required findings based on the cumulative effect of granting the variance to all who may apply. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-294. - Required findings. 
(a)  The developmental review board shall not grant variances from the requirements of any provision of this land development code unless it makes a positive finding, based on substantial competent evidence and weighing and balancing the merits of the request in consideration of the following criteria: 
(1)  The variance request is not based exclusively upon a desire to reduce the cost of developing the site. 
(2)  The proposed variance will not substantially increase congestion on surrounding public streets, the danger of fire or other hazards to the public. 
(3)  The proposed variance will not substantially diminish property values in nor alter the essential character of the area surrounding the site. 
(4)  Special conditions. That special conditions and circumstances exist that are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved, including the nature of and to what extent these special conditions and circumstances may exist as direct results from actions by the applicant. 
(5)  No special privilege. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other similar lands, buildings or structures in the same zoning district. 
(6)  Unnecessary hardship. That there are practical or economic difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the regulation and the literal interpretation of the provisions of this land development code would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of this land development code. 
(7)  Minimum variance necessary. That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
(8)  Purpose and intent compliance. That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent, purpose, and spirit of this land development code, and with the city's comprehensive land use plan adopted pursuant to state law. 
(9)  No detriment to public welfare. That such variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-295. - Imposition of conditions, prohibitions and limitations for variances. 
(a)  Establishing conditions or safeguards. In granting any variance, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards to ensure proper compliance with the general spirit, purpose and intent of this land development code. Noncompliance with such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this land development code and shall void the variance approval. 
(b)  Prohibition. Under no circumstances shall the board grant a variance to permit a use that is not permitted either generally or by special exception in the zoning district or plan category involved. 
(c)  Reasonable time limit. The board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the project for which the variance is granted shall be begun, completed or both. 
(d)  Initiation of construction. A variance issued under the provisions of this land development code shall automatically expire within one year from the date of granting such variance or special exception by the board, or if judicial proceedings to review the board's decision shall be instituted, from the date of entry of the final order in such proceedings, including all appeals if all applicable permits and clearances required by the city have not been obtained for the project. All permits, site plans and other required approvals must be obtained; and the granting of any variance shall not be deemed as automatic approval for any such permit or site plan required. 
(e)  Extension. An extension of one year for a variance may be granted by the board upon a showing of good cause, provided the request for extension is submitted in writing stating the reason for extension and is received 30 days prior to the expiration of the original time limitation which was established. The board may grant authority to the city manager or his designee to grant such approvals. 
(f)  Expiration. All variances granted by the development review board shall be deemed to automatically expire if a structure or use of land that is the subject of the variance has been discontinued or removed for a period of 180 consecutive days. A statement of this provision shall be included as a condition of any approval granted by the board. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-296. - Record of variances to be maintained. 
The community development director shall maintain a record of all variances, including the justification for their issuance and a copy of the notice of the variance. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-297. - Proceedings, hearings, and appeals of decision of the developmental review board. 
(a)  Report filed. On all proceedings held before the developmental review board, the community development department shall review the application and file a report on each item. Reports of the department shall be received by the developmental review board prior to final action on any item before the board and shall be part of the record of the application. 
(b)  Records of the proceedings. 
(1)  Records maintenance. All records of any proceedings before the developmental review board shall be filed with the city clerk's office, to be held as a part of the public records of the city. 
(2)  Official minutes. Minutes shall be kept in which applications, findings of fact, recommendations and all determinations or decisions shall be recorded. 
(3)  Recording devices. All proceedings before the developmental review board shall be recorded by a recording device. 
(4)  Maintenance of application. Application files shall be held and maintained by the community development department. 
(c)  Notice of public hearings. All public hearings shall be conducted only after a public notice has been given pursuant to section 50-199(b), or state law, whichever is applicable. 
(d)  Failure to appear. An applicant's failure to appear or to be represented at scheduled hearings may be sufficient cause to deny the request on the strength of lack of evidence. 
(e)  Appeal of board decisions. A party seeking judicial review of a decision of the developmental review board shall have 30 calendar days from the date of the public hearing which resulted in the approval or denial by the developmental review board to bring the appropriate legal action. The 30-day time period will commence when the decision was finalized at the public hearing, not when the decision was reduced to writing. 
(f)  Reapplication. No new application for an identical variance on the same parcel shall be accepted for consideration within a period of six months following a decision of denial by the developmental review board (unless denied without prejudice). 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-298. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
 
Sec. 50-299. - Statutory definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the definitions set forth in F.S. § 163.3221 shall apply and control all development agreements entered into by the city. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-300. - Legislative intent and findings of fact. 
The city council finds and declares that each of the following statements are true and correct, and hereby adopts these statements as the legislative findings of the council, which shall be considered as further justification and authority for the adoption of this section. 
(1)  The provisions of F.S. §§ 163.3220—163.3243 set forth the Local Government Development Agreement Act (the "Act"). 
(2)  The provisions of F.S. § 163.3223 provide that local governments may, by ordinance, establish procedures and requirements, as provided by the Act, to consider and enter into development agreements with any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property within its jurisdiction. 
(3)  The Act recognizes that the lack of certainty in the approval of development can result in a waste of economic and land resources, discourage sound capital improvement planning and financing, escalate the cost of housing and development, and discourage commitment to comprehensive planning. 
(4)  The Act recognizes that assurance to a developer that upon receipt of his development permit he may proceed in accordance with existing laws and policies, subject to the conditions of a development agreement, strengthens the public planning process, encourages sound capital improvement planning and financing, assists in assuring there are adequate capital facilities for the development, encourages private participation in comprehensive planning, and reduces the economic costs of development. 
(5)  In conformity with, in furtherance of, and in order to implement the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act (F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.) and the State Comprehensive Planning Act of 1972 (F.S. § 186.001 et seq.), it was the intent of the state legislature in adopting the Act to encourage a stronger commitment to comprehensive and capital facilities planning, ensure the provision of adequate public facilities for development, encourage the efficient use of resources, and reduce the economic cost of development. 
(6)  The Act authorizes local governments to enter into development agreements with developers, subject to the procedures and requirements of the Act. 
(7)  The Act provides that the Act shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to the powers conferred upon local governments by other laws and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(8)  The provisions of Ordinance No. 89-11, as amended, adopting the city comprehensive plan, in referencing the concurrency management system, minimum requirements for concurrency, specifically anticipate the use of development agreements to satisfy concurrency requirements for necessary facilities and services. 
(9)  The provisions of F.S. § 166.041 provide authority for the city to adopt ordinances which are in the common interest of the people of the city and not specifically prohibited by law. 
(10)  It is the intent of this article to encourage a strong commitment to comprehensive and capital facilities planning, ensure the provision of adequate public facilities for development concurrent with the impacts of development, encourage the efficient use of resources, and reduce the economic cost of development. 
(11)  It is the intent of this article to encourage comprehensive planning by developers by affording greater predictability and reducing risks in order to lessen the costs of providing major infrastructure and public benefits. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-301. - Authority. 
(a)  This article sets forth the procedural requirements that the city shall consider and implement in order to enter into development agreements. Specific authority for adoption of this article is found in F.S. § 163.3223. In general, the provisions of this article comply with and are authorized by the provisions set forth in the Local Government Development Agreement Act. 
(b)  This article is adopted pursuant to the constitutional and Home Rules Powers of Fla. Const. Art. VIII, § 2(b), F.S. § 166.041. 
(c)  The city council shall have the authority to approve, in conjunction with a development agreement, conditions, stipulations and alternative standards that will apply to and in any other development permit or approval process that the property may be required to obtain. Such conditions, stipulations or alternative standards may take the place of standards set forth in the land development code so long as the alternative standard applied is consistent with and implements the requirements of the comprehensive plan. Such alternative standards may be approved in a development agreement regardless of whether compliance with the strict terms of the land development code would impose a hardship. 
(d)  The city manager may require a landowner to enter a development agreement as a condition of approval of a development order where such approval requires the dedication of easements, the improvement of public facilities in order to meet concurrency or engineering standards, the phasing of a project, the use of density bonuses, or where the standards in the land development code are inadequate to ensure the compatibility of the project with surrounding property. 
(e)  A landowner may request the city to enter a development agreement where the development will require the dedication of property or the construction of public facilities to meet concurrency requirements, where the developer wishes to phase a project, where the landowner or developer desires to qualify for density bonuses, where the landowner or developer seeks the application of alternative standards to those found in the land development code, or where the landowner or developer wishes to vest development rights for the project. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-302. - Development agreement requirements. 
(a)  All development agreements shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
(1)  A legal description of the land subject to the agreement; 
(2)  The duration of the agreement, which shall meet the terms set forth in section 50-303; 
(3)  The development uses permitted on the land, including population densities, and building intensities and height: 
(4)  The land use designation under the future land use plan element of the comprehensive plan for all property included within the terms of the proposed agreement; 
(5)  The current future land use map and zoning map classifications of the property; 
(6)  A description of public facilities that will service the development, including who shall provide such facilities; 
(7)  The date any new facilities, if needed, will be constructed; 
(8)  A schedule to assure public facilities are available concurrent with impacts of the development; 
(9)  A description of any reservations or dedications of land for public purposes; 
(10)  A description of all local development permits approved or needed to be approved for the development of the land; 
(11)  A finding that the development permitted or proposed is consistent with the comprehensive plan and land development code, as required by F.S. § 163.3231; 
(12)  A description of any conditions, terms, restrictions, or other requirements determined to be necessary by the city for the public health, safety, or welfare of its citizens; 
(13)  A statement indicating that the failure of the agreement to address a particular permit, condition, term, or restriction shall not relieve the developer of the necessity of complying with the law governing such permitting requirements, condition, term, or restriction; and 
(14)  A statement identifying the legal and equitable interest of all persons having any interest in the property described in subsection (a)(1), above. The statement of ownership interests of any joint ventures, partnerships or corporations shall reveal all principals or directors and officers, as appropriate. Such statements shall be certified by a title company or an attorney-at-law licensed to practice in the state. 
(b)  A development agreement may provide that the entire development or any phase thereof be commenced or concluded within a specific period of time. 
(c)  Applications for a development agreement shall be signed by the landowner(s) and any equitable owner or current contract purchaser of the property to be covered by such agreement. The application shall acknowledge that the development agreement will run with the land and be binding on the successors and assigns of the applicants. Applicants shall be financially responsible for costs incurred by city for the use of outside review consultants, engineers and lawyers that are required by the city. Applicants shall also be responsible for the cost of legal advertisements and recording fees. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14) 
State Law reference— Development agreement requirements, F.S. § 163.3227.  
Sec. 50-303. - Duration of development agreements. 
The term of a development agreement shall not exceed ten years or such time as the Act may provide. A development agreement may only be extended by mutual consent of the city council and the developer, subject to public hearings in accordance with section 50-304. No extension shall exceed ten years or such time as the Act may provide. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14) 
State Law reference— Duration of development agreement, F.S. § 163.3229.  
Sec. 50-304. - General requirements for notices and hearings. 
(a)  Before entering into, amending, modifying, canceling, or revoking a development agreement, the city shall conduct at least two public hearings. 
(b)  The day, time and place at which the next scheduled public hearing under this article will be held shall be announced at the prior public hearing. 
(c)  Notice of intent to consider a development agreement at a scheduled public hearing under this article shall be provided: 
(1)  By advertising the required notice in a newspaper of general circulation and readership in the city approximately seven days before each public hearing on the application; 
(2)  By mailing the required notice to all property owners of record as of no greater than 60 days prior to mailing, as listed in the county property appraiser's office records as abutting or lying within 300 feet of the subject property boundaries; these notices shall be mailed at least 14 calendar days prior to the first scheduled public hearing; and 
(3)  In writing, to adjacent or affected local governments or their agencies pursuant to the intergovernmental coordination element of the city comprehensive plan. 
(d)  Required notice of intent to consider a development agreement shall specify: 
(1)  The time, place, and location of the scheduled hearing(s); 
(2)  The location of the land subject to the development agreement; 
(3)  The development uses proposed on the property, including the proposed population densities and proposed building intensities and height; and 
(4)  Instructions for obtaining further information, including the place(s) where a copy of the proposed agreement can be obtained. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14) 
State Law reference— Notice, F.S. § 163.3225.  
Sec. 50-305. - Development agreement procedures. 
(a)  Submission requirements; fees. 
(1)  A property owner desiring to enter into a development agreement with the city shall submit a letter of inquiry to the community development director stating the proposed development concept and terms of the development agreement. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the proposed concept and terms of the development agreement, the community development director shall review the proposed development agreement concept and terms, to identify any relief from the requirements of the land development code that would be needed to be included in a development agreement. 
(3)  The city manager, or city manager designee, shall present the proposed development concept and any needed relief items to the city council at a workshop. 
(4)  Subsequent to the staff presentation of the proposed development concept and required relief items, the city council shall determine at the workshop whether to proceed further with the development agreement process. If the majority of the city council members present at the workshop agree to proceed with the preparation of a development agreement, an application for a development agreement may be submitted by the property owner, or their authorized representative, with the application to be processed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  Applications requesting consideration by the city of a developer's proposed or amended development agreement shall be submitted on such forms as may be provided by the city. In addition to the information required by section 50-302 which can be provided, the city may require an applicant to submit such information as is reasonably necessary to process and fully consider the application. 
(6)  Application packages shall be accompanied by such fees and charges as may be imposed by the city council, for proper filing and processing. 
(7)  Payment of application fees, submission of applications, engineering plans, surveys, or any other expenditures shall not vest any rights to complete development or to obtain any requested zoning or land use classification amendments. 
(b)  Negotiation of development agreements. 
(1)  The city manager, or authorized designees, shall review the developer's application package and negotiate such further terms and conditions as the city manager shall deem to be appropriate and necessary to protect the public's interest, safety, health or welfare, and in furtherance of the comprehensive plan, and/or city council goals and policy direction. 
(2)  A development agreement may address, but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Mixed dwelling types and/or housing densities so as provide for the safe, efficient, convenient, harmonious groupings of structures, uses, and facilities: 
b.  Provide for the appropriate relationships of space, inside and outside of buildings; 
c.  Preservation of desirable natural features, minimum disturbance of natural topography, landscaping both on-site and off-site, and the provision of recreation/open space (on-site and/or through mitigation); 
d.  Provide for sidewalks both on-site and off-site, roadway improvements both on and off-site; 
e.  Provide for drainage, and on-site retention; 
f.  Establish design criteria for multifamily, commercial or office uses, including but not limited to transitions in density and intensity, screening and buffering, architectural theme and building finish, consistent roof lines, controlled access, building orientation, building mass, building scale, building height, building setbacks, parking requirements, street design, and other site planning techniques; 
g.  Approval of density bonus for residential developments up to 33.3 percent beyond the limits in the comprehensive plan and/or land development code, where the increased density portion of the overall development density is proposed to provide housing which could reasonably be considered directly supportive of affordable housing; 
h.  Approval of waivers, variances or alternative standards to specific land development code requirements as they relate to: drainage, parking, landscaping, access management, visibility, site/lot/parcel coverage, impervious surface ratio, floor area ratio, density, commercial corridor architectural standards, signage, setbacks, or height, subject only to consistency with the comprehensive plan and consistency with the countywide rules; and 
i.  Establish enforcement procedures and requirements which may be in addition to the code enforcement provisions of the land development code, and which may include the recording of restrictive covenants in favor of the city. 
(3)  Once a tentative agreement has been reached as to the terms and conditions of a development agreement, the city manager, or authorized designees, shall draft a report, including any recommendations, for consideration of the city council along with the tentative development agreement. In the event that negotiations cannot reach a consensus on mutually acceptable terms or conditions of a proposed development agreement, the city manager shall so advise the applicant in writing and further negotiations shall be suspended. The city manager shall report the status of the negotiations to the city council and may request that the council take action to vote to terminate the negotiations. Following a vote of the city council to terminate negotiations, the application for a development agreement shall be considered as denied. 
In lieu of the city council voting to terminate negotiations on a proposed development agreement, the city council may, at their sole discretion, refer the staff and the developer to the developmental review board to present and discuss the unresolved terms of a proposed development agreement. The DRB shall make a recommendation to the city council on the unresolved terms of a proposed development agreement. The city manager shall report the DRB recommendation to the city council and may request that the council take action to vote to terminate the negotiations. Following a vote of the city council to terminate negotiations, the application for a development agreement shall be considered as denied. 
(4)  The terms of a proposed development agreement are not binding on the city until or unless the development agreement is approved by the city council. The existence of a tentative agreement, staff report or recommendation shall not be sufficient governmental acts upon which reliance may be placed, such that further expenditures by a developer would vest any right to continue development; nor shall such actions constitute partial performance entitling the owner to a continuation or extension of the development agreement. 
(c)  Adoption procedures. 
(1)  Following such notice and public hearings as may be otherwise required by statute or this article, the city council, by majority vote, may act to adopt or reject, any proposed development agreement. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-306. - Recordation. 
(a)  Within 14 days after the city enters into, extends, amends, modifies, revokes, or cancels a development agreement, the city clerk shall have the agreement or the action on the agreement recorded with the clerk of the circuit court in the official records of the county. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 50-307. - Periodic review. 
(a)  The city shall review the land and development subject to the development agreement at least once every 12 months. 
(b)  If, as part of its review, the city finds that the developer has, in good faith, complied with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the agreement shall continue in force as is, pending the next review. 
(c)  If as part of its review the city makes a finding on the basis of substantial competent evidence that there has been a failure to comply with the terms of the development agreement, the city council, following the notice and hearing provisions of section 50-304, may: 
(1)  Modify the agreement as necessary to obtain and ensure compliance with the terms of the agreement; or 
(2)  Revoke the agreement in order to protect the public's interest, health, safety or welfare. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14) 
State Law reference— Periodic review of development agreement, F.S. § 163.3235.  
Sec. 50-308. - Amendment, modification, extension, revocation and cancellation of agreements. 
(a)  Development agreements may be amended or canceled by mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or by their successors in interest upon proper notice and hearing as set forth in section 50-304. 
(b)  If state or federal laws are enacted after the execution of a development agreement which are applicable to and preclude the parties' compliance with the terms or conditions of a development agreement, then such agreement shall be modified or revoked as is necessary to comply with the relevant state or federal laws upon proper notice and hearing set forth in section 50-304. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14) 
State Law reference— Amendment, modification, cancellation of development agreement, F.S. §§ 163.3237, 163.3241.  
Sec. 50-309. - Legal status of development agreements. 
(a)  The burdens of a development agreement shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the agreement shall inure to, all successors in interest to the parties to the agreement. 
(b)  The city's laws and policies governing the development of land in effect at the time of execution of a development agreement, including, but not limited to, all other ordinances comprising land development code under F.S. § 163.3202, as amended, shall govern the development of all land specified in the development agreement for its stated duration. 
(c)  The city may only apply subsequently adopted laws and policies to then existing development agreements if, after a duly noticed public hearing the city council: 
(1)  Determines that such laws and policies are specifically anticipated and provided for in a development agreement; 
(2)  Determines that such laws and policies are not in conflict with the prior laws and policies governing existing development agreements; and do not prevent development of the land uses, intensities, or densities set forth in existing development agreements; 
(3)  Determines that such laws and policies are essential to the public health, safety or welfare, and expressly state that they shall apply to existing development agreements; 
(4)  Determines and demonstrates that substantial changes have occurred in pertinent conditions existing at the time of approval of existing development agreements; or 
(5)  Determines that certain development agreements were based upon substantially inaccurate information supplied by the owner/developer. 
(d)  The provisions set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section do not abrogate any development rights that may vest pursuant to common law. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 163.3233.  
Sec. 50-310. - Enforcement. 
The following may file an action for injunctive relief in the circuit court of the county to enforce the terms of a development agreement, or to challenge compliance of the agreement with the provisions of F.S. §§ 163.3220—163.3243: 
(1)  Any aggrieved or adversely affected person as defined in F.S. § 163.3215(2); 
(2)  Any party; or 
(3)  The state land planning agency. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
ARTICLE VIII. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
 
Sec. 50-311. - Permitting procedure for the construction of affordable housing. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a permitting procedure for the construction of affordable housing in keeping with the applicable provisions of the most recent housing incentive plan adopted by the board of county commissioners pursuant to the state housing initiatives partnership (SHIP) program pursuant to state law, as amended. This section will describe procedures and criteria for the certification of affordable housing developments (AHDs), describe the package of incentives which may be made available to developers of AHDs and provide a review process for the approval of AHDs. This section may also provide reference to other city or county ordinances and regulations effecting the development of AHD's. 
(b)  Definition. Affordable housing development is defined as owner-occupied housing development in which a designated portion of the units are affordable to households at or below 80 percent of area median income ("AMI") or rental housing development in a designated portion of the units are affordable to households at or below 60 percent of AMI. Income limits are updated periodically and are available from the Pinellas County Community Development Department upon request. 
(c)  Incentives. The following incentives may be made available to encourage the provision of affordable housing: 
(1)  Expedited permit processing. The city manager, or his designee, shall provide a review process that gives AHDs priority in the permit review process. A two-week turnaround time shall be the desired goal for the processing of a site plan for such development. To assist in achieving this goal a pre-application meeting will be required between the applicant and city staff. The general services director will serve as an ombudsman to assist the applicant in achieving an expeditious review. 
(2)  Impact and other review fees may be waived. The city manager is authorized, at his sole discretion, to waive all fees for affordable housing units, except where "bond covenants" (i.e. on water, sewer connection fees) or other legal constraints prevent such waiving. Subsidies for payment of fees may be provided in the form of deferred payment. The general services department shall administer any program to assist the applicant in this regard. 
(3)  Density bonus. A density bonus of up to 33 percent above the normal density permitted under the comprehensive plan or zoning district, whichever is greater, may be provided as part of an approved development agreement pursuant to chapter 50, article VII of this chapter. 
(4)  Public funding sources. Using state or federal housing funds, the county housing finance authority may also make deferred payment or low interest loans to both nonprofits and for-profits for the purchase of property when the use meets the requirements of the funding source for affordable housing developments to be located within the city. 
(5)  Identifying qualified buyers or renters. Existing sources will be identified and made available to AHDs to provide assistance in locating a qualified pool of homebuyers and renters for the affordable units. The Pinellas County Department of Community Development shall be the source for this information and the city shall coordinate with Pinellas County in this regard. 
(d)  Any proposed affordable housing development that proposes a density bonus for a property shall require a development agreement, which development agreement shall include and address the enumerated countywide rules criteria regulating affordable housing density bonuses. A development agreement for an affordable housing density bonus shall have the status of, and serve as, a land development regulation governing said property. 
( Ord. No. 07-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Chapter 54 - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT AND MULTI-MODAL IMPACT FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 24, 2015, amended Ch. 54 in its entirety to read as herein set out. the former Ch. 54 pertained to concurrency management and proportionate fair share program, and derived from Ord. No. 22-2006, 1-9-07; and Ord. No. 14-2009, 7-14-09. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; development standards, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Concurrency, F.S. § 163.3180. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Acceptance of, or accepted, application for development means that an application for development contains sufficient information, pursuant to existing regulations, to allow continuing review under this chapter or other regulatory ordinances. 
Application for development means any documentation which contains a specific plan for development, including the densities and intensities of development, where applicable, that is presented by any person for the purpose of obtaining a development order or development permit. 
Approved final site plan means any site development plan that has been reviewed and approved by the city as to the site plan's compliance with all currently applicable rules, regulations, and ordinances of the city. 
Certificate of concurrency means that document issued by the city manager or his designee that is a prerequisite for the issuance of any development order or development permit, except that certificates of concurrency for re-zonings shall only be issued such that further development in the rezoned parcel is conditioned upon the availability of sufficient capacity of those public facilities and services required for any project which may be subsequently proposed for that rezoned parcel, or any portion thereof. At a minimum, the certificate of concurrency shall provide information on the following: 
(1)  Type of proposal; 
(2)  Effective date of the concurrency test statement utilized in the comparison; 
(3)  Date of issuance of the certificate of concurrency; 
(4)  Status of each public facility and service after comparison with the current concurrency test statement; and 
(5)  Whether or not the development proposal is subject to development limitations, pursuant to application of the transportation management plan for properties located in service protection, constrained or deferral areas and any other limitations that may be identified in an adopted concurrency test statement. 
Concurrency means that the necessary public facilities and services to maintain the adopted level of service standards are available when the impacts of development occur. 
Concurrency management corridor means road corridors designated in this division as constrained, congestion containment, or long-term concurrency management. 
Concurrency management monitoring system means the data collection, processing and analysis performed by the county to determine levels of service for public facilities and services. Data maintained by the concurrency management monitoring system shall be the most current information available to the city. 
Concurrency management system means the procedure and process that the city utilizes to ensure that development orders and permits issued by the city shall not result in an unacceptable degradation of the adopted level of service adopted in the city comprehensive plan. 
Concurrency test statement means a public facility and service status report, approved and adopted by ordinance, which, at a minimum, establishes for each public facility and service the following: 
(1)  The existing and committed development in each service area; 
(2)  The existing levels of service for each public facility and service; 
(3)  Updates of items (1) and (2), above, based upon the most recently adopted schedule of capital improvements from a capital improvements element; and 
(4)  The methods used in determining the nature of projected development impacts on public facilities and services. 
Constrained roadway means a city or county roadway, regardless of transportation needs, which is constrained from adding additional capacity. A roadway may be physically constrained or policy constrained. Physical barriers occur when intensive land use development is immediately adjacent to highways making roadway expansion cost prohibitive, or when a facility has reached the maximum through-lane standards. Policy barriers are based on concerns about the impacts of roadway expansion on the environment, neighborhoods and/or local communities. Constrained facilities may be more specifically defined through subsequent amendments to this division or a concurrency test statement. 
Deficient road corridors include parcels, all or a portion of which lie within a corridor as defined below. 
(1)  Sole direct access. A condition where the only means of site ingress/egress is directly onto the road facility, regardless of the distance of that site from the facility; 
(2)  Direct access. A condition in which one or more existing or potential site ingress/egress points makes a direct connection to the road facility and the site is within one-half mile of the road facility; and 
(3)  Sole indirect access. A condition where the only point of site ingress/egress is onto a public non-arterial roadway which makes its first and shortest arterial level connection onto a road facility regardless of the distance of that site from the facility. 
Currently available revenue sources means an existing source and amount of revenue available to the city or county, as is applicable. 
Development or development activity/site means the addition to, or improvement of, property, including but not limited to the following activities: 
(1)  A change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure or on land or a material increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, or dwelling units in a structure or on land. 
(2)  Building or installing a new building/structure. 
(3)  Enlarging, replacing or substantially restoring a building/structure. 
(4)  Subdividing land into three or more parcels. 
Development order means any order granting, denying, or granting with conditions, an application for development. 
Development permit means any approved final site plan, building permit, zoning clearance, rezoning, special exception, variance, conditional use, or any other official action of the city having the effect of permitting the development of land. 
Final local development order means, for the purposes of this section, that last approval necessary to carry out the development requested. 
Level of service (LOS) means a measure of performance and/or of demand versus available capacity of public services and facilities. Regarding roadways, LOS is based primarily on travel speeds on a scale of A through F. Roads operating at LOS A are at optimum efficiency with the lower grade roads reflecting travel conditions that are progressively worse. For the purposes of this division and the city concurrency management system, LOS reported for roadways is based on peak hour conditions. Level of service E and F roads and/or roads with a volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratio of 0.9 or more are operating below the adopted level of service standard established in the city or county comprehensive plan and the concurrency test statement, as is applicable. 
Level of service "A" represents free flow. Individual users are virtually unaffected by the presence of others in the traffic stream. Freedom to select desired speeds and to maneuver within the traffic stream is extremely high. The general level of comfort and convenience provided to the motorist, passenger, or pedestrian is excellent. 
Level of service "B" is in the range of stable flow, but the presence of other users in the traffic stream begins to be noticeable. Freedom to select desired speeds is relatively unaffected, but there is a slight decline in the freedom to maneuver within the traffic stream from LOS A. The level of comfort and convenience provided is somewhat less than at LOS A, because the presence of others in the traffic stream begins to affect individual behavior. 
Level of service "C" is in the range of stable flow, but marks the beginning of the range of flow in which operation of individual users becomes significantly affected by interactions with others in the traffic stream. The selection of speed is now affected by the presence of others, and maneuvering within the traffic stream requires substantial vigilance on the part of the user. The general level of comfort and convenience declines noticeably at this level. 
Level of service "D" represents high-density, but stable, flow. Speed and freedom to maneuver are severely restricted, and the driver or pedestrian experiences a generally poor level of comfort and convenience. Small increases in traffic flow will generally cause operational problems at this level. 
Level of service "E" represents operating conditions at or near the capacity level. All speeds are reduced to a low, but relatively uniform value. Freedom to maneuver within the traffic stream is extremely difficult, and it is generally accomplished by forcing a vehicle or pedestrian to "give way" to accommodate such maneuvers. Comfort and convenience levels are extremely poor, and driver or pedestrian frustration is generally high. Operations at this level are usually unstable, because even small increases in flow or minor perturbations within the traffic stream will cause breakdowns. 
Level of service "F" is used to define forced or breakdown flow. This condition exists wherever the amount of traffic approaching a point exceeds the amount which can traverse it and queues begin to form. Operations within the queue are characterized by stopping and starting. Over and over, vehicles progress at reasonable speeds for several hundred feet or more, then are required to stop. Level of service F is used to describe operating conditions within the queue, as well as the point of the breakdown. It should be noted, however, that in many cases once free of the queue, traffic may resume to normal conditions quite rapidly. 
Multi-modal impact fee districts means areas identified by Pinellas County from which impact fee monies are collected and expended. 
Pinellas County Mobility Management System means the county's process of implementing the Pinellas County Mobility Plan through the management of transportation impacts of development projects on county facilities through the assessment, collection and expenditure of multi-modal impact fees. 
Public facilities and services means those necessary public facilities and services covered by a comprehensive plan element for which level of service standards have been adopted by the county. The necessary public facilities and services are: roads, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, potable water, recreation, and mass transit. 
Transportation deficient facility means a facility or facilities operating at level of service E and F and/or a volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratio of 0.9 or higher. 
Transportation management plan, as developed by an applicant representing a proposed development, is submitted in conjunction with individual future land use map (FLUM) amendments, zoning map amendments, and/or site plans seeking to utilize transportation management strategies to mitigate development impacts, protect roadway capacity and to increase mobility. These strategies include, but are not limited to, density/intensity reductions, project phasing, access controls, capital improvements and/or incentives encouraging mass transit, bicycle or pedestrian travel, ride-sharing or roadway improvements. 
Volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratio means the rate of traffic flow of an intersection approach or group of lanes during a specific time interval divided by the capacity of the approach or group of lanes. Volume-to-capacity ratios provide a measure of traffic congestion and are utilized in the concurrency management system to identify congested road segments and to minimize the transportation impacts of development projects that affect them. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Sec. 54-2. - Authority; adoption of legislative findings. 
(a)  This chapter is adopted in compliance with, and pursuant to, the Community Planning Act, F.S. § 163.3184 et seq. 
The legislative findings are as follows: 
(1)  The city council has adopted the City of Seminole Comprehensive Plan, which establishes goals, objectives and policies related to establishing levels of service for public facilities, such as water, sewer, parks, transportation, and solid waste as a basis for evaluating and minimizing the impacts of development on such services through the application of a concurrency management system; 
(2)  The county has adopted comprehensive plans, including the Pinellas Mobility Plan that provide data, analysis, and policies supporting the intent to minimize the impacts of development on county and state facilities operating with deficient level of service conditions through the application of a concurrency management system; 
(3)  The county has adopted the Pinellas County Multi-Modal Impact Fee, which establishes transportation impacts fees related to development and identifies a number of highway and roadway system facilities operating under deficient level of service conditions; county and state roads operating with deficient level of service conditions that are not scheduled for a mitigating improvement and identifies mitigation measures; 
(4)  F.S. § 163.3180 provides for local governments to establish a concurrency management option, which identifies policies, guidelines and techniques for implementing a concurrency management process, including guidelines for implementing a proportionate fair share process for transportation improvements. 
(5)  Transportation management plan strategies are important components of concurrency management for purposes of minimizing development impacts and maximizing mobility and accessibility consistent with the city's and county's comprehensive plans; 
(6)  F.S. § 163.3180 also states: "Consistent with public health and safety, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, adequate water supplies, and potable water facilities shall be in place and available to serve new development no later than the issuance by the local government of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent." 
(7)  F.S. § 163.3180 encourages local governments to apply concurrency management provisions in a coordinated and cooperative manner. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Sec. 54-3. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter, in conjunction with other land development regulations and the city's comprehensive plan, including the capital improvement element, and in coordination with the county, to establish a concurrency management system to ensure that public facilities and services needed to support development are available concurrent with the impacts of such development. Prior to the issuance of a development order and/or development permit, this concurrency management system shall ensure that the adopted level of service standards required for roadways, potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, recreation, and mass transit shall be maintained. 
(b)  The concurrency management system is intended to serve the long-term interests of the citizens of the city by implementing a managed growth perspective that preserves the capacity of important infrastructure facilities and services. 
(c)  The concurrency management system is intended to serve the long-term interests of the county by implementing a managed growth perspective that preserves the capacity of important county infrastructure facilities and services, and to implement the county's multi-modal impact fee. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Secs. 54-4—54-9. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 54-10. - Concurrency management system; procedure. 
(a)  Application for development. The concurrency management system is accessed by the property owner, or designated representative, when an application for development containing the required documentation for the given development order or permit is submitted to the city. A city representative shall then ascertain the completeness of the documentation, in a timely manner, to ensure that the required information is sufficient to accept the application for development for review. The burden of showing compliance with the adopted levels of service and meeting the concurrency evaluation shall be upon the applicant. The city manager or designee will direct the applicant to the appropriate staff to assist in the preparation of the necessary documentation and information. 
(b)  Review of application for development. 
(1)  When the application for a development order or permit has been accepted, it shall be processed and reviewed in accordance with adopted administrative procedures. These procedures shall include a review of the application for development for the public facilities and services identified in this chapter, as they may apply. Further, the city shall have the authority to require the applicant/developer to provide a public facilities concurrency analysis, as determined to be sufficient by the city, so that the city can determine the proposed development's impact on the existing and adopted LOS for the affected public facilities, including roadways that will serve the proposed development. At the option of the city, the city may retain a consultant to conduct an independent public facilities concurrency analysis, which shall be paid for by the applicant. 
(2)  If the application for development is not acceptable as submitted, then the application for development shall be returned to the property owner or representative clearly stating what the deficiencies are and why the application for development cannot be further reviewed. 
(c)  Concurrency review shall recognize the levels of service established by the county comprehensive plan, as applicable to the service or facility provided. The city shall recognize and adopt by reference those adopted levels of service, as defined in the county's comprehensive plan, including but not limited to drainage, recreation and open space, solid waste, water supply, sanitary sewer, traffic circulation and mass transit. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Sec. 54-11. - Concurrency test statement and monitoring system. 
(a)  The community development department shall establish and maintain a concurrency management monitoring system for the purposes of monitoring the status of county public facilities and services within the city, and city public facilities and services. On an annual basis, the community development department shall provide a status report on said concurrency test statement, and as appropriate, recommend the adoption of any proposed amendments to the existing city concurrency test statement, to the city manager. The city manager shall convey such proposed statement or amendment, along with the local planning agency recommendation, to the city council for final adoption. 
(b)  The remaining capacity reported for each public facility and service provided by the city on the city's annual concurrency test statement should be determined by calculating the existing demand as well as the committed impacts, including those associated with multi-year, phased development proposals or projects (including developments of regional impact, development agreements, etc.). These calculations are based upon data accumulated in the concurrency monitoring system, data supplied by other city departments, as well as a reasonable projection for the progress of each proposal or project, population growth projections, or such other considerations as good planning practices would deem appropriate. 
(c)  After city council adoption, a concurrency test statement shall be issued every year. Nothing in this chapter precludes the issuance and effectiveness of amendments to the current concurrency test statement if updating or correction is deemed necessary by the city council for, including, but not limited to, the following circumstances: errors in preparation and adoption are noted; the impact of issued development orders or permits, as monitored by the community development department, indicate an unacceptable degradation to the adopted level of service; or where changes in the status of capital improvement projects, of the state or any local government, change the underlying assumptions of the current concurrency test statement. 
(d)  Under no circumstances will an amended concurrency test statement divest those rights acquired under an approved development agreement or development order under the concurrency test statement as it existed prior to amendment, except where a divestiture of such rights is clearly established by the city council to be essential to the health, safety or welfare of the general public. In no case shall private property be taken for public use without the payment of just compensation. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Sec. 54-12. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  Review of an administrative decision or concurrency variance. Any applicant who has been aggrieved by an administrative decision in the application or interpretation of the provisions of this chapter as applied to a site plan review application for development may apply for a review of that administrative decision or seek a concurrency variance to the developmental review board. 
(b)  Review hearing procedure and criteria. 
(1)  Any applicant who requests a concurrency review and variance hearing shall do so in writing to the community development department. Requests need not be in any particular form but must clearly indicate what is the specific variance request or administrative decision/interpretation review concerns, what property or project the application involved, and be accompanied by a payment determined by the City to be sufficient to cover the cost of providing the hearing procedure. Notice for a variance shall be that same notice provided for in chapter 50, article VI. 
(2)  The applicant shall demonstrate by competent, substantial evidence that the strict interpretation or enforcement of the provisions of this division would cause a unique hardship, peculiar to the applicant's parcel and not shared by other property owners in the area, may be granted a variance to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  The concurrency review and variance hearing shall be conducted as provided for in chapter 50, article VI. 
a.  An applicant's failure to appear or be represented at a scheduled review hearing shall be sufficient cause to deny the application on the strength of lack of evidence. 
b.  Within 30 calendar days after the applicant's review hearing, the concurrency review and variance hearing administrator shall have made available to the public, in writing, his decision of denial or approval, with or without conditions. Such report shall be released through the community development department. If agreed to by all parties, this requirement may be waived. 
c.  In reviewing applications shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter or in the comprehensive plan, and shall utilize the following generalized guidelines and criteria: 
1.  That the variance, review, or decision on appeal will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is otherwise denied by this chapter to other similarly situated lands; 
2.  That any variance, review, or decision on appeal is the minimum increase in intensity or density that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure, consistent with the need to protect public facilities or services; 
3.  That the variance, review, or decision on appeal is not inconsistent with the general intent, purpose, and spirit of this chapter, or with the city or county comprehensive plan, as it relates to the affected jurisdiction's facility or service to be impacted; 
4.  That the variance, review, or decision on appeal will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare; 
5.  That the variance, review, or decision on appeal shall not authorize a development in conflict with any other city ordinance or the city comprehensive plan; and 
6.  That the variance, review, or decision on appeal is based upon evidence submitted by the applicant that factually supports the variance, review, or decision on appeal. 
7.  That the variance granted is only to the extent necessary to relieve the hardship. 
8.  That upon granting the variance, additional safeguards and conditions may be required to ensure proper compliance with the general spirit, purpose and intent of this chapter and of the comprehensive plan. 
d.  Further, the developmental review board may consider the following site-specific guidelines and criteria related to traffic impacts: 
1.  The expected timing of traffic impacts associated with the particular proposed use, and the status of levels of service associated with those impacts; 
2.  The proximity of intersections or highway links with identified service problems, the resolution of which involve solutions that will be impaired or prevented by the issuance of a variance, review, or appeal; 
3.  The ability of the applicant to utilize transportation management strategies as options to reduce the amount of the required variance, review, or appeal; and 
4.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to concurrency management corridor requirements for the proposed use. 
(c)  Appeals procedure. Appeals of the decisions of the developmental review board made pursuant to this chapter shall be by petition for writ of certiorari to the circuit court. 
(d)  Applicability of appeals procedures. 
(1)  This section shall not be interpreted to limit or enhance the applicability of F.S. § 163.3215. 
(2)  This section shall apply to all decisions, determinations and results of applications made under the concurrency management system as soon as it becomes effective, as provided for in this chapter. 
(3)  In order to prevent the taking of property, any party challenging a decision, determination or result made under this chapter as a temporary or permanent taking of private property must exhaust the provisions of this section and any other subsequently enacted administrative procedures, including special master procedures under F.S. § 70.001 or section 50-53(3), before any action on a request for development is deemed final by any competent court or quasi-judicial proceeding having jurisdiction. 
(e)  The community development department shall maintain a summary record of all appeals that have been acted on by the developmental review board with a report then submitted on an annual basis to the city manager to file with the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Secs. 54-13—54-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONCURRENCY DETERMINATION AND ANALYSIS (EXCLUDING TRANSPORTATION) 
 
Sec. 54-20. - Concurrency determination generally. 
(a)  The calculations described in this chapter or in the city's or county's comprehensive plans shall be used to determine the projected demand of the proposed project described in an application for concurrency review. The calculations are listed by public facility and service type. Whenever the term "city" shall appear herein, it shall mean the city manager or designee is authorized to review calculations for the concurrency management system. The information necessary to enable the city to verify the facility/service demand calculations shall be provided by the applicant to the city. Submission requirements for calculations and formulas will be provided to the applicant by city staff. The actual values for the individual items (i.e., persons/household, adopted level of service) in the formulas will also be provided to applicants as part of the concurrency review submittal. 
(b)  After an application for development is accepted and passes review, it will be compared to the most recently adopted city and/or county concurrency test statement, as is applicable. The city shall compare the application for development to the public facilities and services on the current concurrency test statement(s), as they may apply to the location described on the application for development. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Sec. 54-21. - Concurrency test statement. 
(a)  The applicable portions of the concurrency test statement shall be applied to, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, and drainage. The following are minimum standards that, when met, will satisfy the concurrency requirement: 
a.  A development order or permit is issued subject to the condition either through a binding executed agreement or an enforceable development agreement, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220, or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, that, at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent, the necessary facilities and services are in place of and available to serve the new development. 
(2)  Recreation. The following are minimum standards that, when met, will satisfy the concurrency requirement: 
a.  A development order or permit is issued subject to the conditions either through a binding executed agreement or an enforceable development agreement, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220, or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, that the necessary facilities and services needed to serve the new development are scheduled to be in place or under actual construction not more than one year after issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent as provided in the adopted schedule of capital improvements in the city capital improvements element. 
(3)  Public schools . The city may enter into an interlocal agreement with the county school board to implement a concurrency management program pursuant to the review procedures, review criteria and impact analysis contained in the interlocal agreement. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Sec. 54-22. - General strategies to rectify lack of concurrency. 
General strategies that may be considered in order to rectify the lack of concurrency include, but are not limited to the following list below. In all cases, these strategies may be considered effective only if one of the specific standards listed in subsection 54-21(a) (as they pertain to a particular facility and/or service) is achieved and/or mitigated. 
(1)  A plan amendment that improves the adopted level of service standard for the affected facilities and/or services. 
(2)  A renegotiated binding executed contract between the city and the applicant. 
(3)  A renegotiated enforceable development agreement, which may include but is not limited to development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220. 
(4)  A change in the funding source. 
(5)  A reduction in the scale (FAR and/or density) or impact of the proposed development. 
(6)  Phasing of the proposed development. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Secs. 54-23—54-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSPORTATION CONCURRENCY 
 
Sec. 54-30. - Fee required. 
(a)  Any person who, seeks a certificate of occupancy for land development activity or seeks to change a use by applying for issuance of an occupational license or development order, which will generate additional traffic shall be required to pay a multi-modal impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy, development order or occupational license for any activity requiring payment of an impact fee pursuant to this article shall be issued unless and until the multi-modal impact fee hereby required has been paid. 
(c)  Any person who has submitted a site plan or building permit application in accordance with the land development code prior to the effective date of this amendatory ordinance will be subject to the terms of the ordinance that was in effect at the time the site plan or building permit application was submitted. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Sec. 54-31. - County multi-modal impact fee. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts by reference the county's multi-modal impact fee code (chapter 150, and as amended) as it relates to the following: 
(1)  Computation of fee (section 150-40). 
(2)  Payment of fees and credits (section 150-41). 
(3)  Establishment of a trust fund (section 150-42). 
(4)  Disposition of funds (section 150-43). 
(5)  Review of fee structure (section 150-47). 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Sec. 54-32. - Development thresholds, required traffic analysis and required impact fee. 
(a)  When a traffic study is required, a mandatory methodology meeting is required with the city manager or designee and/or county staff to reach agreement on the scope, issues and requirements (such as study format, data requirements, transportation management plan, number of copies) for the traffic study. Following the meeting, the applicant or applicant's authorized representative, shall submit a letter to the city manager or designee confirming the agreed upon methodology and issues to be addressed in the traffic study. 
(b)  Development projects that generate between 51 and 300 new peak hour trips and are located within deficient road corridors are required to submit a transportation management plan (TMP) pursuant to section 54-34 designed to address their impacts while increasing mobility and reducing the demand for single occupant vehicle travel. The cost of transportation management strategies implemented for a project are creditable toward their multi-modal impact fee assessment. If the cost of the improvement exceeds the assessment, the development project would not be subject to payment of the fee. 
(c)  Development projects that generate more than 300 new peak hour trips and are located within deficient road corridors are required to conduct a traffic study and submit an accompanying report. The report shall include the results of the traffic study and a transportation management plan identifying improvements necessary to address the impacts of the project. The cost of transportation management strategies implemented for a project may be applied as credit toward the project's multi-modal impact fee assessment or payment of the fee could be included as part of a transportation management plan. 
(d)  Development projects that generate less than 51 new peak hour trips are required to pay a multi-modal impact fee in accordance with section 54-31. No transportation management plan or traffic study is required. 
(e)  Development projects that generate more than 50 new peak hour trips on non-deficient roads shall be reviewed by city manager or designee to determine if the impacts of the project adversely affect the level of service of the surrounding road network. If it is determined that approval of the development project would reduce the level of service of the adjacent road(s) to peak hour level of service E or F or would cause the volume-to-capacity ratio to reach or exceed 0.9, a TMP would be required. The applicant may submit a traffic study to verify whether their project would affect the level of service of the adjacent road(s). A TMP would be required if the results of the study confirm the findings of the city manager or designee. The TMP for such developments shall comply with the requirements of projects described in subsections 54-34(a) and (b) as appropriate and as determined by the city manager or designee. 
(f)  In the case of a change of use, redevelopment, or modification of an existing use, the impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the impact fee for the new use as compared to the impact fee for the highest previous use in existence on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (February, 24, 2015). 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Sec. 54-33. - Independent impact fee analysis. 
(a)  If an applicant opts not to have the impact fee determined according to section 54-31(1), then the applicant shall prepare and submit to the city manager or designee for approval of an independent fee calculation study for the land development activity for which a development order is sought. The traffic engineering and/or economic documentation submitted, which will require a pre-application meeting with the city manager or designee, shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Trip generation studies: 
a.  Documentation of trip generation rates appropriate for the proposed land development activity. 
b.  Documentation of trip length appropriate for the proposed land development activity. 
c.  Documentation of trip data appropriate for the proposed land development activity. 
(2)  Economic documentation studies: 
a.  Documentation of the cost per lane per mile for roadway construction for the proposed land development activity. 
b.  Documentation of credits attributable to the proposed land development activity which the applicant will make available to replace the portion of the service volume used by the traffic generated by the proposed land development activity. 
(b)  Trip generation data. Trip generation documentation other than traffic engineering or economic documentation described in section 54-33(a)(1) and (2) may be submitted by the applicant in consideration of an independent fee calculation. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Sec. 54-34. - Transportation management plan and other strategies for mitigating impacts. 
(a)  Transportation management plans are to be submitted by applicants of development projects in conjunction with their site plans. Transportation management plans are required for development applications seeking to utilize transportation management strategies/improvements to mitigate their development impacts. The extent of the strategies/improvements included in an approved transportation management plan in terms of the scale of the project(s) and roadway capacity and/or mobility benefits provided shall be based primarily on the projected impact of the development project on the surrounding traffic circulation system. Specific conditions of the deficient road corridor impacted by the development shall also be considered. 
Transportation management plan strategies/improvements applicable to development projects within corridors will be determined at the time of site plan review. Transportation management plans must be developed by the applicant and approved by the city manager or designee. Transportation management plan strategies/improvements include, but are not limited to, those listed below. Transportation management plans seeking to implement strategies that do not involve structural improvements, such as ride-sharing and transit incentive programs, must include a monitoring program to ensure the strategies are carried out in accordance with the plan. Site-related improvements are not eligible for inclusion in transportation management plans. 
(1)  Intensity reduction. The intensity of the proposal may be reduced through an across-the-board reduction of the permitted floor area ratio, as it would otherwise normally apply to the proposal. Other such corrective actions that would reduce the intensity of the proposal may also apply. 
(2)  Density reduction. The density of the proposal may be decreased by a reduction in the number of units per acre below that which would otherwise normally apply to the proposal. 
(3)  Project phasing. A project may be divided into logical phases of development by area, with later phases of the development proposal's approval withheld until the needed facilities are available. 
(4)  Outparcel deletion. Those portions of the proposal characterized as outparcels that create separate and unique impacts may be deleted from the total proposal. 
(5)  Physical highway improvements. A project may construct link capacity improvements, acceleration/deceleration lanes, intersection improvements or frontage roads. 
(6)  Operational improvements (signal). This includes efforts involving signal removal or signal timing improvements. 
(7)  Access management strategies. These include access management controls such as the preclusion of a direct connection to an LOS deficient facility, right-in/right-out driveways, alternative driveway locations, reduction of a driveway, single point access, shared access or the implementation of median controls. 
(8)  Mass transit initiatives. A project may implement a plan to encourage transit (e.g., employer-issued bus passes). Other mass transit initiatives may include, but are not limited to the construction of bus stop amenities, bus pull-off areas and dedication of park and ride parking spaces. 
(9)  Demand management/commuter assistance . These include efforts to encourage ride-sharing (e.g., designated parking spaces for carpools, employer-sponsored carpool program, participation in transportation management organization/initiative programs), and to implement flexible work hours and telecommuting programs. 
(10)  Bicycle/pedestrian improvements. These would involve structural improvements or construction of a bikeway or sidewalk connecting an existing bikeway/sidewalk network or providing access to a school, park, shopping center, etc. These improvements may also include pedestrian treatments in parking areas, sidewalks connecting developments with adjacent land uses, trail improvements and bicycle rack and on-street bicycle lane installations, and the planting of trees to provide shade canopy along sidewalks. 
(11)  Intelligent transportation system improvements. This includes improvements pertaining to computerized traffic signal systems that automatically adjust to maximize traffic flow and to permit emergency vehicles to pass through intersections quickly. It also includes freeway management systems, such as electronic message signs, and electronic fare payment on public buses that reduce passenger boarding time. 
(12)  Livable community site design features. These include, but are not limited to, implementation of pedestrian friendly site design features such as orienting buildings toward the street and parking lots to the side or rear of buildings. 
(b)  Contribution to transportation capital project . In lieu of all or part of the multi-modal impact fee imposed under this chapter, the city manager or designee may accept the offer by an applicant to implement all or part of a transportation improvement project consistent with the comprehensive plan or the metropolitan planning organization's long range transportation plan. The project(s) may be for any mode of transportation, including rail, transit, pedestrian or bicycle travel, providing that it serves to add to the capacity of the surrounding transportation circulation system or to increase mobility and reduce the dependence on automobile travel. This offer shall not include site-related improvements. These transportation improvements must be in accordance with city requirements. The applicant shall submit an offer to make improvements in lieu of a fee payment. The offer shall include a letter detailing the improvements to be made, improvement plans and a construction cost estimate in sufficient detail to allow the city manager or designee to determine consistency with local requirements. If the city manager or designee accepts such an offer, the cost of the improvement project shall be credited against the multi-modal impact fee assessed on the proposed development. Upon satisfactory completion and construction approval of the transportation improvement made in lieu of all or a portion of the impact fee due, the improvement shall be accepted by the city or county for future maintenance. If the certificate of occupancy is requested prior to the completion of the approved project, then a performance bond shall be provided to the city manager to cover the balance of all work required following issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Secs. 54-35—54-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF CONCURRENCY 
 
Sec. 54-40. - Issuance of certificate of concurrency. 
(a)  If the application for development being proposed is found to be exempt from the formal concurrency review, the city manager or designee may record and track facility and service impacts without issuance of a certificate of concurrency. If the application is not exempt, and is not subject to transportation impacts, then a certificate of concurrency or its functional equivalent shall be issued without conditions. 
(b)  If the application for development is found to be subject to transportation impacts then a certificate of concurrency or its functional equivalent shall indicate whether the proposal is acceptable or acceptable with conditions. In those instances where conditions are required, the specific conditions will be identified during site plan review. The conditions that may be applied include, but are not limited to, those required impact fees pursuant to section 54-31 and/or transportation mitigation measures pursuant to section 54-34. 
(c)  If the application for development is found by the latest concurrency analysis to fall within an area with a deficient level of service for a facility or service other than roads, then a certificate of concurrency or its functional equivalent shall state that development shall either not be authorized or be authorized with conditions to be identified in the concurrency test statement. 
(d)  A certificate of concurrency or its functional equivalent shall be issued within 30 days of receipt of an acceptable application for development. This period of time may be waived by the city manager or his designee with additional time granted, based upon the circumstances of the situation. 
(e)  The certificate of concurrency or its functional equivalent shall indicate the date of issuance and will be valid for purposes of the issuance of development orders or permits for 12 months from the date of issuance. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Sec. 54-41. - Certificate of concurrency vesting. 
(a)  Any development order or permit that is issued within the effective period of a validly issued certificate of concurrency or its functional equivalent shall be vested, for the purposes of concurrence, until the expiration of that development order or development permit, provided that development commences within the validity period of the development order or permit and continues in good faith, except that for purposes of a development order or development permit that authorizes construction, the validity period shall be limited to six months from the date of approval of the development order or development permit. Under no circumstances shall the validity period for a development order or permit or application for development under an existing certificate of concurrency or its functional equivalent be extended by action on a subsequent development order or permit for the same project or proposal, except when review of the subsequent development order or permit or application for development is based upon a more recently adopted or amended concurrency test statement, or subsection (b), below, applies. 
(b)  For those certificates of concurrency or its functional equivalent issued for a development agreement entered into by the city, pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 163.3220, as amended, the duration of such certificate of concurrency, as issued, shall be for the time period stated within the development agreement. 
( Ord. No. 02-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-24-15)  
Chapter 58 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, amended Ch. 58 in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Ch. 58 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1991, §§ 6.00.00—6.06.04; Ord. No. 24-2000, 8-22-00; Ord. No. 33-2005, 4-11-06; Ord. No. 03-2006, 4-11-06; and Ord. No. 10-2007, 8-14-07. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 10; environment, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and certain other public property, ch. 38; concurrency management and multi-modal impact fees, ch. 54; zoning, ch. 70. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide site design and improvement standards applicable to all development activity within the city. These standards are intended to ensure that future growth, development and redevelopment in the city conforms to certain minimum criteria, provided for the express purpose of achieving the goals of the city as stated in its comprehensive plan, as well as implementing the objectives and policies adopted to ensure fulfillment of those goals. The site design standards contained in this chapter are provided to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens; to ensure the beneficial impacts of growth and guard against the negative impacts of growth; and to protect neighboring properties as well as the general public from potential adverse impacts from a proposed use. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Secs. 58-2—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 58-31. - Purpose. 
This article establishes minimum requirements applicable to the development as it relates to the transportation system, including public and private streets, bikeways, pedestrian ways, parking and loading areas, and access control to and from public streets. The standards in this section are intended to minimize the traffic impacts of development, to assure that all developments adequately and safely provide for the storage and movement of vehicles consistent with good engineering and development design practices. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-32. - Rights-of-way. 
(a)  Right-of-way widths. Right-of-way requirements for public road construction shall conform to the functional classification of the city's comprehensive plan and the functional classification and right-of-way standards of the county's comprehensive plan transportation element. 
(b)  Future right-of-way. Future right-of-way requirements shall be identified in the transportation circulation element of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Protection and use of rights-of-way. 
(1)  No encroachment shall be permitted into existing rights-of-way, except when authorized by the city. 
(2)  Use of the right-of-way for public or private utilities, including but not limited to sanitary sewer, potable water, telephone wires, cable television wires, internet, gas lines or electricity transmission, shall be allowed, subject to applicable city regulations. 
(3)  Sidewalks and bicycle ways shall be placed within the right-of-way. 
(d)  Vacation of rights-of-way. Applications to vacate a right-of-way shall be approved upon a finding that all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The requested vacation is consistent with the transportation circulation element of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The right-of-way does not provide the sole access to any property. Remaining access shall not be by easement. 
(3)  The vacation would not jeopardize the current or future location of any utility. 
(4)  The proposed vacation is not detrimental to the public interest and provides a positive benefit to the city. 
(e)  Private. (See chapter 38 for standards, as may be applicable.) 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-33. - Transportation circulation. 
(a)  Access. 
(1)  Unrestricted access shall not be permitted. 
(2)  Curb cuts at the property line shall be limited to a maximum of 25 feet for residential uses and 35 feet for nonresidential uses. At the sole discretion of the city manager or designee, the width may be increased so as to reasonably serve the use. 
(3)  All sites shall provide emergency vehicle access. 
(4)  Offset intersections shall be separated by a minimum of 150 feet on inside curves and 40 feet on outside curves. 
(5)  See chapter 38 for additional standards, as may be applicable. 
(b)  Sight visibility triangle. In order to provide a clear view of intersecting streets to the motorist, there shall be a triangular area of clear sight visibility formed by two intersecting streets or the intersection of a driveway and a street. The following standards shall be met: 
(1)  Nothing shall be erected, placed, parked, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two feet and ten feet above the grade, measured at the centerline of the intersection. The city shall have the right to immediately remove, without prior notice, any obstruction within the right-of-way that the city determines is in violation of this provision. 
(2)  The sight visibility triangle shall be formed by connecting a point on each street centerline, to be located at the distance from the intersection of the street centerlines, and a third line connecting the two points. Sight visibility triangles for property located on county, state and federal highways shall be determined by Florida Department of Transportation's Manual of Uniform Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Street and Highway, as amended. 
(3)  The distance from the intersection of the street centerline for a local street that is a collector is 100 feet. 
(4)  The distance from the intersection of the street centerline for a local street that is not a collector is 50 feet. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-34. - Sidewalks and bikeways. 
(a)  New development. All new developments, whether residential or commercial, shall provide for pedestrian circulation. In residential areas that are predominately developed and where no sidewalks exist, the requirement for sidewalks may be waived by the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Commercial development. All commercial development must provide a minimum five-foot wide sidewalk in the following instances: 
(1)  Along public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Along or across private drives providing access to buildings or parking. 
(3)  Along access corridors between buildings. 
(4)  At interconnecting points where significant numbers of people will seek to walk, such as to amenities. 
(c)  Residential development. In residential development, hard-surfaced sidewalks a minimum of four feet in width shall be provided along at least one side of the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  New development and redevelopment. Encourage development to provide for bicycle storage, and appropriately designed bicycle and pedestrian pathways/crossings connecting internal and abutting residential and commercial areas, and connecting to recreation areas, schools, shopping areas and transit stops/terminal areas, as appropriate, and where physically possible. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-35. - Standards for drive-up facilities. 
(a)  Generally. All facilities providing drive-up or drive-through service shall provide on-site stacking lanes in accordance with the standards specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  The facilities and stacking lanes shall be located and designed to minimize turning movements in relation to the driveway access to streets and intersection. 
(2)  The facilities and stacking lanes shall be located and designed to minimize or avoid conflicts between vehicular traffic and pedestrian areas such as sidewalks, crosswalks or other pedestrian access ways. Drive-through lanes that obstruct the pathway between parking areas and entries into the building shall be designated with a pedestrian crossing that is delineated by landscaping curbing, raised or decorative pavement, and signage. 
(3)  A bypass lane shall be provided. 
(4)  Stacking lane distance, a minimum of 19 feet in length, shall be measured from the service window to the property line bordering the furthest street providing access to the facility. 
(5)  Minimum stacking lane distance shall be as follows: 
a.  Financial institutions shall provide not less than three stacking spaces at or behind the pneumatic tube(s) for the drive-through lane(s). 
b.  All other uses shall provide not less than five spaces at or behind the menu board. 
(6)  Alleys or driveways in or abutting areas designed, approved or developed for residential use shall not be used for circulation of traffic for drive-up facilities. 
(7)  Where turns are required in the exit lane, the minimum distance from any drive-up station to the beginning point of the curve shall be 34 feet. The minimum inside turning radius shall be 25 feet. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Secs. 58-36—58-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 58-66—58-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING 
 
Sec. 58-86. - Applicability. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for all development within the city pursuant to the requirements of this land development code. The facilities shall be maintained as long as the use exists that the facilities were designed to serve. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
_____ 
Sec. 58-87. - Specific requirements. 
(a)  Minimum spaces. There shall be provided at the time of the erection of any main structure, or at the time any main structure or use is enlarged or increased in capacity such as, but not limited to, by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, floor area, change to more intense or new use, or seats, a minimum number of off-street automobile parking spaces in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b)—(f) of this section for each use on the site. When the number of required spaces is a fractional number of 0.5 or greater, then the required number of spaces shall be the next highest whole number. 
(b)  Residential uses. 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, per unit ..... 2 spaces 
(Accessory dwelling units are exempt.) 
(2)  Multifamily dwellings, per unit ..... 2 spaces 
(3)  Senior citizen housing developments that are deed restricted to senior citizens, for every ten dwelling units, shall have a minimum of eight parking spaces (0.8 dwelling units = 1 parking space). 
(4)  Nursing home or assisted living facility - one off-street parking space shall be provided for every three beds, plus one parking space for each two employees anticipated to be employed on the largest shift, plus one parking space for each staff physician on the largest shift. 
(c)  Commercial or industrial uses. 
(1)  General business, commercial or personal service establishments, per 250 square feet of gross floor area ..... 1 space 
(2)  Medical clinics or offices, per 200 square feet of gross floor area ..... 1 space 
(3)  Other office buildings, per 250 square feet of gross floor area ..... 1 space 
(4)  Motels and hotels, per hotel or motel unit ..... 1 space 
plus 3 spaces 
Ancillary uses such as restaurants, lounges, and meeting areas shall be provided with the required number of spaces. 
(5)  Eating or drinking establishments, for each 60 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area devoted exclusively to patron use ..... 1 space 
Plus, for each 400 square feet, or fraction thereof, or other area \ 1 space 
(6)  Auto service station, per service bay ..... 3 spaces 
(Service station bays or spaces at gas pumps may not be counted as spaces.) 
(7)  Furniture or carpet store, per 1,000 square feet of gross floor space ..... 1 space 
(8)  Open sales (e.g., autos, boats and other vehicles) ..... 20 percent 
of the display 
sales area 
(9)  Marinas, per each four berths ..... 1 space 
(10)  Campgrounds and travel parks, per campsite and/or vehicle site ..... 1 space 
plus those required 
for any accessory uses 
(11)  Commercial (such as wholesale or business services), manufacturing and industrial concerns not catering to the retail trade, per 400 square feet of gross floor area ..... 1 space 
(12)  Warehousing, per 1,500 square feet of gross floor area ..... 1 space 
(d)  Community service facilities. 
(1)  Religious facilities such as church, temples or places of worship, per 40 square feet of floor space in the main auditorium and educational buildings ..... 1 space 
(2)  Clubs, lodges or similar uses, per 50 square feet of floor area used for assembly, meeting or dining area ..... 1 space 
(3)  Hospitals, for each two patient beds ..... 1 space 
(4)  Library, museum, art gallery and similar uses, for 400 square feet of public area ..... 1 space 
(5)  Theaters, auditoriums, places of assembly, for each four seats ..... 1 space 
(e)  Educational facilities. 
(1)  Elementary, middle or high schools, per employee ..... 1 space 
Plus, per four seats in combination of an auditorium, stadium or gymnasium \ 1 space 
(2)  College, university or similar institution, same as (e)(1) above plus, for each classroom ..... 7 spaces 
(3)  Day care facility, for each ten students ..... 1 space 
Plus, per employee \ 1 space 
(f)  Mixed use residential facility. A facility of mixed use (e.g., retirement community) shall provide one off-street parking space per bed unless the applicant demonstrates to the city manager or designee that such a ratio is unnecessary for the facility in question. 
(g)  Uses not specifically listed. The number of parking spaces required for uses not specifically listed in the matrix shall be determined by the city manager or designee. The city manager or designee, shall consider requirements for similar uses and appropriate traffic engineering and planning data, and shall establish a minimum number of parking spaces based upon the principles of this land development code. 
(h)  Disabled facilities. 
(1)  Number. Accessible parking spaces for disabled persons shall be provided in the following manner: 
FIGURE 1 
Minimum Standards for Accessible Parking Spaces 
Number-Total Parking in Lot 	Required Number of Accessible Spaces 
1—25 	1 
26—50 	2 
51—75 	3 
76—100 	4 
101—150 	5 
151—200 	6 
201—300 	7 
301—400 	8 
401—500 	9 
501—1,000 	2% of total 
Over 1,000 	20 
Plus, for each 100 over 1,000 	1 
 
A minimum of four spaces shall be provided at a hospital or physical rehabilitation center. 
(2)  Size. Diagonal or perpendicular spaces for the disabled shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide. 
(3)  Access. All spaces for the disabled shall be provided with a curb cut or curb ramp to a pathway, a minimum of 44 inches wide to provide access to the building served and shall be located so that users will not be compelled to wheel behind parked vehicles. 
(4)  Location. Disabled parking spaces shall be located immediately adjacent to the building to be served. 
(5)  Marking. Such spaces shall be posted with a permanent above-grade sign bearing the international symbol of accessibility and the caption "Parking by Disabled Permit Only." 
(6)  Calculation. In calculating the required number of accessible spaces, the accessible space shall be included in determining the threshold for additional accessible spaces (i.e., for each multiple of 25 parking spaces, the accessible spaces shall be included as part of the total, not in addition to the total). 
(i)  Bicycle parking. 
(1)  Purpose. The bicycle parking requirements of this section are intended to encourage the use of bicycles as a means of transportation in the city by ensuring that adequate bicycle parking facilities are provided at travel destinations. By encouraging use of bicycles, the public health, safety and welfare will be furthered through improved air quality, reduced energy consumption and more efficient use of vehicular parking facilities. 
(2)  Locational requirements. All bicycle parking facilities provided to satisfy the requirements of this section shall be located on the same building site as the uses which they serve, convenient to the principal entrance(s) of the building. These facilities may be located in the rear 50 percent of any required front yard setback or in other areas approved by the community development department, but shall not be located in any vehicle parking space required by chapter 58. 
(3)  Design requirements. All bicycle parking facilities shall be approved by the community development department. 
(4)  Covered parking encouraged. Wherever the design of the building or use being served by the bicycle parking facility includes covered areas which could accommodate such facilities either as proposed or through economical redesign, covered bicycle parking shall be encouraged. To this end, the community development department shall be authorized to permit modifications to the design requirements of this chapter commensurate with the cost of providing covered parking. 
FIGURE 2 
Minimum Standards Where Bicycle Parking is Required 
The following uses shall be required to provide bicycle parking spaces in the amounts listed: 
	Percentage of Requirement for Vehicles 
Amusement centers 	20 
Bowling lanes 	10 
Child care centers 	10 
Community centers 	20 
Eating and drinking establishments 	* 
Rooms 	30 
Libraries 	20 
Recreation, outdoor 	20 
Retail sales 	* 
Schools—Elementary and middle 	1 bicycle space per 10 students 
Schools—Senior high 	1 bicycle space per 15 students 
Schools—Vocational, business, college 	* 
Shopping centers 	10 
 
* The community development department shall be authorized to require bicycle parking for these uses where it is determined that such facilities will be needed in the particular case. 
(5)  Design. All bicycle parking spaces shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
Minimum width \2 feet 
Minimum length \6 feet 
The community development department shall be authorized to modify these standards where the facilities will be used predominantly by bicycles having different space needs (such as children's bicycles, adult tricycles, etc.). 
(6)  Number of spaces. 
a.  Uses where bicycle parking required. Figure 2 shows minimum requirements for uses for which bicycle parking shall be required. The community development department shall be authorized to reduce or waive these requirements where it is determined that there is insufficient need in a particular case. 
b.  Bicycle parking encouraged for other uses. For any use not listed, bicycle parking facilities may be provided in lieu of not more than two percent of all vehicle parking spaces required by this section, or one space (whichever is greater). For each vehicle space so converted, eight bicycle parking spaces shall be provided. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
_____ 
Sec. 58-88. - Maximum number of parking spaces and provision for relief. 
(a)  The minimum parking space requirements of subsections 58-87(b)—(f) shall not be exceeded. 
(b)  Any development, redevelopment, or change of use of property through the use of a site plan that proposes to exceed the minimum parking requirements shall either: 
(1)  Require the approval of a variance to be granted in strict accordance by conclusively meeting all the required findings of chapter 50, article VI, pertaining to the granting of variances; or 
(2)  Require the approval of a development agreement in accordance with chapter 50, article VII. 
(c)  It is the intent of this section to permit the continuance of those uses on properties/developments that were in compliance with the parking requirements in place prior to the adoption date of this section, March 28, 2006, until the use(s) or property is proposed to change use or is subject to a development order defined in section 50-86. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Secs. 58-89—58-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OFF-STREET LOADING 
 
Sec. 58-111. - Spaces required. 
Loading areas shall comprise one space for every commercial or industrial building of 5,000 square feet or more, plus one additional space for each additional 25,000 square feet of gross building space. This requirement may be waived, at the sole discretion of the city manager or city manager designee, depending on the nature of the proposed use. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-112. - Access and design. 
(a)  Each loading space shall have direct access to an alley or street. 
(b)  Each loading space shall have the following minimum dimensions: 
(1)  Length, 25 feet. 
(2)  Width, 12 feet. 
(3)  Height, 14 feet. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Secs. 58-113—58-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 58-136. - Location. 
Off-street parking or loading lots may be developed in any required side, front or rear yard. Parking garages shall conform to the minimum yard requirements for the principal building of the district in which they are located. Parking spaces for all dwellings should be located on the same lot or parcel with the main structure to be served. Parking spaces for other uses should be provided on the same lot or parcel not more than 500 feet distant as measured along the nearest pedestrian walkway. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-137. - Surface. 
Lots shall be surfaced by a durable paving material, properly graded and drained to dispose of all surface water. Parking areas designed for use three days a week or less, such as for religious facilities, may be surfaced up to 100 percent with sod. The use of pervious/permeable concrete or other similar type porous surface is encouraged as part of low impact development techniques as described and may be required pursuant to this chapter, article IV. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-138. - Dimensions. 
Each parking space shall be measured according to Figure 3. The marking of parking spaces is required in lots designed for more than four vehicles. Access drives or aisles shall be measured according to Figure 3. For those lots of 50 spaces or more the developer may set aside ten percent of the total parking spaces for compact car parking. Such areas shall be a minimum of eight and one-half feet wide and 18 feet deep exclusive of required access drives or drive aisles. 
FIGURE 3 
Parking Standards 
Parking Angle (degrees) 	Stall Width (feet) 	Stall Length (feet) 	Aisle Width (feet) 	Minimum Overall Double Row with Aisle Between (feet) 
Parallel Parking 	8'6" 	23' 		
45° 	9'6" 	19' 	16' 	52.5' 
60° 	9'6" 	19' 	18' 	60' 
70° 	9'6" 	19' 	19' 	61' 
80° 	9'6" 	19' 	24' 	64.3' 
90° 	9'6" 	20' 	24' 	62' 
 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-139. - Vehicular access. 
All parking spaces, except for single family, dwellings, shall be restricted and controlled by curbs or concrete bumpers, including those spaces located on sod. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-140. - Illumination. 
Lots shall be adequately illuminated if designed for use by more than four vehicles after dark. Where parking lots abut residential uses, lighting fixtures shall be shielded or directed so as to protect the residential use from direct parking lot illumination. Residential uses will also be shielded from parking lots by hedges, berms or walls or any combination thereof so that no lights from vehicles using the parking lot shall shine into any residence windows. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-141. - Egress. 
Excluding single-family residences, all off-street parking areas shall be designed so that no vehicle is required to back into a public or private street or through drive to obtain egress. For the purpose of this provision, drives or aisles serving more than 25 vehicles and which are not internal to a parking bay but serve one or more parking bays are considered to be through drives. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-142. - Landscaping. 
Vehicular use areas shall be landscaped in compliance with this chapter, article V. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-143. - Open sales and service areas. 
To protect and maintain safe traffic conditions, all open sales and service areas, e.g., automobile sales lots, trailer sales lots, shall provide a minimum total area of 20 percent of the lot or parcel area as open off-street parking area. Parking required per section 58-87 shall not be counted towards satisfying the requirement of this section. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-144. - Permanent reservation. 
Area reserved for off-street parking or loading in accordance with this division shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use it serves is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent parking or loading space is provided. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-145. - Aggregation. 
Parking requirements for two or more uses, of the same or different types, may be satisfied by the allocation of the required number of spaces for each use in a common parking facility. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-146. - Nonconformities. 
In addition to the nonconforming compliance thresholds pursuant to chapter 50, full compliance with the parking requirements and design standards shall be required where the seating capacity, building addition/expansion, or other factors increase the required parking by 25 percent or more. The city manager or city manager designee in their discretion shall determine if a formal site plan submittal is required. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Secs. 58-147—58-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-201. - Purpose. 
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), pursuant to Title 40, Section 122.26 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and as amended, has mandated that municipalities provide the legal authority to control discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system under the NPDES permit in order to control the quality of discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer system. Therefore, the city commission finds it necessary and in the public interest to protect the quality of waters receiving stormwater discharges for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
In addition to meeting the requirements of this land development code, the design and performance of all stormwater management systems shall comply with applicable national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) regulations, state regulations, and the rules of the Southwest Florida Water Management District (SWFWMD) and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). In all cases the strictest of the applicable standards shall apply. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-202. - Exceptions. 
The following development activities are exempt from this article, except steps to control erosion and sedimentation must be taken for all development. 
(1)  The construction of a single-family, duplex or triplex residential dwelling unit and related accessory structures on a single parcel of land. 
(2)  Any development within a subdivision if each of the following conditions has been met: 
a.  Stormwater management provisions for the subdivision were previously approved and remain valid as part of a final plat or development plan; and 
b.  The development is conducted in accordance with the stormwater management provisions submitted with the final plat or development plan. 
(3)  Bona fide agricultural activity, including forestry, provided farming activities are conducted in accordance with the requirements set forth in an approved natural resources conservation service conservation plan and forestry activities are conducted in accordance with the silviculture best management practices manual published by the state division of forestry. If the conservation plan and forestry best management practices are not implemented accordingly, this exemption shall become void and a stormwater permit shall be required. 
(4)  Maintenance activity that does not change or affect the quality, rate, volume or location of stormwater flows on the site or of stormwater runoff. 
(5)  Action taken under emergency conditions to prevent imminent harm or danger to persons, or to protect property from imminent fire, violent storms, hurricanes or other hazards. A report of the emergency action shall be made to the community development department as soon as practicable. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-203. - Scope. 
A complete drainage system shall be provided. All areas within the development, including lots, streets and other areas, must be suitably drained. In addition, where drainage runoff from outside the development passes over or through the areas of the development, such runoff shall be included in the drainage system design. The system should be designed for long life and shall be suitable for low-cost maintenance by normal maintenance methods. 
(1)  Maximum use shall be made of lakes, low impact development (LID) techniques and retention ponds. 
(2)  Unless approved by the city engineer, all drainage systems in public drainage easements or drainage rights-of-way, with the exception of major county drainage ditches and canals, will be in pipe. 
(3)  Stormwater system design shall be in accordance with design criteria pursuant to this article. 
(4)  To reduce non-point source pollutant loadings and improve the efficiency of the city's drainage system, dumping of debris of any kind (e.g., yard clippings and trimmings) into drainage ditches, canals and storm water control structures shall be prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Secs. 58-204—58-224. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONVEYANCE AND CONTROL SYSTEM DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 58-225. - General standards. 
(a)  All stormwater from all construction sites shall be controlled in such a way as to retain sediment onsite and prevent violations of state water quality standards or national pollutant discharge elimination system permits. Stormwater from areas of development activity shall be treated or managed on-site, using best management practices (treatment methods and practices to control the discharge of pollutants) in accordance with NPDES permits or as required and permitted by DEP or SWFWMD, prior to discharging to a municipal system, Lake Seminole and/or any wetlands. All stormwater discharges from the site shall be of a quality which will not adversely impact the water quality or beneficial uses of the receiving water. 
(b)  The hydraulics of underground drainage through storm sewers, where employed, and drainage structures such as bridges, box culverts, headwalls, dams, weirs, spillways, bulkheads and other structures shall conform to good accepted engineering practice and coefficients of friction suitable for the type of pipe or structure utilized. Foundations or other supports or anchoring methods shall be adequate. Erosion shall be minimized by energy dissipators or other means of reducing flow velocity. 
(c)  The review and approval of stormwater facility design shall be pursuant to the standards identified below or as may be recommended for modification by the city engineer and as approved by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-226. - Valley curb. 
Valley curb shall be 24 inches wide with a minimum thickness of six inches at the center, with a three-inch rise to the back of the curb and a one-inch rise to the pavement edge, 3,000 pounds per square inch concrete used throughout. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-227. - Curb and gutter. 
Curbs shall be 12 inches deep, five-inch top width with a six-inch deep, one-inch wide reveal on the face. Gutters shall be six inches deep, 18 inches wide with a slope of one inch to one foot, 3,000 pounds per square inch concrete used throughout. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-228. - Vertical curb. 
Vertical curb without gutters shall be six inches wide, 18 inches deep with six-inch curb above pavement, 3,000 pounds per square inch concrete used throughout. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-229. - Culvert pipe. 
Culvert pipe shall be reinforced concrete pipe, PVC or ADS N-12 or equal. Corrugated metal pipe shall not be used between structures or within road right-of-way. Culvert pipe under roadways shall be reinforced concrete pipe. Easements, as may be required by the city, for pipe outside the right-of-way are subject to case-by-case review. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-230. - Headwalls. 
All culverts under roadways where sufficient pipe length is not provided shall have headwalls made of reinforced concrete or other approved structure. Where shallow swales intersect deeper drainage ditches, erosion control shall be provided by use of culvert pipes, concrete swales, headwalls with spillways, or other suitable means. Cover material over culverts in swales shall be suitably stabilized to prevent erosion. The proposed design of reinforced concrete headwalls shall be submitted for approval. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-231. - Manholes and junction boxes. 
Drainage connections to drainageways, and intersecting or converging drainageways shall be suitably designed and aligned to provide effective erosion and silting control. All manholes or junction boxes shall be constructed of reinforced concrete. They shall be approved by the city engineer as to appropriate size. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-232. - Catch basins. 
All catch basins shall be constructed of reinforced concrete. They shall be approved by the city engineer as to the appropriate size. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-233. - Valley crossings in streets. 
The design of valley crossings in streets shall be submitted for approval. In no case shall concrete valley gutters be less than 36 inches wide. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-234. - Underdrains. 
(a)  Underdrains for curb and gutter construction are required on both sides of all roads within the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Underdrains for roadside swale construction shall be installed if the bottom of roadside swale ditches is less than 24 inches below the edge of the road surface. 
(c)  Underdrain installation shall be per approval by the city engineer. 
(d)  An isolated underdrain system with cleanout/inspection boxes shall be required if the storm drain system is of insufficient depth to ensure a properly functional underdrain system. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-235. - Swale drainage. 
(a)  Swale geometry. Swale drainage will be considered only with the approval of the city engineer. 
(b)  Swale erosion protection. Swales shall be provided with permanent erosion protection. Such protection may be turf, using an approved type of grass, or approved type of pavement liner may be utilized. When turf protection is used, the swales shall be sodded, sprigged or seeded a lateral distance extending from within one foot of the road pavement to the top of the swale backslope. Mulching in accordance with state road department standards shall be acceptable. 
(c)  Driveways across swales. Driveways across swales shall have placed beneath them drainage pipes of adequate size, as determined by the city engineer. The culvert pipes shall be long enough to provide an adequate shoulder, as determined by the city engineer, on each side of the driveway pavement. The ends of the pipe shall be finished with mitered end sections or headwalls. 
(d)  For local lot drainage, rear yard swales are not permitted when traversing more than one lot. Yard drains and inlets are required where necessary for adequate drainage. Where side yard swales and other swales are required, side slopes shall be not steeper than 5:1 for subdivisions and 3:1 for commercial sites. Minimum depth of swales will be six inches. Minimum gradients of yard swales shall be one-eighth inch per foot (one percent). Vertical rise from high point of swale to lowest floor level shall be not less than eight inches. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-236. - Canals, lakes, major waterways. 
(a)  Open channels other than major waterways may be defined as minor streams, canals, ditches, and swales. Such open channels shall be designed in accordance with good accepted engineering practice adapted to local conditions. Cross-sectional areas and hydraulic gradients shall be such that design velocities shall not result in soil scouring for the soil and/or turf conditions reasonably anticipated. Mean velocities greater than three feet per second shall be considered excessive unless permanent channel lining or other suitable protection is employed. The design shall provide that the channels will not overflow their banks at design flood conditions. 
(b)  All major waterways shall conform to proposed construction as shown on master plans for the various drainage basins. Improvement or establishment of major canals is of such significance that the design of each such improvement or establishment proposed shall be developed as a separate hydraulic problem. Engineering data, criteria and suitable calculations shall be submitted prior to approval of construction plans. 
(c)  Where lakes are included as a part of the drainage system, detention time in these lakes may be considered in computing discharge by presentation of hydrographs developed with accepted engineering methods. Lakes shall have a maximum side slope of 3:1 to a point two feet below water level. Proposed designs shall be submitted for approval. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-237. - Floodplains. 
Where lands are or have been subject to periodic flooding and minimum building elevations have not been established, the subdivider's engineer shall establish flood elevations at design flood conditions and meet any requirements of chapter 62, article IV. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-238. - Drainage outfalls. 
(a)  Studies may be required showing that existing outfalls are both positive and adequate. 
(b)  Drainage wells, seepage basins or underdrains will not be accepted as positive outfalls. In some cases of severe hardship, the city engineer may approve such an outfall with special site specific restrictions and requirements. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Secs. 58-239—58-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER POND CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 58-261. - Retention/detention of surface water runoff. 
(a)  All new construction, development, threshold redevelopment (where any existing multifamily or nonresidential structure and/or parking lot is rebuilt in its entirety) or substantial improvement (where any existing multifamily or nonresidential structure is substantially modified or rehabilitated in excess of 51 percent of the most current total assessed property value per the county property appraiser records or where more than 51 percent of a parking lot area is demolished and/or replaced), other than a single-family home, and all site plans shall include on-site retention/detention of surface water runoff as required by this Code, the applicable SWFWMD, state or federal regulations. General design standards include the following: 
(1)  The peak rate of runoff from a 25-year frequency, 24-hour duration rainfall shall be equal to, or less than, a predevelopment (no impervious surface) condition and used as the design storm. 
(2)  The 100-year, 24-hour design storm event generates 12 inches of rainfall, and shall be used when no potential for outfall into a receiving body exists. 
(3)  Ultimate land usage shall be assumed for selection of proper runoff coefficients within the basins involved, whether within the development or not. Weighted runoff coefficients shall be applied where different coefficients apply within the areas comprising the basin. The rational formula may be used to determine peak runoff rates for project with total drainage areas of ten acres or less. Other, more precise, methods acceptable to the city engineer shall be employed for developments with larger drainage areas. 
(b)  A single family home may be required to provide drainage swales or a French drain system if so determined by the city manager, or city manager designee. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-262. - Drainage plan. 
Every application for new construction or substantial improvement to existing construction, including single-family homes, subdivided lands and un-platted lands, must include a drainage plan that demonstrates: 
(1)  All runoff entering the site from adjacent lands is carried through the site and discharged to a positive and adequate outfall. A sinkhole shall not be considered a positive or adequate outfall. 
(2)  On-site detention is provided as required. 
(3)  Existing surface water drainage systems are not blocked or diverted onto neighboring property. 
(4)  The drainage system will be maintained as such, not landscaped (except for sod or bio-filtration system) or built upon, and will continue to function. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-263. - Diversion; excavation. 
(a)  Surface water runoff shall not be diverted across major drainage basin boundaries. 
(b)  On-site stormwater detention areas may be excavated within the 100-year floodplain as long as perimeter berms are not constructed above existing ground level and adequate compensation is provided on-site. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-264. - Retention/detention facilities design standards. 
The attenuation, treatment and habitat characteristics of retention/detention facilities shall be designed as follows: 
(1)  Side slopes of wet detention ponds shall be constructed to a maximum slope of three feet horizontal to one foot vertical (3:1). Side slopes of dry detention areas shall have maximum slopes of 1½:1. All slopes shall be stabilized to prevent erosion. 
(2)  Vertical walls shall not be permitted around more than 50 percent of the perimeter of wet detention ponds without the installation of a fountain or aeration system. No more than 50 percent of the perimeter of a dry detention pond may be walled if the remainder is sloped no steeper than 3:1. 
(3)  At least 50 percent of the surface area of a detention area must be open to sunlight. 
(4)  During excavation and construction, downstream turbidity shall be maintained at conditions reasonable to assure maintenance of water quality to meet the conditions of the applicable SWFWMD, state or federal regulations. 
(5)  All ground surfaces disturbed by construction shall be sodded or seeded per the city engineer's standards. 
(6)  All construction practices shall conform to accepted best management practices for erosion control, such as straw bales, ground cover, slope stabilization, temporary vegetation, silt barriers trenched into the soil and turbidity barriers. 
(7)  Detention areas must be roughed out prior to other site grading, as a means of erosion control. 
(8)  For on-site irrigation purposes, water quality treatment volume may be pumped onto land from which surface water runoff returns to the same detention area. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-265. - When low-impact development (LID) systems are required. 
(a)  Low-impact development (LID) is a stormwater management approach that uses a set of hydrologic controls (structural and non-structural) distributed throughout the site and integrated as a treatment train (i.e., in series) to replicate the natural hydrologic functioning of the landscape. Unlike conventional systems, which typically control and treat runoff using a single engineered stormwater pond located at the "bottom of the hill," LID systems are designed to promote volume attenuation and treatment at or near the source of stormwater runoff via distributed retention, detention, bio-filtration, treatment, and harvesting mechanisms. The fundamental goal of applying LID concepts, design, and practice is to improve the overall effectiveness and efficiency of stormwater management relative to conventional systems, reducing total and peak runoff volumes, and improving the quality of waters discharged from the site. LID systems are designed primarily for addressing stormwater quality and will provide some attenuation of peak flows; however, they may not provide sufficient storage capacity to meet SWFWMD water quantity control criteria. 
(b)  The utilization of LID techniques or in combination with traditional stormwater systems, as approved by the city manager, shall be required for new, threshold redevelopment or substantial improvements to multifamily and nonresidential development on five acres or more. LID techniques may be required on such developments on less than five acres on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  LID techniques include, but are not limited, to the following: 
(1)  Bio-filtration/bio-filtration retention. Bio-filtration areas are shallow depressions used as structural stormwater controls to capture, treat, and infiltrate stormwater runoff. Bio-filtration retention systems are also shallow depressions which utilize underdrains as structural stormwater controls to capture and treat stormwater runoff and connect to an outfall such as a stormwater pond or roadway. Within the bio-filtration area, nutrient-adsorption media, soils, mulch, and planted vegetation facilitate treatment and remove pollutants from the runoff. Multiple bio-filtration or bio-filtration retention areas are often distributed throughout a larger catchment, providing numerous treatment and water storage areas. Although any one treatment area may be small, the cumulative effect can be significant. 
(2)  Dry wells. A dry well consists of a small excavated pit backfilled with aggregate, usually pea gravel or stone. Dry wells function as infiltration systems used to control runoff from building rooftops. Another special application of dry wells is modified catch basins, where inflow is a form of direct surface runoff. Dry wells provide the majority of treatment by processes related to soil infiltration, including adsorption, trapping, filtering, and bacterial degradation. 
(3)  Parking lot/sidewalk pervious pavement. Pervious pavement or pavers (also commonly referred to as permeable pavement and porous pavement) systems are structural stormwater controls that capture and temporarily store part or all of the water quality volume. Pervious pavement systems infiltrate and capture rainfall that falls on the surface at rates up to the surface infiltration rate, compared to impervious pavements where almost all direct rainfall becomes runoff. These systems infiltrate water below the surface, where water is typically allowed to ex-filtrate into the surrounding parent soil. Under these circumstances, pervious pavement systems function as retention systems. Pervious pavement systems should be considered as part of a treatment system with credit based on available storage volume and the ability of the system to readily recover the storage volume. 
(4)  Stormwater harvesting. It is a combination of a specified harvesting volume and rate of use intended to achieve yearly average reduction in discharge volume. This system utilizes a surface detention pond or underground storage system to hold water, primarily for irrigation use. 
(d)  The city manager or designee may permit the following incentives for utilizing LID techniques. 
(1)  Reduce required parking lot drive-aisle and parking stall depth up to two feet. 
(2)  Permit up to 25 percent compact parking spaces. 
(3)  Permit one landscape island per 20 spaces if drainage is directed toward interior vehicular use area bio-filtration swales or retention ponds. 
(4)  Reduce the parking requirement for multi-family and nonresidential uses up to 25 percent. 
(5)  Other waivers to this chapter, as deemed appropriate and approved by the city manager, to provide incentives for utilizing LID techniques. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Secs. 58-266—58-285. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DEDICATION OR MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 58-286. - Dedication. 
If a stormwater management system approved under this land development code will function as an integral part of the city-maintained regional system, as determined by the city engineer, the facilities should be dedicated to the city. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-287. - Maintenance by an acceptable entity. 
(a)  All stormwater management systems that are not dedicated to the city shall be operated and maintained by one of the following entities: 
(1)  A local governmental unit including a county, municipality, or municipal service taxing unit, special district or other governmental unit. 
(2)  An active water control district created pursuant to F.S. ch. 298, or drainage district created by special act, or community development district created pursuant to F.S. ch. 190, or special assessment district created pursuant to F.S. ch. 170. 
(3)  A state or federal agency. 
(4)  An officially franchised, licensed or approved communication, water, sewer, electrical or other public utility. 
(5)  The property owner or developer if: 
a.  Written proof is submitted in the appropriate form by either letter or resolution that a governmental entity or such other acceptable entity as set forth in subsections (1)—(4) above will accept the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management and discharge facility at a time certain in the future. 
b.  A bond or other assurance of continued financial capacity to operate and maintain the system is submitted. 
(6)  For-profit or nonprofit corporations, including homeowners associations, property owners associations, condominium owners associations or master associations, if: 
a.  The owner or developer submits documents constituting legal capacity and a binding legal obligation between the entity and the city affirmatively taking responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility. 
b.  The association has sufficient powers reflected in its organizational or operational documents to: 
1.  Operate and maintain the stormwater management system as permitted by the city. 
2.  Establish rules and regulations. 
3.  Assess members. 
4.  Contract for services. 
5.  Exist perpetually, with the articles of incorporation providing that if the association is dissolved, the stormwater management system will be maintained by an acceptable entity as described above. 
(b)  If a project is to be constructed in phases, and subsequent phases will use the same stormwater management facilities as the initial phase or phases, the operation/maintenance entity shall have the ability to accept responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management systems of future phases of the project. 
(c)  In phased developments that have an integrated stormwater management system, but employ independent operation/maintenance entities for different phases, the operation/maintenance entities, either separately or collectively, shall have the responsibility and authority to operate and maintain the stormwater management system for the entire project. That authority shall include cross easements for stormwater management and the authority and ability of each entity to enter and maintain all facilities, should any entity fail to maintain a portion of the stormwater management system within the project. 
(d)  The applicant shall be an acceptable entity and shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management system from the time construction begins until the stormwater management system is dedicated to and accepted by another acceptable entity. 
(e)  The maintenance of a drainage system constructed or placed on private property is the unequivocal responsibility of the property owner(s) or the designated maintenance entity. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-288. - Illicit discharge and penalties. 
Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer system, Lake Seminole or to waters of the United States that is not composed entirely of stormwater, with the exception of discharges approved by the city, county, SWFWMD or DEP. Any discharge in violation of a NPDES system or SWFWMD permit shall constitute an illicit discharge and such violation and penalties shall be enforced pursuant to Code of Ordinances, chapter 18, article IX. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-289. - Nonconformities. 
In addition to the nonconforming compliance thresholds pursuant to chapter 50, any existing development that does not comply with the stormwater management requirements of this land development code must be brought into full compliance or as may be required by the Southwest Florida Water Management District when any proposed use of the development as part of a formal site plan submittal increases the impervious surface ratio by 25 percent or more. When any proposed use of the development does not require a formal site plan submittal, but increases the impervious surface area, then only compliance with the regulations of the Southwest Florida Water Management District shall be required. The city manager or city manager designee in their discretion shall determine if a formal site plan submittal is required. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Secs. 58-290—58-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING 
 
Sec. 58-321. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Grounds permit means a permit that must be secured from the city prior to the development or redevelopment of or addition to any vehicular use area. 
Plant material means as follows: 
(1)  Accent tree means a species of tree which grows to a typical mature height of less than 30 feet and whose natural form is a narrow or oval shape as opposed to a broad canopy shape. Palms are not classified as accent trees. 
(2)  Caliper is the minimum diameter of a tree measured six inches above the ground for trees up to and including four inches in diameter, and 12 inches above the ground for trees having a larger diameter. This measurement is utilized by nurseries for measuring tree sizes. 
(3)  Canopy trees are self-supporting, woody plants that normally grow to a minimum height of 15 feet with a mature crown spread of 15 feet or greater and having trunks that can be maintained with over five feet of clear wood. 
(4)  Diameter at breast height (dbh) means the diameter of a tree measured at a point four and one-half feet in height from the base of the tree at grade level. This measurement is utilized inventorying mature trees and for tree replacement mitigation and tree valuation purposes. 
(5)  Ground covers include plant materials that normally reach a maximum height of not more than 12 inches and may be used in lieu of grass. 
(6)  Hedge means a row of planted shrubs forming a boundary or screen. 
(7)  Lawn grass includes all species normally grown as permanent lawns in the city or county. 
(8)  Major gateway streets include Park, Seminole and Johnson Boulevards; Park, 113th and 102nd Streets, and Starkey Road. 
(9)  Shrub is a self-supporting woody plant with several permanent stems instead of a single trunk. 
(10)  Vehicular use areas include all areas used for the circulation, loading, parking and/or display of any and all types of vehicles, boats or heavy construction equipment, whether self-propelled or not, and all land upon which vehicles traverse as a function of the primary uses. This shall include, but not be limited to, vehicular circulation of a drive-in nature, such as service stations, convenience stores, banks, restaurants and the like. Only driveways and parking spaces serving single and two-family uses shall be an exception to this definition. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-322. - Purpose. 
This article is intended to assure that for all development in the city other than single-family or duplex, where off-street parking and open lot sales, display and service areas are provided, a portion of such areas be devoted to landscape beautification and natural plant growth. The purpose of this requirement is to improve the appearance of the city, major gateway streets, environment, character and value of the total urban area; reduce urban heat island effects, promote energy conversation, and to protect nearby properties, thereby promoting the public health and general welfare. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-323. - Design principles. 
(a)  A landscape plan shall be submitted for review and approval that demonstrates compliance with this article and should conform to the following general design principles: 
(1)  Landscaping should integrate the proposed development into existing site features through consideration of existing topography, hydrology, soils and vegetation, and buffering of adjacent uses. 
(2)  The functional elements of the development plan, particularly the drainage systems and internal circulation systems for vehicles and pedestrians, should be integrated into the landscaping plan. 
(3)  Landscaping should be used to minimize potential erosion through the use of ground covers or any other type of landscape material that aids in soil stabilization. 
(4)  Landscaping should enhance the visual environment through the use of materials that achieve variety with respect to seasonal changes, species of living material selected, textures, colors and size of maturity. 
(5)  Landscaping design should consider the aesthetic and functional aspects of vegetation, both when initially installed and when the vegetation has reached maturity. Newly installed plants should be placed at intervals appropriate to the size of the plant at maturity, and the design should use short- and long-term elements to satisfy the general design principles of this section over time. 
(6)  Landscaping should enhance public safety and minimize nuisances. The city will perform an on-site inspection as part of the final inspection. 
(7)  Landscaping should be used to provide windbreaks, channel wind and increase ventilation. 
(8)  Landscaping should maximize the shading of streets and vehicle use areas. 
(9)  The selection and placement of landscaping materials should consider the effect on existing or future solar access, of enforcing the use of solar radiation, and of conserving the maximum amount of energy. 
(b)  No development plan shall be denied solely on the basis of the design principles in this section. The purpose of this section is to provide developers with a checklist of principles in designing landscaped areas. 
(c)  Any modification to an approved landscape plan shall require city approval pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-324. - Installation of landscaping. 
All landscaping shall be installed in accordance with accepted good planting procedures as prescribed by the University of Florida Institute of Food and Agriculture (IFAS) and/or registered landscape architect. Plant material to be used in conformance of this article shall conform to the standards for Florida No. 1 or better as given in the current "Grade and Standards for Nursery Plants," State of Florida, Department of Agriculture, Tallahassee, or equal thereto. At a minimum 25 percent of all required canopy trees shall be native Florida vegetation. Plant materials and trees shall be planted in an upright manner perpendicular to the ground and trees shall be appropriately staked for a minimum period of at least 60 days. 
(1)  Landscaped areas, wall structures and walks shall be protected from vehicular encroachment or overhang through appropriate wheel stops or curbs, located a minimum of two and one-half feet from such areas, structures or walkways. When wheel stops are not provided, any required landscape buffer width shall be increased by two and one-half feet (Exhibit A). 
(2)  Ground covers must present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage at time of planting. Ground cover size at time of installation must be a one gallon minimum planted at a maximum of 24 inches on center. It is encouraged in lieu of turf to reduce irrigation needs. 
(3)  Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded; except that solid sod shall be used in areas subject to erosion. In areas where other than solid sod or grass seed is used, nurse-grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. Grass sod shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. Turf areas should be consolidated and limited to areas of pedestrian traffic, recreation and erosion control. 
(4)  Shrubs and hedges shall be minimum of 18 inches in height when measured immediately after planting. Hedges, where required, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen within a maximum of one year after time of planting. Spacing for plants for a hedge shall be no more than two or three feet on center, depending on the species used. 
(5)  Accent trees may be substituted for canopy trees at a ratio of 2:1. A maximum of 30 percent of the required canopy trees may be substituted with accent trees. At least 60 percent of all required canopy and accent trees, other than palms, shall have a minimum caliper diameter of three inches at the time of planting. At least 40 percent of all required trees, other than palms, shall have a minimum caliper diameter of two inches at the time of planting. Fractions of a single tree required as a result of the percentage calculations shall be rounded off to the nearest whole number (0.5 or greater = one tree). Trees to be planted shall be selected from a list of trees as contained in section 58-327 or as approved by the city manager or designee. All trees shall be installed in a planting area of at least 25 square feet, with a minimum dimension of eight feet, excluding any curbing. Planters must provide a minimum planting medium/soil depth of four feet and a minimum bottom width of three times the tree root ball diameter. 
(6)  A maximum of ten percent of the required canopy trees may be substituted with palms at a ratio of 3:1. A maximum of 30 percent of all required accent trees may be substituted with palm at a ratio of 2:1. Palms shall have a minimum of ten feet of clear trunk at planting and at a minimum be clustered in pairs. Palms to be planted shall be selected from section 58-327 or as approved by the city manager or designee. 
(7)  The front yard setback area for all zoning districts must be landscaped and maintained. This area may not be treated as a left-over or unmaintained area. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-325. - Maintenance of required landscaping—Nonresidential and residential properties. 
(a)  The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping, which shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Plant materials and trees shall be maintained so as to grow in an upright manner perpendicular to the ground. Water supply shall be piped to each individual planter island, and in no case shall any landscaped area be more than 50 feet from a water supply hose bib. These requirements shall apply to all landscaping, drainage retention areas, and common areas required to be installed on nonresidential properties as part of an approved site plan, irrespective of whether or not the site plan was approved by the county and the property was subsequently annexed by the city, or as approved by the city. The city shall have the right to require the property owner to replace or reinstall plant material that was required as part of a site plan and landscape approval, development order or development permit for any plant material that is diseased, or which has died or otherwise been removed. Removal of dead or diseased trees will require tree replacement equivalent to the dbh size of trees to be removed or tree replacement mitigation pursuant to chapter 62, section 62-36 or other replacement alternative as approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Tree topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any property owner or landscape maintenance firm to top any required landscape tree. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this ordinance at the determination of the city manager or city manager designee. Crown reduction is different than topping and is a recognized pruning procedure referenced in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI-A-300 Standards) that can be used to reduce the height or width of a tree per the requirements. 
(c)  Pruning and corner clearance. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 13 feet, six inches above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with sight visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(d)  When pruning lateral branches of a required tree, the proper pruning techniques, as specified by the ANSI A300 Part 1: Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance - Standard Practices (pruning) must be followed. Flush cuts (pruning cuts that remove the branch collar) and stub cuts (pruning cuts that leave a limb stub) are improper pruning techniques and are prohibited. 
(e)  Any tree that has been topped or improperly pruned will not be recognized as a tree left in a healthy growing condition and consequently will not meet approval by the city towards meeting landscape buffer or tree replacement requirements. Such tree(s) shall be subject to tree replacement requirements pursuant to this article. 
(f)  A tree removal permit is required for the removal of any required tree(s) and/or palm(s) pursuant to the approved landscape plan and this article. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-326. - Irrigation. 
All landscaped areas shall be provided with a non-potable water supply for the irrigation system. If a landscaped area contains primarily species native to the immediate region, Florida-Friendly drought tolerant plants, or plants acceptable for xeric landscaping, the city manager or city manager designee, as applicable, may waive the requirement for installation of a non-potable irrigation system. Consideration of a waiver of the irrigation requirement shall include, in addition to the area covered by native vegetation, such local conditions as sun or shade, use of fill soil, and depth to water table. New irrigation systems require a rain sensor device which will override the timing cycle when adequate rainfall has occurred. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-327. - Acceptable and prohibited landscape materials. 
The following is a list of plant material that may be used to fulfill the requirements of this article. Other plant materials may be used subject to approval by the city manager or city manager designee. On development sites of one or more acres, required landscaping shall provide for the planting of at least two different species of canopy/large tree and accent tree. 
(1)  Approved plant materials list: 
BOTANICAL NAME 	COMMON NAME 
Canopy and Large Trees 
Quercus virginiana 	Live Oak *# 
Quercus falcata 	Southern Red Oak * 
Persea borbonia 	Red Bay or Bay Oak * 
Magnolia grandiflora 	Southern Magnolia # 
Liquidamber styraciflua 	Sweetgum # 
Pinus caribaea 	Slash Pine * 
Pinus palustris 	Longleaf Pine * 
Ulmus alata 	Winged Elm *# 
Acer rubrum 	Red Maple 
Acer saccharum, floridanum 	Florida Sugar Maple *# 
Cercis canadensis 	Eastern Redbud 
Gordonia lasianthus 	Loblolly-Bay Pine 
Koelreuteria paniculata 	Golden Raintree* 
Taxodium distichum 	Bald Cypress *# 
Carya glabra 	Pignut Hickory *# 
Prunus caroliniana 	Cherry Laurel * 
Accent Trees 
Cercis canadensis 	Eastern Redbud * 
Callistemon spp. 	Bottlebrush* 
Callistemon viminalis 	Weeping Bottlebrush* 
Lagerstromia indica 	Crape Myrtle* 
Ligustrum lucidum 	Ligustrum* (tree form) 
Myrica cerifera 	Wax Myrtle* 
Juniperus silicicola 	Southern Red Cedar * 
Ilex vomitoria 	Yaupon Holly * 
Ilex opaca east palatka 	East Palatka Holly * 
Salix spp. 	Weeping Willow* 
Conocarpus erectus var. sericeus 	Silver Buttonwood * 
Jatropha integerrima 	Jatropha 
Palms 
Syagrus romanzoffiana 	Queen Palm 
Phoenix canariensis 	Canary Island Date Palm*# 
Phoenix reclinata 	Cluster Date Palm 
Livistona chinensis 	Chinese Fan Palm 
Sabal palmetto 	Cabbage (Sabal) Palm *# 
 
Notes: 
Italics = Native trees 
* Drought tolerant trees 
# Medium to high wind resistance 
BOTANICAL NAME 	COMMON NAME 
Shrub Plants 
Myrcianthes fragrans 	Simpsons Stopper* 
Raphiolepis spp. 	Indian Hawthorne* 
Viburnum odoratissimum 	Sweet Viburnum 
Hamelia patens 	Firebush 
Pittosporum tobira and variegated 	Pittosporum* 
Ligustrum japonicum/Ligustrum lucidum 	Ligustrum* 
Forestiera segregata 	Florida Privet* 
Ilex cornuta 'Burfordii' 	Burford Holly* (dwarf) 
Buxus microphylla 	Boxwood 
Codiaeum variegatum 	Croton* 
Rhododendron spp. 	Azalea 
Elaeagnus pungens 	Silverthorn* 
Loropetalum chinensis 	Loropetalum 
Schefflera arboricola 	Schefflera or Arboricola 
Plumbaginaceae 	Plumbago 
 
Note: * Drought tolerant plants 
BOTANICAL NAME 	COMMON NAME 
Ground Covers/Grasses 
Plumbaginaceae 	Plumbago 
Archis pintol or Archis glabrata 	Perennial Peanut* (ground cover) 
Cortaderia selloana 	Pampasgrass* 
Aristida stricta var. beyrichiana 	Wiregrass* 
Spartina spp. 	Cordgrass* 
Tripsacum dactyloides and cvs. 	Fakahatchee Grass or Gamma Grass 
Bulbine caulescens 	Bulbine* 
Trachelospermum jasminoides 	Confederate Jasmine (or dwarf or other varieties) 
Wedelia trilobata 	Wedelia 
Pennisetum alopecuroides* or setaceum 'Rubrum' 	Fountain Grass* or Red or Purple Fountain Grass 
 
Note: * Drought tolerant plants 
(2)  Prohibited landscape materials: 
BOTANICAL NAME 	COMMON NAME 
Casuarina cunninghamiana 	Beefwood 
Casuarina equisetifolia 	Australian Pine 
Casuarina glauca 	Scale-Bark Beefwood 
Ficus retusa 	Cuban Laurel 
Grevillea robusta 	Silk Oak 
Melalueca quinquenervia 	Punk Tree or Cajeput 
Melia azedarach 	Chinaberry 
Schinus terebinthifolius 	Brazilian Pepper 
 
This list shall be supplemented by exotic and/or invasive plant species that are determined to be noxious, invasive, cause environmental degradation to native habitats, or to be detrimental to human health, safety or the public welfare by the city manager or designee and/or as identified by the University of Florida Center for Aquatic and Invasive Plants. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-328. - Existing vegetation. 
Existing plant materials that conform to the requirements of this article may be used to satisfy minimum landscape requirements. However, existing invasive species must be removed at the time of site development or redevelopment. Where existing mature tree canopy precludes meeting the perimeter or interior requirements of this article, the city manager or designee may grant administrative relief from said provisions. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-329. - Perimeter landscaping and buffering requirements. 
Where possible, a minimum of 25 percent of the native vegetation on-site should be preserved and incorporated into the following landscape requirements. The exterior (property line) perimeters of a development site or lot providing a vehicular use area or any nonresidential use abutting a residential use, or multi-family use abutting a single-family use shall be entirely screened visually from abutting property or right-of-way. Fractions of required landscaping shall be rounded off to the nearest whole number (0.5 or greater = one tree/palm/planter island). The following standards shall apply: 
(1)  One canopy tree shall be provided for every 50 linear feet of frontage, or fraction thereof, except where such planting would conflict or interfere with underground or overhead utilities. In such cases, pursuant to this article, accent trees and/or palms may be substituted for required canopy trees pursuant to section 58-324. Trees shall be located between the common lot line and the adjacent nonresidential or residential use off-street parking area or other vehicular use area within a minimum five-foot wide buffer strip with wheel stops set back two and one-half feet from curb (see Exhibit A). Where a parking lot is located along the property perimeter, for every eight parking spaces and at the terminus of a row of parking spaces there shall be created planter islands. Each required planter island shall be a minimum of nine feet wide and 18 feet deep and planted with a canopy tree. Along the development site and/or vehicular use perimeter there shall also be landscaping with two or more accent trees and a continuous row of shrubs as shown in landscape standard A; or 
a.  Where a development site or vehicular use area perimeter or nonresidential or multi-family structure fronts along a major gateway street, the minimum buffer width, excluding any curbing, shall be ten feet. No wheel stops required (see Exhibit A). 
b.  Where a nonresidential use abuts a single-family residential zoned property a minimum eight-foot wide buffer is required. 
(2)  A wall with a continuous hedge, berm with hedge, or combination thereof, not greater than eight feet in height nor less than four feet in height, to form a continuous screen is required between all vehicular use areas and adjacent residential property. At the discretion of the city manager or city manager designee, landscaping may be required to be located on the residential or street side of the wall. 
(3)  Canopy trees should be located in such a manner that at maturity the tree should not conflict with freestanding signage. 
(4)  Any new single-family house abutting a public or private street shall plant at least one canopy tree within the required front yard setback area, except where such planting would conflict or interfere with underground or overhead utilities. In such cases, pursuant to this article, accent trees and/or palms may be substituted for required canopy trees pursuant to section 58-324. 
(5)  Mitigation in the form of a payment in lieu of, as established by the City, may be considered by the city manager or city manager designee, as a substitute for the installation of required landscaping, in those areas where required landscaping installation has been determined by the city manager or city manager designee, as not being feasible or practical to meet the requirements of this section. 
Landscape Standard A 
Perimeter buffer requirement: 
Plant material/50 linear feet of frontage. 
One canopy tree. 
Two accent trees. 
Continuous row of shrubs. 
 
 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-330. - Perimeter landscaping and buffering requirements—Exceptions. 
(a)  Exceptions from the landscaping and buffer requirements of section 58-329 are as follows: 
(1)  When a nonresidential or multi-family use property line abuts a dedicated alley or those portions of the property that are opposite a building or other structure located on the abutting residential property, no buffer is required on the nonresidential use property. The existing alley must be platted or a dedicated easement for vehicle traffic and be a minimum 15 feet wide. 
(2)  A nonresidential or multi-family use may receive credit for an existing buffer which is located on an adjacent residential or nonresidential property. 
(3)  Where the abutting property is zoned or used for nonresidential uses, only the canopy tree and shrub provisions shall apply within a five-foot wide planter island (see Exhibit A). 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-331. - Interior vehicular use area landscaping requirements. 
(a)  An area or a combination of areas, equal to ten percent of the total vehicular use area exclusive of the perimeter landscape buffers required under sections 58-329 and 58-330, shall be devoted to interior landscaping (see Exhibit A). Any perimeter landscaping area provided in excess of that required by sections 58-329 and 58-330 may be counted as part of the interior landscaping requirement. There shall be a minimum of one canopy tree for each 400 square feet or fraction thereof of the required landscaped area. Up to 50 percent of this requirement may be satisfied using accent trees (clustered in pairs of two) or palms (clustered in pairs of three). Planters shall be located to most effectively relieve the monotony of large expenses of paving and contribute to the orderly circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic as illustrated in Exhibit A. 
(b)  Landscaping (trees/palms) provided around a structure or structures on the same parcel of land, may count toward meeting the interior requirement. 
(c)  Multi-family housing development and nonresidential development must provide a planter island for every eight parking spaces and at the end of each row of parking. Each planter island shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet and planted with one canopy tree. An alternative to providing an island for every eight spaces is to provide a nine-foot wide planter median with wheel-stops or ten-foot wide island without wheel-stops (see Exhibit A). 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-332. - Open space and stormwater pond landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Required open space areas shall be landscaped with one canopy tree or two accent trees for each 2,000 square feet of open space area. 
(b)  Stormwater ponds located adjacent to public right-of-way or private property shall be landscaped along the top of the bank or slope with one canopy tree spaced every 50 feet or two accent trees spaced every 25 feet. Pond slopes shall be planted with grass and/or plants as recommended by the Southwest Florida Water Management District. Any fencing along the pond perimeter shall be decorative PVC fencing or black or green vinyl coated chain link fencing. 
(c)  No more than 50 percent of the required use perimeter buffer area and/or parking lot perimeter buffer, shall be utilized for a stormwater pond(s), provided the buffer planting requirement is met along the top of the bank. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-333. - Nonconformities to landscape buffers and vehicular use area landscaping requirements. 
(a)  An existing development that does not comply with the requirements of this article must be brought into full compliance when one of the following occurs: 
(1)  Twenty-five percent or more of the site building square footage is increased. 
(2)  Fifty percent or more of the existing building square footage is converted to a use that triggers a greater parking requirement. 
(3)  Fifty percent of the vehicular use area is replaced or demolished. 
(4)  Site and/or building renovations (exterior) exceed 51 percent of the most current assessed value of the property (building(s) and land) per the county property appraiser records; or 
(5)  Pursuant to compliance required by chapter 50. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Secs. 58-334—58-365. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SUBDIVISIONS, STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 58-366. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Improve means any procedure, administrative, technical and/or physical required in order to grade, construct, reconstruct, repair, build or rebuild, alter, extend or open streets, sidewalks, avenues, alleys and thoroughfares; to remove encroachments, obstructions, building, ruins, trees or poles; to construct, maintain or repair storm and drainage sewers; to construct, reconstruct, pave or repave, hard-surface or rehard-surface, widen, gutter and drain existing or new streets, avenues, cul-de-sacs, parking areas, and sidewalks, including the necessary appurtenances thereto. 
Maintain means to hold, keep or continue in a condition or state of repair satisfactory to the city manager or designee and subject to sound engineering judgment and economic feasibility. 
Maintenance means the necessary procedures, administrative technical or physical, required in order to maintain. 
New means a street, avenue, cul-de-sac, thoroughfare, sidewalk, parking area, or alley not previously platted or constructed. 
Property owner means freeholders of improved or unimproved real property only. Multiple owners of single parcels or individual owners of multiple parcels shall be considered one petitioner. 
Rebuild means to reconstruct to minimum standards a street, avenue, cul-de-sac, thoroughfare, sidewalk, parking area, or alley, that has reached a state of deterioration that indicates its further repair or maintenance is not feasible to sound engineering and economic judgment. 
Repair means to restore to a safe condition limited surface areas of streets, avenues, and cul-de-sacs that may have become unsafe or deteriorated due to normal wear and tear by usage or erosion and not due to groundwater conditions by such means or methods as may be considered by the city satisfactory when subject to sound engineering judgment and economic feasibility. 
Solar energy system means a solar collection (such as solar panels) or other device or structural design feature of a structure that relies upon sunshine as an energy source and is capable of collecting, distributing and storing the sun's radiant energy to use for water heating, space heating or cooling, electrical power and/or other applications. 
Solar-oriented lot shall mean: 
(1)  A lot with a front lot line oriented to within 30 degrees of a true east-west line. When the lot line abutting a street is curved, the "front lot line" shall mean the chord or straight line connecting the ends of the curve. For a flag lot, the "front lot line" shall mean the lot line that is most parallel to the closest street, excluding the "pole portion of the flag lot"; or 
(2)  A lot which, when a straight line is drawn from a point midway between the side lot lines at the required front yard setback to a point midway between the side lot lines at the required rear yard setback, is oriented to within 30 degrees of true north along said line; or 
(3)  A corner lot with a south lot line oriented to within 30 degrees of a true east-west line, which south lot line adjoins a public street or permanently reserved open space; provided, however, that the abutting street right-of-way has a minimum north-south dimension of at least 50 feet. 
Used for includes "designed for." 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-367. - Minimum street, sidewalk and landscaping standards. 
(a)  The minimum design standards for streets, avenues or cul-de-sacs shall be in substantial correspondence with the standards of the FDOT manual of uniform minimum standards for design, construction and maintenance for streets and highways, as amended. 
(1)  Pavement width. Local residential streets shall be constructed to a minimum width of 24 feet, including width of curbing or valley gutter. Local commercial streets shall have a minimum width of 30 feet, unless less width is recommended by the city engineer and approved by the city manager or designee. 
(2)  Base construction. Bases for local residential streets shall be a minimum of six inches compacted thickness of shell or limerock. Other base materials may be considered upon request providing supporting evidence of adequacy accompanies the request. A greater base thickness may be required for streets that may be placed in a higher classification by the city council. 
(3)  Subbase construction. Subbase shall be of a good clean acceptable material, nine inches compacted thickness, having a minimum Florida bearing value of 60 pounds at 95 percent of maximum density per square inch. Subbase shall extend a minimum of six inches beyond back of concrete curb or valley gutter. 
(4)  Private street. Private streets must be approved by the city manager, or designee, as to specification, type of construction, width, etc. 
(5)  Pavement surfaces. Pavement surfaces shall be a minimum of one-and-one-half-inch-thick asphaltic concrete surface course, or as directed by the city. 
(6)  Pavement crown. All pavement crowns shall be sloped at one-quarter inch per foot or greater. Finish pavement shall be from one-quarter inch to one-half inch higher than the lip of the adjacent concrete gutter. 
(7)  Sidewalks. Consideration for future installation of sidewalks shall be given in designing the grade of newly constructed pavements. 
(8)  Gutters. Concrete valley gutters shall have a width of 24 inches, a minimum thickness of six inches at the center, and a one-inch rise to the edge of pavement. A minimum rise of three inches to the back of the gutter is required. Three thousand pounds per square inch concrete shall be used. 
(9)  Drainage. New streets and streets being rebuilt shall be drained by concrete valley gutters along the length of the pavement. They shall have a minimum longitudinal grade of 0.3 percent, and inlets shall be placed at all sags and at intermediate points as dictated by an analysis of the drainage conditions. Inlets shall be served by an adequate storm sewer system designed to conduct flow to a suitable outlet. Complete drainage plans shall be developed showing incremental and total areas drained, runoff factors, storm frequency, design rainfall intensity, expected total flows and capacity of each element of the storm sewer system. Subsurface drainage using pipe underdrains shall be installed unless adequate studies of groundwater conditions show they are not necessary. 
(10)  Shoulders. Shoulders must be stabilized and sodded according to specifications approved by the city manager or designee. 
(11)  Driveways. In cases of new building construction, driveways must be paved in an acceptable manner in accordance with specifications approved by the city manager or designee up to the property line. 
(b)  The minimum standards established in this article shall be applied only when constructing new streets, avenues and cul-de-sacs, and whenever it is necessary as determined by the city manager or designee to completely rebuild existing streets, avenues and cul-de-sacs. 
(c)  The minimum standards established in this article shall be applied only when constructing new streets, avenues and cul-de-sacs and whenever it is necessary as determined by the city manager or designee to completely rebuild existing streets, avenues and cul-de-sacs. 
(d)  Upon the recommendation of the public works director and approval by the city manager, or designee, may approve a lessening of the minimum standards where circumstances and economics justify same. 
(e)  No street, avenue or cul-de-sac shall be required to be brought to minimum standard if it can be maintained economically as determined by the city manager or designee. 
(f)  Any new single-family house abutting a public or private street shall plant at least one canopy tree within the required front yard setback area, except where such planting would conflict or interfere with underground or overhead utilities. In such cases, pursuant to article V of this chapter, accent trees and/or palms may be substituted for required canopy trees pursuant to section 58-324. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-368. - Subdivision and platting design standards. 
(a)  Subdivision standards for residential and commercial developments, except as required by this article, shall comply with F.S. ch. 177. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-369. - Subdivision standards for solar energy systems. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the city's intent to encourage the use of both active and passive solar energy systems for heating air and water and providing electrical power in homes and businesses, as long as natural topography, soil or other subsurface conditions or other natural conditions peculiar to the site are preserved. While the use of solar energy systems is optional, the right to solar access should be protected. Solar collectors require access to available sunshine during the entire year, including between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., EST, on December 21, when the longest shadows occur. Additionally, a goal of this section is to ensure that site plan elements do not excessively shade adjacent properties, creating a significant adverse impact upon adjacent property owners. Thus, standards are set forth to evaluate the potential impact of shade caused by buildings, structures and trees. 
(b)  Solar-oriented residential lots. Lots less than 15,000 square feet in area in single and two-family residential developments should conform to the definition of a "solar-oriented lot" in order to preserve the potential for solar energy usage. 
(c)  Access to sunshine. 
(1)  The elements of the development plan (e.g., buildings, circulation, open space, and landscaping) shall be located and designed to the maximum extent feasible, to protect access to sunshine for planned solar energy systems or for solar-oriented rooftop surfaces that can support a solar collector or collectors capable of providing for the anticipated electrical and hot water needs of the buildings in the project between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. EST, on December 21. 
(2)  Solar access easements should be established pursuant to F.S. § 704.07 to protect a property's solar access rights. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-370. - Engineering for assessment related improvements. 
(a)  All plans for street or drainage improvements shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer of the state and submitted to the city council for approval prior to calling for bids. They shall be accompanied by an engineering estimate of the total cost of the project, unit cost of the materials and labor, total assessable footage, assessable footage of each property to be benefited, and the unit assessment cost. 
(b)  Specifications for materials and methods of construction shall conform to the latest edition of the state department of transportation specifications for road and bridge construction. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14)  
Sec. 58-371. - Procedures for assessment related improvements. 
(a)  An undertaking may be initiated by the city council when: 
(1)  It is deemed necessary in the interest of the health, welfare and safety of the owners and/or users of abutting property or of property to be benefited in any given area within the city limits; or, 
(2)  The city council receives a petition signed by owners of more than 50 percent of the lands of abutting property in any given area within the city limits requesting that the improvement, maintenance or repair be undertaken. 
(b)  In all such undertakings, the city council shall determine and record whether such undertaking is to be assessed. When the city council determines that the costs of an undertaking or a portion thereof are to be assessed, the method for levying and collecting such assessment shall be in accordance with state statutes, and accompanying resolutions. It shall be the policy of the city to assess property owners on each side of the street improvements, who shall pay 30 percent of the total of all of the cost associated with the improvements on a linear footage basis, with the city assuming the balance of 70 percent of the cost of the improvements. 
( Ord. No. 24-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 

Chapter 62 - NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and certain other public property, ch. 38; zoning, ch. 70. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 14, 2014, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, § 62-1, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1991, § 5.00.00. 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish those resources or areas of a development site that must be protected from harmful effects of development. A developer should apply the provisions of this chapter to a proposed development site before any other development design work is done. Application of the provisions of this chapter will divide a proposed development site into areas that may be developed and areas that must generally be left free of development activity. The proposed development should then be designed to fit within the areas that may be developed. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 62-2—62-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TREE PROTECTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 14, 2014, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 62-31—62-40, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1991, §§ 5.01.01—5.01.09; Ord. No. 25-2001, 10-9-01. 
 
Sec. 62-31. - Intent. 
Trees are declared to be a natural public resource. It is the intent of the city to protect them as set out in this article in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this city. To that end, it shall be unlawful to cut down, damage by topping or improper pruning, poison or in any other manner destroy or cause to be destroyed any trees as covered by the terms of this article except in accordance with all the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accent tree means a species of tree which grows to a typical mature height of less than 30 feet and whose natural form is a narrow or oval shape as opposed to a broad canopy shape. 
Commercial nursery or tree farm means a licensed plant or tree nursery or farm in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises of the licensee, which are so planted and growing for the sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of the licensee's business. 
Diameter at breast height (dbh) means the diameter of a tree measured at a point four and one-half feet in height from the base of the tree at grade level. 
Drip line means an imaginary, perpendicular line that extends downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
Protected tree means any tree listed as a native tree, excluding palms, by the University of Florida Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences or as listed in chapter 58, article V. 
Protective barrier means a physical structure limiting access to a protected area, composed of wooden or other suitable materials that assures compliance with the intent of this article. 
Remove or removal means the actual removal by digging up or cutting down, or the effective removal through damage or other means. 
Transplant means the digging up by a property owner of a tree from one place on his property and the planting of the same tree in another place on the same property. 
Tree means any self-supporting, woody plant that normally grows to a minimum height of 15 feet or greater with a mature crown spread of 15 feet or greater and having trunks that can be maintained with over five feet of clear wood. Mangroves shall be considered trees and palms are not defined as trees. 
Tree survey means an aerial photograph or drawing at no more than a scale of 1" = 200' which provides the location of all trees protected under the provisions of this article, plotted by accurate techniques, common and botanical name of all trees, consecutively numbered and calibrated by dbh. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-33. - Permit required—Small tracts. 
(a)  On platted lots or tracts of less than one acre in area, it shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed any protected tree, except exempt trees, with a trunk dbh of four inches or more without first having a tree removal permit to do so as provided in this article. 
(b)  On approved nonresidential or multi-family development landscape plans, no tree or palm shown on the approved landscape plan shall be removed without first obtaining a tree removal permit. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-34. - Permit required—Large tracts. 
(a)  On any platted or unplatted tract of one acre or more in area, it shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed any protected tree, except exempt trees, with a trunk dbh of four inches or more, without first having obtained a tree removal permit to do so as provided in this article. 
(b)  On approved nonresidential, multi-family or single-family subdivision development landscape plans, no tree or palm shown on the approved landscape plan shall be removed without first obtaining a tree removal permit. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-35. - Protected and exempt trees. 
(a)  Protected species. All species commonly known as mangroves (Avicennia germinans, black mangrove; Laguncularia racemosa, white mangrove; Rhizophora mangle, red mangrove; Conocarpus erectus, buttonwood) of whatever size, as well as the species Quercus Virginiana (live oak) and Quercus laurifolia (laurel oak), of four-inch dbh or greater, and any other protected tree species, except exempt trees, 20-inch dbh or greater are recognized to be of special ecological value. No mangrove tree, live oak or laurel oak or any other protected tree species 20-inch dbh or greater shall be removed without a tree removal permit and a report prepared by a certified arborist, provided by the permittee, regarding the current condition of the tree(s) and specific reason(s) for removal. Where, in the opinion of the city manager or designee, a large numbers of protected trees less than 20-inch dbh are proposed to be removed, a report prepared by a certified arborist regarding the current condition of the tree(s) and specific reasons for removal may be required to be submitted with the permit application. 
(b)  Mangroves exempt from survey. Due to the vegetative characteristics of mangroves, they will be exempt from the tree survey requirement; but no other permitting procedures will nullify the requirements of this article, including site plan review. 
(c)  Commercial nursery/tree farm. The terms and provisions of this article shall not apply to a commercial nursery or tree farm. 
(d)  Exempt trees. Specifically exempt from the terms and provisions of this article are the following species of nuisance trees: 
(1)  Melaleuca quinquenervia (punk). 
(2)  Enterolobium cyclocarpum (ear). 
(3)  Melia azedarach (chinaberry tree). 
(4)  Jacaranda mimosifolia (jacaranda tree). 
(5)  Schinus terebinthifolius (Brazilian pepper). 
(6)  Casuarina equisetifolia (Australian pine). 
(7)  Cinnamomum camphora (Camphor). 
(8)  Sapium sebiferum (Chinese tallow tree). 
The above list shall be supplemented by exotic and/or invasive plant species that are determined to be noxious, invasive, cause environmental degradation to native habitats, or to be detrimental to human health, safety or the public welfare by the city manager or designee and/or as identified by the University of Florida Center for Aquatic and Invasive Plants. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-36. - Reforestation. 
(a)  Reforestation required. As a condition for the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this land development code, the city manager or designee may require that the owner of the property either relocate or replace any trees with comparable substitutes within designated areas of the property. The permittee may be required to replace the tree(s) based on a minimum dbh or caliper size and height and/or pay a mitigation fee on the tree(s) proposed to be removed on a per dbh inch basis. The city shall establish the basis for the per dbh inch mitigation fee to compute the total cost of mitigation for each protected tree species proposed to be removed. No tree which has been planted as a replacement under the provisions of this section may be removed without a tree removal permit, regardless of size. No mitigation fee will be assessed where a report prepared by a certified arborist has determined the protected tree is diseased, dead, in a severe state of decline or poses a public safety threat. However, tree replacement may be required. 
(b)  Replacement species. A list of suggested tree replacement species is available upon request; the trees on this list were selected from the viewpoint of hardiness, disease and pest resistance, availability, and size. It is not the intent to limit acceptable species, but rather to provide adequate guidelines. However, in no case shall single-trunk palms or cluster palms (at a replacement ratio of 3:1) and/or accent trees (at a replacement ratio of 2:1) constitute more than 20 percent of the total number of required replacement trees. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-37. - Protection during construction. 
(a)  Area of protection. It shall be unlawful for any person in the construction of any structures or improvements to place material, machinery or temporary soil deposits within six feet or two-thirds of the drip line, whichever distance is greater, of any tree having a dbh of four-inches or greater. 
(b)  Barriers required. Before development, demolition, excavation, land clearing or any other land alterations that may affect the health of existing trees, the developer shall be required to erect suitable protective barriers; further, these barriers shall remain until such time as they are authorized to be removed. During construction, no wires or attachments of any kind shall be affixed to any of these trees. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-38. - Emergencies. 
In the case of emergencies such as hurricane, windstorm, flood, freeze or other disasters or hazards, the requirements of this division may be waived by the city manager or designee upon a finding that such waiver is necessary so that public or private work to restore order in the community will not be impeded. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-39. - Public right-of-way. 
No trees shall be removed from the public right-of-way except under the direction of the city manager or designee. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-40. - Creation and establishment of a tree advisory committee. 
There is hereby created and established a tree advisory committee for the city, which shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(1)  Duties and responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the tree advisory committee to develop and/or update, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. The tree advisory committee shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
(2)  Term of office. The term of the five persons to be appointed by the mayor and council shall be three years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(3)  Compensation. Members of the tree advisory committee shall serve without compensation. 
(4)  Definitions. 
Park trees mean trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
Street trees mean trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
(5)  Operation. The tree advisory committee shall choose its own officers, governed by Robert's Rules, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(6)  Street tree species to be planted. The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the city. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the city manager or designee. 
Canopy Trees 	Accent Trees 	Palm Trees 
Live Oak 	Crepe Myrtle 	Washingtonia 
Weeping Elm 	Ligustrum Tree-form 	Sabal 
Winged Elm 	Weeping Yaupon Holly 	Medjool 
Magnolia 	Weeping Bottlebrush 	Queen 
Red Maple 	Silver Buttonwood 	
 
(7)  Spacing of street trees. No trees may be planted closer together than the following, without the approval of the city manager or designee: 
Shade trees, 40—50 feet on center; 
Accent trees/power line planting, 30—40 feet on center; 
Palm trees, 20—30 feet on center; except as recommended by the advisory committee. 
(8)  Distance from curb and sidewalk. The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the following: 
Shade trees, three feet; 
Accent trees, two feet; and 
Palm trees, two feet. 
(9)  Distance from street corners and fire hydrants. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fireplug. 
(10)  Utilities. No street trees other than those species listed in subsection (6) of this section may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(11)  Review by city council. The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the tree advisory committee. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-41. - Tree maintenance. 
(a)  Public tree care. The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all rights-of-way, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
The tree advisory committee may recommend the removal of any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(b)  Tree topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property, or any protected tree or tree [with] four-inch dbh or greater on private property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this article at the determination of the city manager or designee. Crown reduction is different than topping and is a recognized pruning procedure referenced in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI-A-300 Standards) that can be used to reduce the height or width of a tree per the requirements. 
(c)  Pruning and, corner clearance. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 13 feet, six inches above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(d)  When pruning lateral branches of a tree, the proper pruning techniques, as specified by the ANSI A300 Part 1: Tree, Shrub and other Woody Plant Maintenance - Standard Practices (pruning) must be followed. Flush cuts (pruning cuts that remove the branch collar) and stub cuts (pruning cuts that leave a limb stub) are improper pruning techniques and are prohibited. 
(e)  Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a nuisance or a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city will notify in writing, by certified mail, the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal to the property owner with a lien to be filed against the property for any unpaid charges, or to process a code enforcement action against the property owner. 
(f)  Removal of stumps. All stumps of street and park trees, or trees required by the city to be removed on private property, shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(g)  License and bond. It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a permit. Before any permit shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the city, for bodily injury and property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. 
(h)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine as provided for by the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(i)  Any tree that has been topped or improperly pruned will not be recognized as a tree left in a healthy growing condition and consequently will not meet approval by the city towards meeting landscape and buffering or tree replacement requirements. Such tree(s) shall be subject to tree replacement requirements pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 62-42—62-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LANDS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 14, 2014, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1991, §§ 5.02.01, 5.02.03—5.02.13; Ord. No. 24-2000, § 10, 8-22-00. See also the Code Comparative Table for a detailed listing of repealed sections. 
Cross reference— Environment generally, ch. 18; zoning pollution regulations, § 70-936 et seq. 
State Law reference— Provisions to ensure the protection of environmentally sensitive lands designated in the comprehensive plan F.S. § 164.3202(2)(e). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-71. - General provisions. 
(a)  Public purpose served. The environmentally sensitive lands provisions of this division are designed to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the city's comprehensive plan. The protection of environmentally sensitive lands within the corporate limits of the city is of major importance to the city and its citizens. These resources serve the public purposes of preservation, conservation and limited recreation. These regulations are intended to protect these environmentally sensitive lands, which include beaches, dunes, coastal hammocks, mangrove swamps, tidal islands, tidal marshes, marine and estuarine habitats, and irreplaceable natural resources. The protection of these lands is vital in supporting ecological functions such as tidal flushing, along with providing habitats for vegetative and animal communities, including species of special status. 
(b)  Relationship to other standards. In addition to meeting the protection of environmentally sensitive lands requirements, development plans shall comply with applicable federal, state and water management district regulations relating to environmentally sensitive lands. In all cases the strictest of the applicable standards shall apply. 
(c)  Compliance when subdividing land. Each lot of a proposed subdivision must include a site suitable for constructing a structure in conformity with the standards of this article and F.S. ch. 177. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-72. - Creation of protected environmentally sensitive zones. 
(a)  Establishment. There are hereby created protected environmentally sensitive zones in which special restrictions on development apply. The extent and boundaries of these environmentally sensitive zones are those of the tidal swamps, marine wetlands, pine flatwoods and freshwater wetlands as identified in the city's comprehensive plan on the future land use map, designated as preservation. 
(b)  Determination of boundaries. A developer may obtain a generalized determination of the boundaries of a protected environmentally sensitive zone by referring to those areas designated preservation on the future land use map. Specific delineation shall be accomplished through a regulatory agency jurisdictional survey. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 62-73—62-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 62-106. - Restricted. 
Except as expressly provided in this division, no development activity shall be undertaken in a protected environmentally sensitive zone. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-107. - Insignificant adverse effect. 
(a)  Certain activities are presumed to have an insignificant adverse affect on the beneficial functions of protected environmentally sensitive zones. Such uses are permitted pursuant to chapter 70, divisions 13 and 14. These activities may be undertaken unless it is shown by competent and substantial evidence that the specific activity would have a significant adverse effect on the protected environmentally sensitive zone. 
(b)  The following uses and activities are presumed to have an insignificant adverse effect on protected environmentally sensitive zones: 
(1)  Scenic, historic, wildlife or scientific preserves and approved related accessory uses and structures. 
(2)  Minor maintenance or emergency repair to existing structures or improved areas. 
(3)  Recreational fishing. 
(4)  Activities requiring a permit by a regional, state or federal regulatory agency. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-108. - Water dependent activities. 
(a)  Generally. Designated water dependent activities that are otherwise prohibited pursuant to chapter 70, divisions 15 and 16 may be allowed if the developer shows: 
(1)  The public benefits of the activity substantially outweigh the adverse environmental effects on a wetland area; and 
(2)  No practicable alternative to placement in the protected environmentally sensitive zone exists. 
(3)  Activities requiring a permit by a regional, state, or federal regulatory agency. 
(b)  Allowable water dependent activities. The following are allowable water dependent activities: 
(1)  New riprap or similar structures (not including seawalls, bulkheads or the like) not exceeding 50 feet of shoreline. 
(2)  Installation of buoys, aids to navigation, signs, and fences. 
(3)  Installation of subaqueous transmission and distribution lines for water, wastewater, electricity or communication cables. 
(4)  Construction of foot bridges. 
(5)  Replacement or widening of bridges on pilings or trestles where the effects of pollutants discharged into open waters are minimized. 
(c)  Minimization of impacts. The water dependent activity shall be designed, constructed, maintained and undertaken in a way that minimizes the adverse impacts on the beneficial functions of the affected environmentally sensitive zone. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 62-109—62-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 62-131. - Standards for special uses. 
(a)  Generally. In addition to the standards listed in section 62-108, the standards given in this section apply to special uses allowed in the protected environmentally sensitive zones. 
(b)  Special uses allowed in an environmentally sensitive zone. 
(1)  The development shall be designed to: 
a.  Maintain existing flood channel capacity; 
b.  Assure stable shoreline embankments. 
(2)  The development shall not be located: 
a.  On unstable shorelines where water depths are inadequate to eliminate or minimize the need for offshore or foreshore channel construction dredging, maintenance dredging, spoil disposal, filling, and other lake and channel maintenance activities; 
b.  In areas where there is inadequate water mixing and flushing; 
c.  In areas that have been identified as hazardous due to high winds or flooding. 
(3)  Access roads, parking lots and similar structures shall be located on upland sites. 
(4)  Nondeveloped portions of the protected environmentally sensitive zone that are damaged during construction shall be restored or replaced through replanting of vegetation, restocking of fish, shellfish, and wildlife, reestablishment of drainage patterns, and the like. To the maximum extent possible, the restored areas shall match their prior ecological functioning. 
(5)  Accessory uses shall be limited to those which are water dependent or necessary for operation of the development. Accessory uses will be consistent in scale and intensity with the surrounding uses. Fill shall not be placed in waters or associated wetlands to create usable land space for accessory uses. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 62-132—62-165. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MITIGATION 
 
Sec. 62-166. - Generally. 
(a)  Compensatory mitigation, by which environmentally sensitive lands are purchased, created, enhanced and/or restored to compensate for the loss of such lands, is required whenever a special use is allowed under section 62-108. 
(b)  The purchased, created, enhanced or restored environmentally sensitive land must be of the same type as that destroyed or degraded. 
(c)  Compensatory mitigation shall not be the basis for approving a project that could not otherwise be approved. 
(d)  A developer of a compensatory mitigation plan shall grant a perpetual conservation easement under state law on the newly purchased, created, enhanced or restored environmentally sensitive lands to protect them from future development. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-167. - Wetlands. 
Compensatory wetland mitigation shall require that the amount of wetlands purchased, created, enhanced or restored be large enough to assure that the amount of wetlands destroyed or degraded will be completely and successfully replaced. The following ratios of replacement to destroyed wetlands shall be presumed to provide reasonable assurance for type-for-type mitigation, unless the authorized regulatory agency requires a greater ratio. 
(1)  Mangroves ..... 2.5:1 
(2)  Freshwater marsh ..... 1.5:1* 
(3)  Salt marsh ..... 1.5:1* 
*If the wetland creation proposed depends extensively on natural recolonization, the ratio may be 3.0:1 to 4.0:1. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 62-168—62-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESTRICTED DEVELOPMENT ZONE (BUFFER ZONE) 
 
Sec. 62-191. - Generally. 
There is hereby created a restricted development zone adjacent to each protected environmentally sensitive area. This zone shall be established by the South West Florida Water Management District (SWFWMD), the Army Corp of Engineers or other regulatory agency as may be applicable, or as may be established by the city. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-192. - Development activities in buffer zone. 
(a)  All development in a buffer zone shall be designed, constructed and maintained to avoid significant adverse effects on the adjacent environmentally sensitive zone. 
(b)  The following special design standards apply within the buffer zones adjacent to protected environmentally sensitive zones: 
(1)  Wherever possible, natural buffers shall be retained between all development and all protected environmentally sensitive zones. If a natural buffer does not exist, an equivalent buffer shall be provided. The size (width and/or area) of the buffer shall be the minimum necessary to prevent significant adverse effects on the protected environmentally sensitive zones. The factual basis of the city's decision as to the size, required landscaping and/or use limitations within the buffer shall be stated in writing. 
(2)  The applicant shall completely restore any portion of a protected environmentally sensitive zone damaged during construction. Complete restoration means that the damaged area shall, within two years, be operating as effectively as the natural system did prior to being destroyed. 
(3)  Other reasonable protective measures necessary to prevent significant adverse effects on a protected environmentally sensitive zone may be required. The factual basis of the city's decision to require the measure shall be stated in writing. Protective measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Maintaining natural drainage patterns. 
b.  Limiting the removal of vegetation to the minimum necessary to carry out the development activity. 
c.  Expeditiously replanting denuded areas. 
d.  Stabilizing banks and other unvegetated areas by siltation and erosion control measures. 
e.  Minimizing the amount of fill used in the development activity. 
f.  Disposing of dredged spoil at specified locations in a manner causing minimal environmental damage. 
g.  Constructing channels at the minimum depth and width necessary to achieve their intended purposes, and designing them to prevent slumping and erosion and allow revegetation of banks. 
h.  Dredging wetlands at times of minimum biological activity to avoid periods of fish migration and spawning, and other cycles and activities of wetlands. 
i.  Designing, locating, constructing and maintaining all development in a manner that minimizes environmental damage. 
j.  Prohibiting septic tanks or locating them away from high groundwater areas and peaty soils. 
k.  Requiring deed restrictions and other protective legal mechanisms to require the developer and successors to protect the environmentally sensitive zones and maintain the development in compliance with the protective measures. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 62-193—62-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 62-211. - Prohibited ongoing activities. 
(a)  Application. The standards specified in this section apply to post-development activities taking place within any restricted development zone (buffer zone) or protected environmentally sensitive zone. 
(b)  Point-source and nonpoint-source discharges. Absent an amendment to the development order, point-source and nonpoint-source discharges shall continue to meet the standards applicable to the original development. 
(c)  Clearing land (removal of natives). Absent an amendment to the development order, no person shall clear more vegetation than was allowed for the original development. 
(d)  Handling and storage of fuel, toxic substances and wastes. 
(1)  Preventive measures. Developments where fuel or toxic substances will be stored, transferred or sold shall employ the best available facilities and procedures for the prevention, containment, recovery and mitigation of spillage of fuel and toxic substances. Facilities and procedures shall be designed to prevent substances from entering the water or soil, and employ adequate means for prompt and effective cleanup of spills that do occur. 
(2)  Outdoor storage. No toxic or hazardous wastes or substances shall be stored in outdoor containers. 
(3)  Storage on shorelines. Storage or disposal of all types of wastes is prohibited on shorelines. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-212. - Prohibited uses. 
The storage of equipment or materials and the disposal of wastes shall be prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-213. - Fertilizers, herbicides or pesticides. 
(a)  Fertilizers, herbicides or pesticides shall not be applied in a protected environmentally sensitive zone except for projects conducted under the authority of, the Surface Water Improvement and Management Act approved by state statute, and governmentally authorized mosquito control programs. 
(b)  Fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides used in buffer zones shall be applied sparingly and at appropriate rates and time intervals. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-214. - Spray vehicles. 
Vehicles used for mixing or spraying chemicals are prohibited from withdrawing water directly from waters. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Sec. 62-215. - Pumpout, holding and treatment facilities from mobile sources. 
Sewage, solid waste and petroleum waste generated by vessels or vehicles on the site shall be properly collected and disposed of. 
( Ord. No. 09-2014 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-14-14)  
Secs. 62-216—62-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22-2014 , §§ 2, 3, adopted Oct. 28, 2014, repealed the former Art. IV and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1991, §§ 5.03.01—5.03.04; Ord. No. 32-2001, §§ 1—3, 9-25-01. See also the Code Comparative Table for a detailed listing of repealed sections. 
State Law reference— Provisions to regulate areas subject to seasonal and periodic flooding and provide for drainage and stormwater management required, F.S. § 164.3202(2)(d). 
Note— Pursuant to state requirement, state model ordinance code section references are shown in brackets [ ]. 
 
DIVISION 1. - [CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATION - SECTION 101] GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-251. - [101.1] Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City of Seminole, hereinafter referred to as "this article." 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-252. - [101.2] Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-253. - [101.3] Intent. 
The purposes of this article and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-254. - [101.4] Coordination with the Florida Building Code. 
This article is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code requirements. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-255. - [101.5] Warning. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the national flood insurance program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-256. - [101.6] Disclaimer of liability. 
This article shall not create liability on the part of the city council of the City of Seminole or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-257—62-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - [SECTION 102] APPLICABILITY 
 
Sec. 62-281. - [102.1] General. 
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-282. - [102.2] Areas to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Seminole, as established in section 62-283 [Section 102.3] of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-283. - [102.3] Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. 
The Flood Insurance Study for Pinellas County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated August 18, 2009, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this article and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the City of Seminole Building Division, 9199 113 th Street N., Seminole, FL 33772. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-284. - [102.3.1] Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. 
To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to division 5 [Section 105] of this article the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this article and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-285. - [102.4] Other laws. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-286. - [102.5] Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this article and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This article shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-287. - [102.6] Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-288—62-305. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - [SECTION 103] DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR 
 
Sec. 62-306. - [103.1] Designation. 
The city manager or designee, is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-307. - [103.2] General. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this article consistent with the intent and purpose of this article and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this article without the granting of a variance pursuant to division 7 [Section 107] of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-308. - [103.3] Applications and permits. 
The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this article; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this article is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-309. - [103.4] Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. 
For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this article is required. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-310. - [103.5] Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to division 7 [Section 107] of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-311. - [103.6] Notices and orders. 
The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-312. - [103.7] Inspections. 
The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in division 6 [Section 106] of this article for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-313. - [103.8] Other duties of the floodplain administrator. 
The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to section 62-309 [Section 103.4] of this article; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, state floodplain management office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this article and the Florida Building Code and this article to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the City of Seminole are modified; and 
(6)  Advise applicants for new buildings and structures, including substantial improvements, that are located in any unit of the coastal barrier resources system established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) and the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-591) that federal flood insurance is not available on such construction; areas subject to this limitation are identified on flood insurance rate maps as "coastal barrier resource system areas" and "otherwise protected areas." 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-314. - [103.9] Floodplain management records. 
Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including flood insurance rate maps; letters of change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this article; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at the building division upon a public records request made to the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-315—62-319. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - [SECTION 104] PERMITS 
 
Sec. 62-320. - [104.1] Permits required. 
Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this article, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-321. - [104.2] Floodplain development permits or approvals. 
Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this article for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-322. - [104.2.1] Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(2)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
(3)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(4)  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
(5)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(6)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
(7)  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(8)  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(9)  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k) are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-323. - [104.3] Application for a permit or approval. 
To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in division 5 [Section 105] of this article. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-324. - [104.4] Validity of permit or approval. 
The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this article shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this article, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-325. - [104.5] Expiration. 
A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-326. - [104.6] Suspension or revocation. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this article or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-327. - [104.7] Other permits required. 
Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The South West Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065 and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for construction, reconstruction, changes, or physical activities for shore protection or other activities seaward of the coastal construction control line; F.S. § 161.141. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(5)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(6)  Federal permits and approvals. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-328—62-339. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - [SECTION 105] SITE PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 
 
Sec. 62-340. - [105.1] Information for development in flood hazard areas. 
(a)  The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this article shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance with sections 62-341.2 or 62-341.3 [Sections 105.2(2) or (3)] of this article. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with section 62-341.1 [Section 105.2(1)] of this article. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal high hazard areas, new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Delineation of the coastal construction control line or notation that the site is seaward of the coastal construction control line, if applicable. 
(8)  Extent of any proposed alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, provided such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(9)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
(b)  The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this article but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-341. - [105.2] Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate zone A). 
Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-342. - [105.3] Additional analyses and certifications. 
As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in section 62-343 [Section 105.4] of this article and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as zone AO or zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in section 62-343 [Section 105.4] of this article. 
(4)  For activities that propose to alter sand dunes or mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas (zone V), an engineering analysis that demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-343. - [105.4] Submission of additional data. 
When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-344—62-349. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - [SECTION 106] INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 62-350. - [106.1] General. 
Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-351. - [106.1.1] Development other than buildings and structures. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-352. - [106.1.2] Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-353. - [106.1.2.1] Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. 
Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
(1)  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
(2)  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 62-343.3(b) [Section 105.2(3)(b)] of this article, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-354. - [106.1.2.2] Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. 
As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in section 62-353 [Section 106.1.2.1] of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-355. - [106.1.3] Manufactured homes. 
The building official shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the building official. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-356—62-369. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - [SECTION 107] VARIANCES AND APPEALS 
 
Sec. 62-370. - [107.1] General. 
The developmental review board shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this article. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the developmental review board shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. This section does not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-371. - [107.2] Appeals. 
The developmental review board shall hear and decide variances when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this article. Any person aggrieved by the decision of developmental review board may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-372. - [107.3] Limitations on authority to grant variances. 
The developmental review board shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in section 62-376 [Section 107.6] of this article, the conditions of issuance set forth in section 62-377 [Section 107.7] of this article, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The developmental review board has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-373. - [107.3.1] Restrictions in floodways. 
A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in section 62-342 [Section 105.3] of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-374. - [107.4] Historic buildings. 
A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-375. - [107.5] Functionally dependent uses. 
A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this article, provided the variance meets the requirements of section 62-373 [Section 107.3.1], is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-376. - [107.6] Considerations for issuance of variances. 
In reviewing requests for variances, the developmental review board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this article, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-377. - [107.7] Conditions for issuance of variances. 
Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this article or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the developmental review board that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-378—62-389. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - [SECTION 108] VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 62-390. - [108.1] Violations. 
Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this article, shall be deemed a violation of this article. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-391. - [108.2] Authority. 
For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-392. - [108.3] Unlawful continuance. 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-393—62-399. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9A. - [SECTION 201] DEFINITIONS GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-400. - [201.1] Scope. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings shown in division 10. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-401. - [201.2] Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. 
Where terms are not defined in this article and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-402. - [201.3] Terms not defined. 
Where terms are not defined in this article or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-403—62-405. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9B. - [SECTION 202] DEFINITIONS SPECIFIC 
 
Sec. 62-406. - Definitions. 
Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
Base flood. A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "one-percent-annual chance flood." 
Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Coastal construction control line. The line established by the State of Florida pursuant to F.S. § 161.053 and recorded in the official records of the community, which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a 100-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions. 
Coastal high hazard area. A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V zones" and are designated on flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) as zone V1-V30, VE, or V. [Note: The FBC, B defines and uses the term "flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" and the FBC, R uses the term "coastal high hazard areas."] 
Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year: or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before January 27, 1981. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before January 27, 1981. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this article (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this article. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
Florida Building Code (FBC). The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings. 
Letter of map change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
•  Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
•  Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
•  Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
•  Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this article, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Technical Bulletins. These bulletins provide guidance concerning the building performance standards of the NFIP and are intended to be utilized by local officials responsible for interpreting and enforcing NFIP regulations and as a supplement to the Florida Building Code. 
New construction. For the purposes of administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and NFIP Technical Bulletins, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after January 27, 1981, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after January 27, 1981. 
Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in F.S. § 320.01.] 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [See F.S. § 320.01.] 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Sand dunes. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Start of construction. The date of issuance for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not however, include: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this article, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this article or the Florida Building Code. 
Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-407—62-409. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - [SECTION 301] BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 62-410. - [301.1] Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
Pursuant to section 62-322 [Section 104.2.1] of this article, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of division 17 [Section 307] of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-411. - [301.2] Buildings and structures seaward of the coastal construction control line. 
If extending, in whole or in part, seaward of the coastal construction control line and also located, in whole or in part, in a flood hazard area: 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed to comply with the more restrictive applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building Section 3109 and Section 1612 or Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
(2)  Minor structures and non-habitable major structures as defined in F.S. § 161.54 shall be designed and constructed to comply with the intent and applicable provisions of this article and ASCE 24. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-412—62-414. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - [SECTION 302] SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 62-415. - [302.1] Subdivision/minimum requirements. 
Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-416. - [302.2] Subdivision plats. 
Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 62-341.1 [Section 105.2(1)] of this article; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of division 13 [Section 303] of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-417—62-419. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - [SECTION 303] SITE IMPROVEMENTS, UTILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 
 
Sec. 62-420. - [303.1] Minimum requirements. 
All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-421. - [303.2] Sanitary sewage facilities. 
All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-422. - [303.3] Water supply facilities. 
All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-423. - [303.4] Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. 
No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in section 62-342.1 [Section 105.3(1)] of this article demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-424. - [303.5] Limitations on placement of fill. 
Subject to the limitations of this article, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-425. - [303.6] Limitations on sites in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas, alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be permitted only if such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and only if the engineering analysis required by section 62-342.3(4) [Section 105.3(4)] of this article demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. Construction or restoration of dunes under or around elevated buildings and structures shall comply with section 62-462.3 [Section 307.8(3)] of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-426—62-429. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - [SECTION 304] MANUFACTURED HOMES 
 
Sec. 62-430. - [304.1] General. 
All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this article. If located seaward of the coastal construction control line, all manufactured homes shall comply with the more restrictive of the applicable requirements. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-431. - [304.2] Foundations. 
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that: 
(1)  In flood hazard areas (zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 and this article. 
(2)  In coastal high hazard areas (zone V), are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.3 and this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-432. - [304.3] Anchoring. 
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-433. - [304.4] Elevation. 
Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with sections 62-434 or 62-435 [Sections 304.4.1 or 304.4.2] of this article, as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-434. - [304.4.1] General elevation requirement. 
Unless subject to the requirements of section 62-435 [Section 304.4.2] of this article, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V). 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-435. - [304.4.2] Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. 
Manufactured homes that are not subject to section 62-434 [Section 304.4.1] of this article, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
(1)  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V); or 
(2)  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-436. - [304.5] Enclosures. 
Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322 for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-437. - [304.6] Utility equipment. 
Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-438, 62-439. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - [SECTION 305] RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND PARK TRAILERS 
 
Sec. 62-440. - [305.1] Temporary placement. 
Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-441. - [305.2] Permanent placement. 
Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in section 62-440 [Section 305.1] of this article for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of division 14 [Section 304] of this article for manufactured homes. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-442—62-444. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - [SECTION 306] TANKS 
 
Sec. 62-445. - [306.1] Underground tanks. 
Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-446. - [306.2] Above-ground tanks, not elevated. 
Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of section 62-447 [Section 306.3] of this article shall: 
(1)  Be permitted in flood hazard areas (zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(2)  Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-447. - [306.3] Above-ground tanks, elevated. 
Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-448. - [306.4] Tank inlets and vents. 
Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-449—62-454. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - [SECTION 307] OTHER DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 62-455. - [307.1] General requirements for other development. 
All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this article, the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of section 62-423 [Section 303.4] of this article if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-456. - [307.2] Fences in regulated floodways. 
Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of section 62-423 [Section 303.4] of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-457. - [307.3] Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in floodways. 
Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 62-423 [Section 303.4] of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-458. - [307.4] Roads and watercourse crossings in floodways. 
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 62-423 [Section 303.4] of this article. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of section 62-342.3 [Section 105.3(3)] of this article. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-459. - [307.5] Concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be: 
(1)  Structurally independent of the foundation system of the building or structure; 
(2)  Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any structure; and 
(3)  Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four inches. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-460. - [307.6] Decks and patios in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following: 
(1)  A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck. 
(2)  A deck or patio that is located below the design flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than 12 inches or that is constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to the building or structure or to buildings and structures. 
(4)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of 12 inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-461. - [307.7] Other development in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the appropriate federal, state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control structures; 
(2)  Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters; and 
(3)  On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems defined in 64E-6.002, F.A.C., as filled systems or mound systems. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Sec. 62-462. - [307.8] Nonstructural fill in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas: 
(1)  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings. 
(2)  Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than one unit vertical to five units horizontal shall be permitted only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  Where authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the diversion of floodwater or wave runup and wave reflection if the scale and location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the lowest horizontal structural member of the building. 
( Ord. No. 22-2014 , § 3, 10-28-14)  
Secs. 62-463—62-469. - Reserved.  
Chapter 66 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, adopted November 24, 2009, amended Ch. 66, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 66 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Provisions to regulate signage required, F.S. § 164.3202(2)(f). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below or in the specific article in which they appear, words or phrases used in these regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage, and to give these regulations their most reasonable application. One or more concept or thing may be referred to by different names throughout this Code. It should not be assumed that because one concept or thing may have different names that it is a separate concept or thing unless that is the most reasonable interpretation. 
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
The word "used" or "occupied" includes the words "intended," "designed," or "arranged to be used or occupied." 
The word "structure" includes the word "building," as well as other things constructed or erected on the ground, attached to something having location on the ground, or requiring construction or erection on the ground. 
The word "land" includes the words "water," "marsh," or "swamp." 
Abandoned or discontinued sign or sign structure. A sign or sign structure is considered abandoned or discontinued when its owner fails to operate or maintain a sign for a period of 90 days or longer. The following conditions shall be considered as the failure to operate or maintain a sign: (1) a sign displaying or advertising for a product or service which is no longer available, or displaying or advertising for a business which is no longer licensed, or (2) a sign which is blank or empty. This definition of abandoned sign includes signs on which is advertised a business that is no longer licensed, no longer has a certificate of occupancy, or is no longer doing business at that location or any other sign for any purpose for which the purpose has lapsed. If the sign is a conforming sign in compliance with building codes and all other applicable city ordinances, then only the sign face will be considered abandoned. 
Advertising. Sign copy intended to aid, directly or indirectly, in the sale, use or promotion of a product, commodity, service, activity, entertainment, or real or personal property. 
Area or surface area of signs. the square-foot area enclosed by a rectangle, parallelogram, triangle, circle, semicircle, other geometric figures, or other architectural design, the sides of which make contact with the extreme points or edges of the sign. The area of a sign composed of characters or words attached directly to a large, uniform building wall surface shall be the smallest rectangle, triangle, circle, parallelogram, other geometric figure, or other architectural design that encloses the whole group of words or characters. 
Animated sign. A sign which includes action, motion, or color changes, or the optical illusion of action, motion, or color changes, including signs using electronic ink, signs set in motion by movement of the atmosphere, or made up of a series of sections that turn, including any type of screen using animated or scrolling displays, such as an LED (light emitting diode) screen or any other type of video display, even if the message is stationary. 
Architectural detail means any projection, relief, change of material, window or door opening, exterior lighting, inlay, or other exterior building features not specifically classified as a sign. The term includes, but is not limited to, relief or inlay features or patterns that distinguish window or door openings, exterior lighting that frames building features, and changes in facade materials to create an architectural effect. 
Artwork. A two- or three-dimensional representation of a creative idea that is expressed in a form and manner as to provide aesthetic enjoyment for the viewer rather than to specifically convey the name of the business or a commercial message about the products or services offered on the property upon which the artwork is displayed. All outdoor artwork shall conform to the maximum height and size restrictions in any particular zone in which it is located. All outdoor artwork shall also conform to any applicable building and safety standards. 
Attached sign. Means any sign attached to, on, or supported by any part of a building (e.g., walls, awning, windows, or canopy), which encloses or covers useable space. 
Awning sign. See canopy sign. 
Banner. A temporary sign made of wind and weather resistant cloth or other lightweight material, intended to hang either with or without frames or in some other manner as not to be wind activated, and possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. Flags shall not be considered banners for the purpose of this definition. 
Beacon means a stationary or revolving light that flashes or projects light that flashes or projects illumination, single color or multicolored, in any manner which has the effect of attracting or diverting attention, except, however, this term does not include any kind of lighting device that is required or necessary under the safety regulations of the Federal Aviation Agency or other similar agencies. This definition does not apply to any similar type of lighting device contained entirely within a structure and which does not project light to the exterior of the structure. 
Bench advertising sign. An advertising sign appearing on a bench or on or adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
Billboard. A sign structure and/or sign utilized for advertising an establishment, an activity, a product, service or entertainment, which is sold, produced, manufactured, available or furnished at a place other than on the property on which said sign structure and/or sign is located. 
Building setback line means a line beyond which no building may extend, as established by ordinance. A building setback line, in some instances, may coincide with the property line. 
Bulletin board means a sign of permanent character, but with removable letters, words, numerals or symbols, indicating the names or persons associated with, or event conducted upon, or products or services offered upon, the premises upon which such a sign is maintained. 
Bus shelter advertising sign. An advertising sign appearing on a bus shelter or on or adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
Bus stop informational sign. A freestanding or attached non-commercial sign located at a bus stop and providing information as to the route, hours or times of service. 
Business establishment means any individual person, nonprofit organization, partnership, corporation, other organization or legal entity holding a valid occupational license and occupying distinct and separate physical space. 
Canopy sign. Any sign that is a part of or printed, stamped, stitched or otherwise applied onto a protective awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Changeable copy sign. A sign that is designed so that characters, letters or illustrations can be manually changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. 
City council designee. As used in the sign regulations under Chapter 66 of the Seminole City Code, city council's designee shall mean the individual designated by the city council to administer the provisions of the sign regulations of the Land Development Code of the City of Seminole. 
Code administrator means the city official, or his designee, responsible for the administration, interpretation and enforcement of the building codes of the city. 
Commercial message. Any sign wording, logo, or other representation or image that directly or indirectly names, advertises, or calls attention to a product, service, sale or sales event or other commercial activity. 
Construction sign. A temporary on-premise sign identifying the ongoing construction activity during the time that a building permit is active and prior to completion of the work for which the permit was issued, and containing sign copy that is limited to the ongoing construction activity and identifying the contractor and/or any subcontractor engaged to perform construction activity on the site. Construction signs shall not exceed six square feet in sign area, and six feet in height for single-family residential properties, and 32 square feet in sign area, and ten feet in height for multifamily and nonresidential properties. 
Copy. The linguistic or graphic content of a sign. 
Changeable electronic variable message sign ("CEVM"). A sign which uses electronic means to display changeable or intermittent images, such as by turning on or off various lighting elements including any illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use. The term includes display technology such as LED or digital displays which can vary in color or intensity, or any system which is functionally equivalent. 
Directional sign. An on-site non-commercial sign directing the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the premises where it is located. These signs may use words such as "entrance," "exit," "caution," "no parking," "one way only," "no trespassing," and the like, or arrows or similar graphics. These may be attached or freestanding. 
Directory sign. A non-commercial sign which lists the names and locations of occupants or the use of a building, limited to multi-tenant office buildings and complexes. 
Double-faced sign. A sign which has two display surfaces backed against the same background, one face of which is designed to be seen from one direction and the other from the opposite direction, every point on each face being either in contact with the other face or in contact with the same background. 
Election sign. A temporary sign erected or displayed for the purpose of expressing support for or opposition to a candidate or stating a position regarding an issue upon which the voters of the city shall vote. 
Erect. To construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or in any way bring into being or establish: but it does not include any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to the change of advertising message or customary maintenance or repair of a sign. 
Fixed aerial advertising sign. Any aerial advertising medium that is tethered to the ground. 
Flag. Any fabric, or similar material, or bunting containing distinct colors, patterns or symbols, used as an ornamental flag or as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, corporation, business or other entity and which is not a banner. 
Flagpole. A pole on which to raise a flag. 
Flashing sign. A sign that permits light to be turned on or off intermittently. 
Foot-candle. A unit of measure of luminosity of a surface that is everywhere one foot from a uniform point source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot. 
Footlambert. The centimeter gram second unit of brightness equal to the brightness of a perfectly diffused surface that radiates or reflects one lumen per square centimeter. 
Free expression sign. A sign, not in excess of three square feet in size (area) and the top of the sign is not more than three feet off the ground if freestanding and communicating information or views of concern to the owner of the sign, or containing any other non-commercial message, that is otherwise lawful. 
Freestanding sign. A sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on or anchored in the ground or at ground level and which are independent of any building or other structure. 
Frontage means the length of the property line for a parcel that runs parallel to, and along, a road right-of-way or street exclusive of alleyways. 
Frontage, building means a single facade constituting length of building or that portion of a building occupied by a single office, business or enterprise abutting a street, parking area, or other means of customer access such as an arcade, mall or walkway. 
Garage or yard sale or garage-yard sign. Any on-site temporary sign pertaining to the sale of personal property in, at or upon any residentially-zoned property located in the city. Garage or yard sales shall include but not be limited to all such sales, and shall include the advertising of the holding of any such sale, or other offering to make any sale, whether made under any name such as garage sale, lawn sale, yard sale, front yard sale, back yard sale, attic sale, rummage sale, patio sale, moving sale, or any similar designation. 
Gasoline price display signs means changeable message signs, typically mounted on the freestanding identification sign, which display the prices of gasoline for sale. 
Ground level means the level of finish grade of a parcel of land exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating a sign. Ground level on marina docks or floating structures shall be the finish grade of the landward portion of the adjoining parcel. 
Ground sign. Any sign which is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building; however, a ground sign shall include any sign which is partially supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building. 
Height means the vertical distance measured from ground level nearest the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign. 
Holiday and seasonal decorations. Decorations that pertain to legal or other recognized holidays or to a season of the year. 
Holographic display sign. An advertising display that creates a three-dimensional image through projection, OLED (organic light emitting diode), or any similar technology. 
Identification sign. Any structural device, display board, screen, surface, or wall with characters, letters or illustrations placed, by any method or means whatsoever, where the material displayed is used only to indicate to the public the legal or exact firm name or the character of the business carried on therein. Identification signs are subject to the size and height restrictions delineated elsewhere in this Code. An identification sign is differentiated from a directory sign in that the identification sign identifies the occupant or use of an individual address or business premises. Individual addresses or business premises may have both an identification sign and a directory sign. 
Illuminated sign. Any sign or portion thereof which is illuminated by artificial light, either from an interior or exterior source, including outline, reflective or phosphorescent light (including but not limited to plasma or laser), whether or not the source of light is directly affixed as part of the sign, and shall also include signs with reflectors that depend upon sunlight or automobile headlights for an image. 
Indirectly illuminated sign. Any sign, the facing of which reflects light from a source intentionally directed upon it. 
Internally illuminated sign. Any sign which has the source of light entirely enclosed within the sign not visible to the eye. 
LED sign. Any sign or portion thereof that uses light emitting diode technology or other similar semiconductor technology to produce an illuminated image, picture, or message of any kind whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED technology of any kind whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light emitting diodes (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro luminescence (OEL), or any similar technology. 
Local government means the county government and the municipalities within the county. 
Machinery and equipment signs. Any sign that is integral to the machinery or equipment and that identifies the manufacturer of the machinery or equipment that is placed on the machinery or equipment at the factory at the time of manufacture. 
Maintenance means the replacing, repairing or repainting of a portion of a sign or sign structure, periodically changing changeable copy or renewing copy that has been made unusable by ordinary wear or weather or accident. 
Marquee. Any permanent wall or roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Marquee sign. Any sign attached to a marquee. 
Menu display sign. A fully enclosed or otherwise protected from the elements sign structure, including but not limited to a box, shadow box or cabinet, attached to a wall or freestanding, which is used solely for the purpose of displaying restaurant menus. A menu display sign may be used for a restaurant without drive-through service and for transient lodging facilities which have restaurant facilities open to the general public in addition to the registered guests. Menu display sign structures shall be limited to one per establishment. 
Menu sign, drive-in. An attached sign that is located at each drive-in stall or bay of a restaurant and which may provide a mechanism for ordering the products while viewing the sign. 
Menu sign, drive-through. A sign placed so as to be viewed from a drive-through lane and which contains only a listing of the products, with prices, offered for sale by the restaurant where the sign is located and which may provide a mechanism for ordering the products while viewing the sign. 
Mobile billboard advertising. Any vehicle, or wheeled conveyance which carries, conveys, pulls, or transports any sign or billboard for the primary purpose of advertising. 
Monument sign. A freestanding sign whose ratio of width of sign to width of support is less than three to one and is subject to all other restrictions as applicable elsewhere in this Code. 
Multiple dwelling means any building comprised of more than one-family dwelling unit. 
Multi-tenant building means a building where more than one business is serviced by a common entrance, and where such businesses may be located above the first story or otherwise be without frontage on a public right-of-way. 
Nameplate sign or occupant identification sign. An attached wall sign indicating the name and/or profession or address of a person or persons residing on the premises where the sign is located or legally occupying the premises where the sign is located. 
Non-commercial message. Any message which is not a commercial message. 
Nonconforming sign. A sign which does not conform with the regulations contained in this Code. 
Nonconforming structures. Existing buildings or structures which do not meet required limitations such as off-street parking and loading regulations, height regulations, area regulations, floor area regulations, sign regulations, or other applicable regulations for the district in which they are located. 
Off-site permanent monument identification sign. A permanent monument sign that identifies a residential or commercial subdivision, office park, shopping center, industrial subdivision, or industrial park, located within 100 feet of the location of such sign, and that contains no other copy other than the identification of such development. This sign-type shall not be considered a billboard. 
On-premise sign or on-site sign. Any sign relating in its subject matter to the commodities, accommodations, service or activities on the premises on which it is located. 
Ornamental flag. Any fabric or similar material containing patterns, drawings or symbols used for decorative purposes and designed to be flown as a flag. 
Owner. The land owner. 
Pennant means any series of small flag-like or streamer-like pieces of cloth, plastic or paper, or similar material attached in a row to any staff, cord, building, or at only one or two edges, the remainder hanging loosely. 
Permanent sign. Any sign which, when installed, is intended for permanent use. For the purposes of this division any sign with an intended use in excess of three months from the date of installation shall be deemed a permanent sign unless otherwise indicated elsewhere in this Code. 
Permit holder. The person in legal possession of any permit required under this Code. 
Pole sign. A freestanding sign whose ratio of width of sign to width of support is equal to or greater than three to one. 
Portable sign. Any sign, banner, or poster that is not permanently attached to the ground or to a structure that is attached to the ground. For purposes of this chapter, a cold air inflatable sign shall be considered to be a portable sign. 
Projecting sign. Any sign affixed perpendicularly to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
Property means the overall area represented by the outside boundaries of a parcel of land or development. 
Real estate sign. A temporary sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed temporarily. 
Revolving sign or rotating sign. Any sign that revolves or rotates. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on or over the roof of a building, and which is supported by the roof structure, or any sign that extends in whole or in part above the roofline of a building. 
Safety sign. See Warning sign. 
Sandwich board sign. Any double-faced or single-faced A-frame sign which is portable and may readily be moved from place to place. This type of sign is generally freestanding and not affixed to the ground in any way, although some temporary type of attachment to the ground is occasionally used. 
Sight visibility triangle. A triangular shaped portion of land established at street intersections or driveway and street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. The sight visibility triangle is an area created by measuring a distance of 15 feet along the right-of-way line (property line) from the point of the intersection of two adjacent right-of-way lines and connecting the terminus of the two 15-foot right-of-way lines. 
Sign. Any surface, fabric, device or display which bears lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter, including forms shaped to resemble any human, animal or product, designed to convey information to the public and which is not artwork as defined herein or architectural detail as defined herein. For the purposes of these regulations, the term "sign" shall include all structural members. A sign shall be construed to be a display surface or device containing organized and related elements composed to form a single unit. In cases where matter is displayed in a random or unconnected manner without organized relationship of the components, each such component shall be considered to be a single sign. In the case of a permanent sign made of any fabric or other non-rigid material the sign shall conform to each specification for such signs found elsewhere in the Code. 
Signable area. The total surface area on a single plane of a wall or window, or similar structure, or a building facade where a sign may be located under this Code. This does not include the main supporting sign structure, but includes all other ornamental attachments, connecting links, etc., which are not a part of the main supports of the sign. 
Signable area, wall. For purposes of determining the maximum size (area) allowed for a wall sign, signable wall area is the continuous portion of a single plane of wall surface that is unbroken by doors, windows, or openings. 
Sign face. The part of the sign, including trim and background, that is or can be used to identify, display, advertise, communicate information, or for visual representation which attracts or intends to attract the attention of the public for any purpose. 
Sign, maintenance. The replacing, repairing, or repainting of a portion of a sign structure, periodically changing copy, or renewing copy which has been made unusable by ordinary wear or weather or accident. The replacing or repairing of a sign or sign structure of which 25 percent or more of the total areas has been damaged (as determined by the city manager or designee) shall not be considered maintenance. 
Snipe sign means a sign tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees (living or dead), poles, including but not limited to telephone and utility poles, stakes, fences or to other objects, with the message appearing thereon not applicable to the present use of the premises or structure upon which the sign is located. 
Statutory sign. A sign required by any statute of the State of Florida or the United States. 
Street means a public right-of-way used for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
Street address sign. Any sign denoting the street address of the premises on which it is attached or located. 
Structure. For the purposes of sign regulation in the City of Seminole a structure is defined to be, anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. It includes a movable structure while it is located on land which can be used for housing, business, commercial, agricultural, or office purposes either temporarily or permanently. Structure also includes swimming pools, fences, freestanding signs, sidewalks, patio slabs and driveways. 
Structure, temporary. Any structure built to serve a use temporarily, such as, a field or sales office, or contractor's office. 
Temporary sign. A sign intended for a use not permanent in nature. For the purposes of this division, a sign with an intended use of three months or less shall be deemed a temporary sign unless otherwise indicated elsewhere in this Code. 
Traffic control device sign. Any sign located within the right-of-way that is used as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard. A traffic control device sign includes those signs that are classified and defined by their function as regulatory signs (that give notice of traffic laws or regulations), warning signs (that give notice of a situation that might not readily be apparent), and guide signs (that show route designations, directions, distances, services, points of interest, and other geographical, recreational, or cultural information). 
Tube graphics means an electrical luminous neon tubing used as a conventional sign or linear display, usually in the form of an outline for a script message or to highlight the outline of a building or entrance way. 
Umbrella sign. A sign printed on umbrellas used for legal outdoor eating and drinking establishments, push-carts, sidewalk cafes and which is made of a lightweight fabric or similar material. 
Vehicle sign. Any sign or signs where the total sign area covers more than ten square feet of the vehicle. 
Vested right. A right is vested when it has become absolute and fixed and cannot be defeated or denied by subsequent conditions or change in regulations, unless it is taken and paid for. There is no vested right to an existing zoning classification or to have zoning remain the same forever. However, once development has been started or has been completed, there is a right to maintain that particular use regardless of the classification given the property. There can be no vested right in a sign permit if a sign permit is applied for under a sign ordinance that is later partially or wholly adjudicated to be unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Wall sign. A sign which is painted onto, fastened, or affixed to the wall of a building with its face in a parallel plane with the plane of the building facade or wall. 
Warning sign or safety sign. A sign which provides warning of a dangerous condition or situation that might not be readily apparent or that poses a threat of serious injury (e.g., gas line, high voltage, condemned building, etc.) or that provides warning of a violation of law (e.g., no trespassing, no hunting allowed, etc.). 
Wall wrap sign. A sign composed of fabric, plastic, vinyl, mylar or a similar material that drapes or hangs over the side of a building, wall or window. This sign type was the subject of the litigation in City of Philadelphia v. Berman, 863 A.2d 156 (Pa.Cmwlth. 2004) and Society Created To Reduce Urban Blight (SCRUB) v. Zoning Bd. Of Adjustment, 908 A.2d 967 (Pa.Cmwlth. 2006). 
Window sign. Any sign mounted or placed in any fashion on the interior or exterior of the surface of a window, and intended to be seen from the exterior. 
Wind sign. A sign which uses objects or material fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind, and shall include, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers or captive balloons, however, the term wind sign shall not include flags. 
Zone lot means a parcel of land that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage and use, and that can provide such setbacks and other open spaces as required by the city's zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-2. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter to authorize the use of signs compatible with their surroundings, appropriate to the neighborhood in which they are situated and to the type of activity to which they pertain, expressive of the community as a whole and legible in the circumstances in which they are seen. 
(b)  This chapter is intended to create the legal framework for sign regulations that will facilitate a reasonable communication between business and people by preventing that which is undesirable in commercial signage without hampering the inherent right of business to communicate reasonably through identification of products, goods, services and/or facilities. 
(c)  It is also the intent of this chapter to prohibit nonconforming signs and provide for a reasonable transitional period to bring nonconforming signs which had been permitted under previous ordinances into conformity with the regulations in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-3. - Purpose and scope. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare through reasonable, consistent and non-discriminatory sign standards. The sign regulations in this article are not intended to censor speech or to regulate viewpoints, but instead are intended to regulate the adverse secondary effects of signs. The sign regulations are especially intended to reach the secondary effects that may adversely impact aesthetics and safety. The city is a primarily single-family residential community on the west coast of Florida. The economic base of the city is enhanced by tourism. In order to preserve and promote the city as a desirable community in which to live, vacation and do business, a pleasing, visually attractive environment is of foremost importance. The regulation of signs within the city is a highly contributive means by which to achieve this desired end. These sign regulations have been prepared with the intent of enhancing the visual environment of the city and promoting its continued well-being, and are intended to: 
(1)  Establish a system of sign regulation that addresses the full spectrum of principal sign considerations on a uniform basis. 
(2)  Establish a standard for principal sign considerations that will foster consistency and avoid disharmony with neighboring municipalities. 
(3)  Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city; 
(4)  Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; 
(5)  Improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
(6)  Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; 
(7)  Foster the integration of signage with architectural and landscape designs; 
(8)  Lessen the visual clutter that may otherwise be caused by the proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation, excessive height, and excessive size (area) of signs which compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
(9)  Allow signs that are compatible with their surroundings and aid orientation, while precluding the placement of signs that contribute to sign clutter or that conceal or obstruct adjacent land uses or signs; 
(10)  Encourage and allow signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in which they are located and consistent with the category of use and function to which they pertain; 
(11)  Curtail the size and number of signs and sign messages to the minimum reasonably necessary to identify a residential or business location and the nature of any such business; 
(12)  Establish sign size in relationship to the scale of the lot and building on which the sign is to be placed or to which it pertains; 
(13)  Categorize signs based upon the function that they serve and tailor the regulation of signs based upon their function; 
(14)  Preclude signs from conflicting with the principal permitted use of the site and adjoining sites; 
(15)  Regulate signs in a manner so as to not interfere with, obstruct the vision of or distract motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians; 
(16)  Except to the extent expressly preempted by state or federal law, ensure that signs are constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and satisfactory manner, and protect the public from unsafe signs; 
(17)  Preserve, conserve, protect, and enhance the aesthetic quality and scenic beauty of all districts of the city; 
(18)  Allow for traffic control devices consistent with national standards and whose purpose is to promote highway safety and efficiency by providing for the orderly movement of road users on streets and highways, and that notify road users of regulations and provide warning and guidance needed for the safe, uniform and efficient operation of all elements of the traffic stream; 
(19)  Protect property values by precluding, to the maximum extent possible, sign-types that create a nuisance to the occupancy or use of other properties as a result of their size, height, illumination, brightness, or movement; 
(20)  Protect property values by ensuring that sign-types, as well as the number of signs, are in harmony with buildings, neighborhoods, and conforming signs in the area; 
(21)  Regulate the appearance and design of signs in a manner that promotes and enhances the beautification of the city and that complements the natural surroundings in recognition of this city's reliance on its natural surroundings and beautification efforts in retaining economic advantage for its resort community, as well as for its major subdivisions, shopping centers and industrial parks; and 
(22)  Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-4. - Authority and jurisdiction. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted in F.S. ch. 163, pt. II, the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-5. - Relationship to other codes. 
Signs subject to this chapter shall comply with applicable zoning building, electrical and mechanical codes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-6. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city's building division and its respective code enforcement officials shall bear the responsibility for the appropriate enforcement of this chapter in their jurisdictions. 
(b)  Violations of this chapter shall be subject to prosecution pursuant to section 2-106 et seq. and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $250.00 per day for the offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided by subsection (b) of this section above, any violation of this chapter shall be subject to appropriate civil action in the court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-7. - Exemptions. 
This article does not pertain to the following: 
(1)  A sign (except a window sign which shall be subject to the provisions of this article) located entirely inside the premises of a building or enclosed space. 
(2)  A sign on a car, other than a prohibited vehicle sign or signs. 
(3)  A statutory sign. 
(4)  A traffic control device sign. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-8. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs and sign-types are prohibited within the city limits and shall not be erected. Any lawfully existing permanent sign or sign-type that is among the prohibited signs and sign-types listed below shall be deemed a nonconforming sign subject to the provisions of this section and section 66-126: 
(1)  Billboards. Existing billboards shall not be permitted to convert to a CEVM. 
(2)  Any attached sign that exceeds 100 square feet in sign area. 
(3)  Any freestanding sign that is higher than 20 feet, other than flagpoles as allowed in certain zoning districts pursuant to this article. 
(4)  Any freestanding sign that exceeds 100 square feet in sign area. 
(5)  Abandoned and discontinued signs. 
(6)  Flashing signs. 
(7)  Revolving or rotating signs. 
(8)  Signs which move, twirl or swing, including multi-prism and tri-vision signs. 
(9)  Floodlights and beacon lights, except when required by the Federal Aviation Agency. 
(10)  Bus shelter advertising signs; bench advertising signs. 
(11)  Wind signs. 
(12)  Projecting signs, other than projecting signs as allowed within certain locations within certain zoning districts pursuant to this chapter. 
(13)  Pavement markings, except official traffic control markings and building address markings required by law. 
(14)  Portable signs. 
(15)  Roof signs, and above roof signs, except as provided in a development agreement to be consistent with the adopted architectural standards. 
(16)  Sandwich board signs. 
(17)  Any sign attached to or painted on walls, piers or seawalls, other than a warning sign or safety sign. 
(18)  Signs in or upon any river, bay, lake or other body of water within the limits of the city, except official regulatory or warning signs. 
(19)  Signs that emit sound, vapor, smoke, odor, particles, or gaseous matter. 
(20)  Signs that involve the use of live animals. 
(21)  Signs that contain any food or other substance that attracts large numbers of birds or other animals and causes them to congregate on or near the sign. 
(22)  Commercial mascot and commercial message signs that are carried, waved or otherwise displayed by persons either on public rights-of-way or in a manner visible from public rights-of-way. This provision is directed toward such displays intended to draw attention for a commercial purpose, and is not intended to limit the display of placards, banners, flags or other signage by persons participating in demonstrations, political rallies, or otherwise exercising their valid First Amendment rights. 
(23)  Signs that have unshielded, illuminating devices. 
(24)  Signs that obstruct, conceal, hide or otherwise obscure from view any official traffic control device sign or official traffic signal. 
(25)  Snipe signs. 
(26)  Three-dimensional objects that are used as signs. 
(27)  Umbrella signs. 
(28)  Any sign within a sight visibility triangle that obstructs a clear view of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(29)  Any sign in or over the public right-of-way, other than traffic control device signs, bus stop informational signs, warning signs or safety signs, except as may be allowed by city council resolution that sets forth specific criteria not based on the speaker's viewpoint and not allowing undue discretion on the part of any city official. 
(30)  Any sign other than a traffic control device sign that uses the word "stop" or "danger," or presents or implies the need or requirement of stopping or the existence of danger, or which is a copy or imitation of a traffic control device sign and which is adjacent to the right-of-way of any road, street, or highway. 
(31)  Any sign nailed, fastened, affixed to, or painted on any tree (living or dead), or other vegetation. 
(32)  Any sign prohibited by state or federal law. 
(33)  Any sign located on real property without the permission of the property owner. 
(34)  Holographic display signs. 
(35)  Pennants, streamers, balloons, wind activated banners, cold air inflatables and other fixed aerial signage, except where specifically provided elsewhere in this article. 
(36)  Vehicle sign or signs with a total sign area on any vehicle in excess of ten square feet and the vehicle is not "regularly used in the conduct of the business" and (a) is visible from a street right-of-way within 100 feet of the vehicle. A vehicle shall not be considered "regularly used in the conduct of the business" if the vehicle is used primarily (i) for advertising, or (ii) for the purpose of advertising. This provision is not to be construed as prohibiting the identification of a firm or its principal products on a vehicle which is currently licensed, insured and operable and is being used as part of the daily operation of the business; provided, however, that no such vehicle shall be parked on public or private property with signs attached or placed on such vehicle "primarily" for the purpose of advertising a business establishment or firm or calling attention to the location of a business establishment or firm. 
(37)  Mobile billboard advertising. It is a violation of City Code and this sign ordinance for any person to conduct, or cause to be conducted, any mobile billboard advertising upon any street, or any other public place within the city in which the public has the right to travel. This prohibition does not apply to: (a) any vehicle which displays an advertisement or business identification of its owner, so long as such vehicle is engaged in the usual business or regular work of the owner, and not used merely, mainly or primarily to display advertisements; (b) buses; or (c) taxicabs. 
(38)  Wall or building wrap signs. 
(39)  Commercial mascots. Humans or animals used as advertising devices for commercial establishments, typically by the holding or wearing of insignia, masks or costumes associated with the commercial establishment. 
(40)  CEVM billboards, including the conversion of existing non-CEVM billboards to CEVM billboards. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-9. - Building permits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or business or the person in charge of the business to erect, construct, alter or maintain an outdoor advertising display sign, as defined in the Florida Building Code, without first obtaining a building permit from the city in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Building Code and applicable law. Permit fees for a building permit shall be paid in accordance with the applicable city fee schedules. The requirement of a building permit under the Florida Building Code is separate and independent of the requirement for a sign permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-10. - Substitution of non-commercial speech for commercial speech. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter or code to the contrary, any sign erected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or code may, at the option of the owner, contain a non-commercial message in lieu of a commercial message and the non-commercial copy may be substituted at any time in place of the commercial copy. The non-commercial message (copy) may occupy the entire sign face or any portion thereof. The sign face may be changed from commercial to non-commercial messages, or from one non-commercial message to another non-commercial message, as frequently as desired by the owner of the sign, provided that the size, height, setback and other dimensional criteria contained in this chapter and Code have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-11. - Content neutrality as to sign message (viewpoint). 
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter or code to the contrary, no sign or sign structure shall be subject to any limitation based upon the content (viewpoint) of the message contained on such sign or displayed on such sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-12. - Illegal signs on public property. 
Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, shall be deemed illegal and shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such sign the cost of removal and disposal of such sign. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Secs. 66-13—66-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 66-41. - Refacing of abandoned conforming signs. 
(a)  Any abandoned sign that is a conforming sign as to the Florida Building Code and the City of Seminole Code of Ordinances and that no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or a product sold on the same premises on which the sign is placed shall have the sign face replaced with blank, opaque sign faces of like material to the original sign face by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or property upon which such sign may be found within ten days of the closing of the business to which the signage pertained. Upon failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection, the matter may be referred to the code enforcement special magistrate. The city is hereby authorized to cause the refacing of such sign, upon a failure of the property owner to comply with the order imposed by the code enforcement special magistrate. Any expense incidental thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure or property upon which the sign is erected or attached. 
(b)  If it is necessary for the city to cause any sign to be refaced, the cost of refacing the sign will constitute a lien and special assessment against the property on which the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Secs. 66-42—66-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SIGN PERMITS AND APPEALS 
 
Sec. 66-66. - Sign permits. 
(a)  Unless exempt from permitting, no permanent sign shall be erected, altered, relocated, maintained or displayed until a sign permit is obtained from and the appropriate fee paid to the city. The sign permit is in addition to any building permit required to be obtained pursuant to the provisions of the Florida Building Code. 
(b)  No sign permit shall be issued for the erection of a prohibited sign. 
(c)  A sign lawfully erected may be repainted or have ordinary and customary repairs performed, including replacement of plastic or glass panels, without a new sign permit; however, if such sign is to be structurally altered in any manner, a new sign permit shall be required and the altered sign must meet all requirements of this chapter and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-67. - Exceptions from permitting. 
The following types of signs, while they may be covered by the general provisions of this chapter, shall be exempt from all sign permit requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Any sign of the type described in section 66-7. 
(2)  Allowed temporary and allowed permanent signs of the type described in section 66-161. 
However, these exemptions in no way waive requirements of the Florida Building Code or any limitation or restriction on the number, size, height, setback, placement or duration of such signs under this chapter, or any limitation or restriction under any other applicable law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-68. - Permits not required for change of sign copy. 
No permit or permit fee shall be required for changing the copy of a sign, as long as no changes are made to the sign's height, size, location, or structure. This exemption shall also apply to any change of copy on a changeable copy sign. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-69. - Sign permit applications. 
A sign permit application for permanent and certain temporary signs as may be required by this chapter, or separate city council resolution, shall be prepared and submitted on forms available at the office of the building division of the community development department. The sign permit application is in addition to any building permit application required by the Florida Building Code. The applicant shall furnish the following information on or with the sign permit application form: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the person making application for the permit. If the applicant is anyone other than the property owner, the applicant shall provide written authorization from the property owner permitting the installation of the sign. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the property owner. If the owner is an entity other than an individual, list the contact person's name. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the business tenant, if applicable. If the tenant is an entity other than an individual, list the contact person's name. 
(4)  Name, address, telephone and license number of the contractor, if applicable. If the contractor is an entity other than an individual, list the contact person's name. 
(5)  Address and legal description of the property upon which the sign is to be located. The legal address may be located on a certified boundary survey. 
(6)  Lot frontage on all streets and public rights-of-way. 
(7)  Indicate in feet and inches the location of the sign in relation to property lines, public rights-of-way, easements, buildings and other signs on the property. 
(8)  Freestanding signs shall require a boundary survey prepared within the last 24 months of the permit application date, and signed and sealed by a land surveyor or engineer licensed in Florida showing the proposed location of the sign. 
(9)  For all wall mounted signs, the facade elevation with dimensions, drawn to scale. Windows and doors and other openings shall be delineated and their dimensions given. 
(10)  Sign dimensions and elevation, drawn to scale. 
(11)  Maximum and minimum height of the sign measured from finished grade. 
(12)  Dimensions of the sign's supporting members. 
(13)  Sign illumination, specifying illumination type, placement, intensity and hours of illumination. 
(14)  Three copies of the plans, specifications, calculations and details, signed and sealed by an engineer licensed in Florida, specifications documenting the applicable windload, and electrical specifications, if applicable, meeting the minimum requirements of the applicable electric code. 
(15)  Number, type, location and surface area of all existing signs on the same property. 
(16)  Landscape plan, as applicable. 
(17)  Signature of applicant. If the value of construction is $2,500.00 or greater, a certified copy of notice of commencement shall be required prior to permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-70. - Sign permit application review. 
(a)  An applicant shall deliver a sign permit application for a permanent sign to the building division of the community development department, or such other office as may be designated by the city. The sign permit application shall be reviewed for a determination of whether the proposed sign meets the applicable requirements of this article and any applicable zoning law. The review of the sign permit application shall be completed within 30 days following receipt of a completed application, and any applicable fees, not counting the day of receipt and not counting any Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday which falls upon the first or the thirtieth day after the date of receipt. A sign permit shall either be approved, approved with conditions (meaning legal conditions existing in the Code such as dimensional requirements), or disapproved, and the decision shall be reduced to writing. A disapproval shall include or be accompanied by a statement of the reason(s) for the disapproval. If disapproval is the consequence of a failure to decide upon the application within the deadline set forth herein, the city manager or designee shall upon request refund any applicable fee to the person who paid the fee. In the event that no decision is rendered within 30 calendar days following submission, the application shall be deemed denied and the applicant may appeal to the developmental review board. Any appeal shall be heard and a decision rendered within the time frames specified in this article for appeals. 
(b)  An approval, an approval with conditions, or disapproval by the city manager or designee shall be deemed the final decision of the city upon the application. 
(c)  In the case of an approval with conditions or a disapproval, including a disapproval by lapse of time as described herein, an applicant may ask for reconsideration of the decision on the grounds that the city manager or designee may have overlooked or failed to consider any fact(s) that would support a different decision. A written request for reconsideration accompanied by such additional fact(s) as the applicant may wish the city manager or designee to consider, shall be filed with the city manager or designee within ten calendar days after receipt of the decision. No fee shall be required for a request for reconsideration. Upon the timely filing of a request for reconsideration, the decision of the city manager or designee shall be deemed stayed and not a final decision, until the request for reconsideration is decided. The request for reconsideration shall be decided within seven days of receipt by the city, not counting any intervening Saturday, Sunday, or legal city holiday. Such decision shall be in writing and shall include a statement of the reason(s) for the decision. If the disapproval of the request for reconsideration was a consequence of a failure to decide upon the application within the deadline set forth herein, the city manager or designee shall verify upon request that any applicable fee was refunded even if the city manager or designee approves the application upon reconsideration. 
(d)  All decisions shall be mailed, transmitted electronically, or hand delivered to the applicant. A record shall be kept of the date of mailing, electronic transmittal, or hand delivery. For the purposes of calculating compliance with the 30-day deadline for a decision upon an application or the seven day deadline for a decision upon request for reconsideration, the decision shall be deemed made when deposited in the mail, transmitted electronically, or hand delivered to the applicant. 
(e)  As exceptions to the foregoing, the 30-day deadline for approval and the seven-day deadline for a decision upon receipt of a request for a reconsideration shall not apply (that is, the time shall be suspended): 
(1)  In any case in which the application requires a variance from any provision of the City Code of Ordinances, a rezoning of the property, or an amendment to the comprehensive plan of the city. In such cases, the time shall be suspended until a final decision is made upon the application for the variance, rezoning, or comprehensive plan amendment. 
(2)  If the applicant is required to make any change to the application in order to obtain an unconditional approval, the time shall be suspended while the applicant makes such change. 
(3)  If an applicant is required to obtain an approval from any other governmental agency, the time shall be suspended until such approval is obtained. 
(4)  In any of the foregoing cases, the applicant may elect to seek a variance, make no change to the application, or obtain no approval that may be required by another governmental agency, and may instead demand a decision upon the sign permit application as filed. In such event, the city manager or designee shall make a decision on the application as appropriate within five business days after receiving such demand. If a decision is not made in such a time, the application shall be deemed denied and the city manager or designee shall verify that any applicable fee was refunded to the person who paid the fee. 
(5)  An application which is materially incomplete or which is not accompanied by the required fee shall not be deemed accepted and the time for review of the application shall not commence until a complete application accompanied by the required fee is filed with the city manager or designee. However, the city manager or designee shall keep the record of incomplete application or any application not accompanied by the correct fee, as required by applicable public record laws. In addition, the city manager or designee shall within 30 days of receipt of such an application send the applicant a written explanation of the deficiencies in the application and ask that the deficiencies be remedied, explaining that the application can not proceed forward otherwise and the review will be suspended pending receipt of the required information or documentation. The applicant must then submit a new application with the deficiencies corrected in order for it to be considered by the city manager or designee. 
(f)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager or designee upon his or her sign permit application shall have the right to seek judicial review by the Circuit Court of the Sixth Judicial Circuit and for Pinellas County, Florida, or any other court of competent jurisdiction, filed in accordance with the requirements of law, seeking such appropriate remedy as may be available. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-71. - Sign permit fees. 
Before issuance of a permit, the building official or his designee shall collect the necessary sign permit fees. The sign permit fees shall be as designated by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-72. - Inspection. 
The building official and the director of community development or their designees may make or require any inspections to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the land development code, and other laws. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-73. - Revocation of sign permit. 
If the work under any sign permit is proceeding in violation of this chapter, any other ordinance of the city, or should it be found that there has been any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit was based, the permit holder shall be notified of the violation. If the permit holder fails or refuses to make corrections within ten days, it shall be the duty of the building official or his designee to revoke such permit and serve notice upon such permit holder. Such notice shall be in writing and signed by the building official or his designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to proceed with any part of work after such notice is issued. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-74. - Miscellaneous safety requirements. 
In addition to any requirement of this chapter, Code, or other law or regulatory provision, signs shall be erected and maintained to conform to the following safety requirements. 
(1)  No sign shall be erected so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window, or door opening intended as a means of egress. 
(2)  No sign shall be erected which interferes with any opening required for ventilation. 
(3)  Signs shall maintain a minimum of six feet horizontal and twelve feet vertical clearance from electrical conductors and from all communications equipment or lines located within the city. 
(4)  Signs and their supporting structures shall maintain clearance and noninterference with all surface and underground facilities and conduits for water, sewage, electricity, or communications equipment or lines. Furthermore, placement shall not interfere with natural or artificial drainage or surface or underground water. 
(5)  No sign shall be attached to a standpipe, gutter, drain, or fire escape, nor shall any sign be installed so as to impair access to a roof. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-75. - Appeals to developmental review board. 
(a)  Whenever it is alleged that there has been an error in any order, action, decision, determination, or requirement by an administrative official in the enforcement and application of any provision contained within this chapter or any other provision of this Code pertaining to sign permits (including any allegation that an administrative official has failed to act within applicable time frames), the aggrieved party may file a written appeal with the developmental review board. 
(b)  The written appeal shall be filed with the developmental review board within 30 days of the date of the alleged error. The written appeal shall describe the alleged error and the applicable provisions of the Code pertaining to the administrative official's order, action, decision, determination, requirement, or failure to act. 
(c)  The developmental review board shall hold a hearing within 45 days following receipt of the written appeal, not counting the day of receipt and not counting any Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday which falls upon the first or the forty-fifth day after the date of receipt. 
(d)  The developmental review board shall render a written decision within ten days following the hearing. 
(e)  If the developmental review board does not render a decision within ten days following the hearing, the sign permit shall be deemed denied. 
(f)  Failure to appeal the decision regarding a sign application by the city manager or designee shall not be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. The applicant may choose to proceed directly to a judicial action once the sign application has been denied by the city manager or designee. 
(g)  If an administrative appeal is filed by the applicant, and the developmental review board fails to meet within the proscribed time the appeal will be deemed denied and the decision of the city manager or designee regarding the sign application will be deemed a final decision subject to immediate appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(h)  Once a decision is appealed to the developmental review board the city manager, or designee, shall take no further action on the matter pending the board's decision, except for unsafe signs which shall present an immediate and serious danger to the public in which case the city may pursue any proper legal remedy available to it. 
(i)  The developmental review board shall comply with all applicable rules of conduct and procedures that pertain to zoning and that are not inconsistent with the provisions in this chapter. 
(j)  No variance shall be given by the developmental review board to any height, size or other dimensional criteria set forth in this article. No variance shall be given by the developmental review board with regard to the number of signs allowed on any parcel of land as set forth in this article. A variance may be given by the developmental review board with regard to the required setback. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-76. - Appellate decisions deemed final, subject to judicial review. 
The appellate decisions of the developmental review board pursuant to section 66-75 above, shall be deemed final, subject to judicial review by a Circuit Court of the Sixth Judicial Circuit in and for Pinellas County, Florida, filed in accordance with the requirements of law, seeking such appropriate remedy as may be available. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Secs. 66-77—66-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS 
 
Sec. 66-126. - Generally. 
Consistent with the public policy to restrict and eventually eliminate nonconforming uses and structures, it is the policy of the city that nonconforming signs shall be brought into conformity or removed as expeditiously as possible while allowing such signs to be maintained in the interim. A nonconforming sign that was lawfully erected may continue to be maintained and used, until the earlier of such time in which any of the following occurs: (a) The sign meets the definition of an abandoned or discontinued sign; or, (b) The sign is substantially damaged or destroyed in excess of 51 percent of its value; or, (c) The real property on which the sign is located is redeveloped; or, (d) The principal structure on the real property on which the sign is located is demolished in excess of 51 percent of its value as determined by the property appraisers office; or, (e) The property owner chooses to replace the entire sign. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-127. - Nonconforming signs, specific regulation 
In addition to any requirement of this chapter, a nonconforming sign shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Unsafe nonconforming sign. Any nonconforming sign or portion thereof declared to be unsafe by the building official shall only be restored in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Alteration of a nonconforming sign. A nonconforming sign may be maintained and repairs may be made thereon, in accordance with the definition of "sign maintenance" as contained in this chapter. The changing of sign copy or sign face is permitted. However, no change or alteration to an existing CEVM component, or the addition of a new CEVM component where one does not currently exist, shall be permitted. 
(3)  Extension of a nonconforming. A sign that is nonconforming shall not be increased in area, extended or enlarged so as to encompass additional area. 
(4)  Abandonment of a nonconforming sign. When a nonconforming sign meets the definition of an "abandoned or discontinued sign or sign structure" as defined in this chapter, any future use of the sign shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  Restoration of a nonconforming sign. A nonconforming sign damaged or destroyed in excess of 51 percent of its value, by any means, method or event may not be reconstructed or restored for use except in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the Florida Building Code. 
(6)  Structural conversion of a nonconforming sign. Sections of this division shall not apply to any construction, structural alteration, extension, addition or repair where such work, as proposed, would convert a nonconforming sign into a sign that conforms with all the pertinent requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-2011, § 1, 4-26-11)  
Secs. 66-128—66-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - ALL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 66-161. - Regulations that apply in every zoning district in the city, except where otherwise specified or indicated. 
Sign permits are not required for signs and sign-types described and identified below in this subsection. 
(1)  Street address signs and residential mailboxes. For each parcel within the city, one attached wall street address sign may be displayed. For parcels in residential use, the street address sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in sign area. For each parcel in non-residential use, the street address sign shall not exceed four square feet in sign area. In addition to street address signs, a residential mailbox with the address of the property affixed to it such that the address is no larger than one side of the mailbox shall be allowed for each residence in the city. 
(2)  Nameplate or occupant identification signs. For each residence, business or other occupancy within the city, one attached wall nameplate sign may be displayed. For residences the nameplate or occupant identification signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet in sign area. For any non-residential use, the nameplate or occupant identification sign shall not exceed four square feet in sign area. 
(3)  Non-commercial onsite parking space signs. Non-commercial onsite parking space number or identification signs, not exceeding one square foot of sign face per sign, shall be allowed on each parcel in non-commercial use having multiple parking spaces onsite. One such sign shall be allowed for each parking space. The maximum height for a freestanding or attached wall sign shall be six feet unless otherwise required by applicable law. 
(4)  Free expression signs. For each parcel within the city, one free expression sign not exceeding three square feet in sign area may be displayed on each frontage per parcel of land. The free expression sign may be displayed as an attached sign, window sign, or as a freestanding sign; if displayed as a freestanding sign, the free- standing sign shall not exceed three feet in height. A free expression sign is in addition to any other sign permitted under this Code and is permitted in any zoning district. Only one such sign shall be permitted on each parcel. 
(5)  Election signs. For each parcel within the city, election signs candidates or issues may be displayed on each frontage per parcel of land. Election signs may be displayed as an attached sign or as a freestanding sign. On parcels that are in residential use, election signs shall not exceed six square feet in sign area; and, if the election signs are displayed as freestanding signs on the parcel, the election signs shall not exceed six feet in height. On parcels that are in non-residential use, the election signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area; and, if the election signs are displayed as freestanding signs on the parcel, the election signs shall not exceed six feet in height. Election signs shall be removed within seven calendar days following the election to which it pertains. 
(6)  Artwork. Artwork is allowed in all districts. 
(7)  Flagpoles. One flagpole is allowed for each parcel. Flagpoles shall not exceed the maximum permitted height of the zoning district for the parcel on which the flagpole is located. 
(8)  Flags-government/public. There shall be a maximum of three government/public flags permitted on each lot within any zoning district. The flags shall be flown according to protocol established by the Congress of the United States of America for the Stars & Stripes. 
(9)  Warning signs and safety signs. Warning signs and safety signs, not exceeding four square feet in sign area, shall be allowed in all districts. The maximum height for these signs shall be six feet unless otherwise required by applicable law. 
(10)  Machinery and equipment signs. Machinery and equipment signs shall be allowed in all districts. 
(11)  Temporary construction signs. One temporary construction sign shall be allowed on each parcel within the city. Temporary construction signs shall not exceed six square feet in sign area, and six feet in height for residential properties, and 32 square feet in sign area, and ten feet in height for nonresidential properties. 
(12)  Temporary real estate signs. For each parcel within the city, one temporary real estate sign may be displayed on each frontage per parcel of land. However, when more than one dwelling unit or non-residential space on a parcel of land is for sale, lease, or rent, there shall only be one temporary window or attached real estate sign for each such unit or space that is separately owned. Temporary real estate signs shall not exceed three square feet in sign area, and three feet in height for residential properties, and 16 square feet in sign area, and six feet in height for nonresidential properties. The temporary real estate sign shall be removed immediately upon the sale, lease or rent of the real estate that was offered for sale, lease, or rent. 
(13)  Temporary garage-yard sale signs. For each parcel within the city, one temporary garage-yard sale sign may be displayed on each frontage per parcel of land. However, the sign shall only be displayed on the parcel of land upon which the garage sale is taking place. A temporary garage-yard sale sign shall not exceed three square feet in sign area, and three feet in height. A temporary garage-yard sale sign may not be displayed for a period longer than two days during any calendar month and shall be removed upon the conclusion of the sale. 
(14)  Temporary window signs. For each parcel within the city, one or more temporary window signs may be displayed on the inside of the window. On parcels that are in residential use, the temporary window sign(s) shall not exceed an aggregate of three square feet in sign area. On parcels that are in non-residential use, the temporary window sign(s) shall not exceed an aggregate of 24 square feet in sign area. Temporary window signs shall not cover more than 25 percent of any window surface. 
(15)  Temporary holiday and seasonal decorations. Temporary holiday and seasonal decorations shall be allowed in all districts. 
(16)  Temporary valet parking station signs. One temporary valet parking station sign no more than three square feet in sign area, and not more than three feet in height, shall be allowed on each parcel where the valet station is located. The temporary valet parking station sign shall only be visible during hours that the valet is operating, and shall be located on the same parcel as the valet station. 
(17)  Bus stop informational signs. Bus stop informational signs up to three square feet in area shall be allowed in all districts. These signs shall have a maximum height of six feet unless otherwise required by applicable law. 
(18)  Temporary banner signs. Temporary banner signs not exceeding 15 square feet in a residential zone and 48 square feet in a commercial zone may be displayed on property no more than four times per year and up to a maximum of 14 days per occurrence, with a minimum of 45 days between each occurrence. No temporary banner exceeding 15 square feet may be displayed without the issuance of an banner permit that is based upon guidelines providing specific criteria and that are not based upon the content (viewpoint) of the banner sign; however, until such criteria are established by resolution or other action by this council, no temporary banner sign exceeding 15 square feet in size shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Secs. 66-162—66-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DIMENSIONS 
 
Sec. 66-181. - Computation of sign dimensions generally. 
The computation of sign dimensions shall be as set forth in this division and in section 66-183. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-182. - Computation of total permitted sign area. 
(a)  Freestanding signs. 
(1)  Except as otherwise specifically stated in this chapter, the permitted sign area for freestanding signs shall be based upon one and one-half square feet for each linear foot of zone lot frontage. 
(2)  A freestanding sign shall be allowed to have an additional two square feet per sign face, provided that this allowance is used exclusively for the street address number, numbers or number range, depicted in Arabic numbers. The public purpose for the address is to assist the traveling public to locate specific places and to assist public safety and emergency service vehicles to rapidly locate addresses. 
(b)  Attached signs. 
(1)  Except as otherwise specifically stated in this chapter, the permitted sign area for attached signs shall be based upon one and one-half square feet for each linear foot of zone lot frontage, with a specified maximum for each respective land use, whichever is less. 
(2)  An attached sign shall be allowed to have an additional two square feet per sign for residential usage and an additional eight square feet for nonresidential usage, provided that this allowance is used exclusively for the street address number, numbers or number range depicted in Arabic numbers a minimum of three inches in height. The public purpose for the address is to assist the traveling public to locate specific places and to assist public safety and emergency service vehicles to rapidly locate addresses. 
(c)  Multiple-frontage lots. Zone lots fronting two or more streets are allowed the permitted signage for each frontage, but signage cannot be accumulated and used on one street in excess of that allowed for the zone lot based on that one street frontage. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-183. - Computation of sign area. 
(a)  The area of a sign shall be computed on the basis of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, other geometric figure, or combination thereof, that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, lighting or other display, together with any material, color or border trim forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. 
(b)  The area of a sign shall be computed on a per-sign-face basis and all requirements with respect to sign area reference the area of a single face of a sign. A double-faced sign shall be permitted to have the allowed area for a single-faced sign on each of the two faces of the double-faced sign. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-184. - Computation of sign height. 
(a)  The height of a freestanding sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at ground level to the top of any portion of the sign structure. In cases where the ground level cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be derived on the assumption that the elevation of the ground at the base of the sign is equal to the average elevation at the front property line of the zone lot. 
(b)  If a freestanding sign is on a parcel contiguous to an overpass or elevated road (excluding service roads) from which the sign is designed to be viewed, the height of the sign shall be measured from the highest point of the overpass or elevated road at the crown of the roadway surface to the top of the sign, this highest point to be determined by the average elevation between the perpendicular extension of the contiguous zone lot lines on which the sign is to be located, as such lot lines intersect the overpass or elevated road. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-185. - Computation of visual clearance and sight triangle. 
To  ensure adequate sight distance at the intersection of two public roadways and at the intersection of a public roadway and an accessway or driveway, the visual clearance and sight triangle shall conform to the criteria of the state department of transportation's manual of uniform minimum standards for design, construction, and maintenance for streets and highways. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Secs. 66-186—66-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITTED SIGNS AND STANDARDS BY LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 66-206. - Purpose and procedure. 
(a)  It is the intent of this division to regulate signs consistent with the land use classification that establishes the character of the area in which the signs are located. 
(b)  The city shall establish a definitive categorization, by land use plan or zoning district, to correlate such designations with the major land use classifications of the city's future land use plan. 
(c)  Within the major commercial land use classification, the differentiation between the commercial subcategories of neighborhood commercial and general commercial, shall be found in this division under subdivision V, relating to commercial land use classification. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Secs. 66-207—66-230. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Residential Land Use Classifications 
 
Sec. 66-231. - Permitted signs. 
The following types of signs are permitted in residential land use classifications, as depicted on the city's future land use plan map. 
(1)  Permanent monument identification signs located within 100 feet of a residential subdivision entrance to which it pertains for residential areas shall be permitted only as follows: 
a.  Number. A maximum of one sign is permitted for each platted subdivision or property entrance. 
b.  Area. The maximum area shall be 24 square feet per sign face. 
c.  Height. The maximum height for a freestanding sign is six feet. 
d.  Setbacks. There shall be a minimum setback of ten feet from the leading edge of the sign to the property line unless attached to a subdivision wall. 
(2)  Home occupational signs in residential districts shall be permitted only as follows: 
a.  Number. A maximum of one attached sign is permitted. 
b.  Area. The maximum area of the sign shall be one square foot per sign face. 
(3)  Non-commercial onsite directional signs. Non-commercial onsite directional signs, not exceeding three square feet in sign area, and three feet in height shall be allowed on each parcel or lot. These signs may not exceed 15 square feet in the aggregate. 
(4)  Signs for public/semipublic land uses shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 66-256. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Secs. 66-232—66-255. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Public/Semipublic Land Use Classifications 
 
Sec. 66-256. - Permitted signs. 
The following types of signs are permitted in public/semipublic land use classifications, as depicted on the city's future land use plan map: 
(1)  Non-commercial onsite directional signs. Non-commercial onsite directional signs, not exceeding three square feet in sign area, and three feet in height shall be allowed on each parcel or lot. These signs may not exceed 15 square feet in the aggregate. 
(2)  Freestanding signs shall be permitted only as follows: 
a.  Number. A maximum of one sign per zone lot is permitted. One additional sign may be permitted for each additional street frontage. For parcels with over 500 feet of street frontage on one right-of-way, one additional freestanding sign may be permitted, such additional sign to be spaced at least 300 feet from the other. 
b.  Area. The total maximum area for any freestanding sign or signs shall be that area calculated according to section 66-182(a) or 48 square feet per sign face, whichever is less. 
c.  Height. The maximum height for a freestanding sign shall be 12 feet. 
d.  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet from the property line to the leading edge of the sign. 
(3)  Attached signs shall be permitted only as follows: 
a.  Number. A maximum of two signs per zone lot is permitted. 
b.  Area. The maximum total area for all attached signs shall be that area calculated according to section 66-182(b) or 48 square feet, whichever is less. 
c.  Permitted signs. The following attached signs may be permitted, provided the cumulative area of the attached signs does not exceed the maximum area according to subsection b. above: 
1.  Wall sign and any associated lighting. 
2.  Canopy or awning sign. Canopy or awing sign may be permitted in lieu of a wall or window sign. Such canopy or awning and signage square footage combined shall not exceed the total permissible square footage for a wall or window sign. 
3.  Permanent window sign. 
4.  Projecting sign. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Secs. 66-257—66-280. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Mixed Use Classifications 
 
Sec. 66-281. - Generally. 
Within the mixed use classification, the city will apply the sign standards specified in section 66-282 based on the actual type of use to which the sign pertains, i.e. residential, office or commercial. It shall further be the prerogative of the city to determine which commercial subcategory, i.e., neighborhood, general, etc., applies to the commercial use within the mixed use classification, which determination shall be made consistent with the provisions of section 66-206(c). 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-282. - Permitted signs. 
(a)  Generally. The types of signs specified in subsections (b) and (c) of this section are permitted in mixed use (office land use) land use classifications as depicted on the city's future land use map. 
(b)  Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be permitted only as follows: 
(1)  Number. A maximum of one sign per zone lot is permitted. One additional sign may be permitted for each additional street frontage. For parcels with over 500 feet of street frontage on one right-of-way, one additional freestanding sign may be permitted, such additional sign to be spaced at least 300 feet from the other. 
(2)  Area. The total maximum area for any freestanding sign or signs shall be that area calculated according to section 66-182(a) or 50 square feet per sign face, whichever is less. 
(3)  Height. The maximum height for a freestanding sign is 12 feet. 
(4)  Setbacks. There shall be a minimum setback of ten feet from the property line to the leading edge of the sign. A freestanding sign shall not be located within any yard setback that is directly contiguous to or abuts a property zoned RR, RE, RS, RL or RU. 
(c)  Attached signs. Attached signs shall be permitted only as follows: 
(1)  Area. The maximum total area for all attached signs shall be that area calculated according to section 66-182(b) or 50 square feet, whichever is less. 
(2)  Permitted signs. The following attached signs may be permitted, provided the cumulative area of the attached signs does not exceed the maximum area according to subsection (1) above: 
a.  Wall sign. 
b.  Canopy or awning sign. Canopy or awing sign may be permitted in lieu of a wall or window sign. Such canopy or awning and signage square footage combined shall not exceed the total permissible square footage for a wall or window sign. 
c.  Permanent window sign. 
d.  Projecting sign. 
(3)  Time and temperature signs. The maximum area for the time and temperature portion only shall be 20 square feet per sign face. 
(4)  Directory/information signs. Directory/information signs shall be permitted only as follows: 
a.  Number. The number of directory/information signs shall be limited to two. 
b.  Area. The maximum area for a directory/information sign shall be 25 square feet per sign face for one sign, with a total of 50 square feet per zone lot. 
(5)  Residential land use. See section 66-231 et seq. 
(6)  Commercial land use. See section 66-306 et seq. 
(7)  Non-commercial onsite directional signs. Non-commercial onsite directional signs, not exceeding three square feet in sign area, and three feet in height shall be allowed on each parcel or lot. These signs may not exceed 15 square feet in the aggregate. 
(8)  Public/semipublic uses. Public/semipublic land uses shall follow the sign provisions of section 66-256. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Secs. 66-283—66-305. - Reserved.  
Subdivision V. - Commercial Land Use Classifications 
 
Sec. 66-306. - Generally. 
Within the commercial classification, the city will apply the sign standards specified in section 66-307 based on a determination as to which commercial subcategory, i.e. neighborhood, general or limited applies to a given commercial classification within the city, which determination shall be made consistent with the provisions of section 66-206(b) and (c). 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-307. - Permitted signs. 
(a)  Generally. The types of signs specified in subsections (b) and (c) of this section are permitted in commercial land use classifications, as depicted on the citywide future land use plan map. 
(b)  Neighborhood commercial subcategory. 
(1)  Freestanding signs shall be permitted only as follows: 
a.  Number. A maximum of one sign per zone lot is permitted. One additional sign may be permitted for each additional street frontage. For parcels with over 500 feet of street frontage on one right-of-way, one additional freestanding sign may be permitted, such sign to be spaced at least 300 feet from the other. 
b.  Area. The total maximum area for any freestanding sign or signs shall be that area calculated according to section 66-182(a) or 75 square feet per sign face, whichever is less. 
c.  Height. The maximum height for a freestanding sign is 15 feet. 
d.  Setbacks. A minimum of ten feet setback from the property line to the leading edge of the sign is required. Those signs set back an additional ten feet shall be permitted an increased allowance for height and sign area of ten percent. 
e.  Time and temperature signs. The maximum area for the time and temperature portions only shall be 20 square feet per sign face. 
f.  Menu display. One attached menu display sign of no more than six square feet of sign face area, located at the entrance, or service window of a restaurant, and one freestanding drive-through menu sign. The drive-through menu sign shall be placed so as to be viewed from the drive-through lane and shall contain only a listing of products offered for sale by the business with prices and may provide a mechanism for ordering products while viewing the drive-through menu sign. The drive-through menu sign shall have a surface area not exceeding 40 square feet. The top of the sign and its surrounding or supporting framing/structure shall not exceed nine feet above ground level. The drive-in menu sign lettering will be no larger than necessary in order to be read from a vehicle located in the drive-through lane. Drive-in restaurants may have one additional attached sign, not exceeding six square feet in total sign area, per drive in stall or bay. 
g.  Gasoline pumps. Gasoline service stations shall be permitted pump signage per pump as follows: two single-sided or one double-sided gasoline price sign not to exceed one (1) square foot per sign face. 
(2)  Attached signs shall be permitted only as follows: 
a.  Area. The maximum total area for all attached signs shall be that area calculated according to section 66-182(b) or 75 square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  Permitted signs. The following attached signs may be permitted, provided the cumulative area of the attached signs does not exceed the maximum area according to section 66-182: 
1.  Wall sign. 
2.  Canopy or awning sign. Canopy or awning sign may be permitted in lieu of a wall or window sign. Such canopy or awning and signage square footage combined shall not exceed the total permissible square footage for a wall or window sign. 
3.  Permanent window sign. 
4.  Projecting sign. 
c.  Tube graphics. The city will permit in addition to the allowable attached signage area, one linear foot of tube graphics for each linear front footage of building or appropriate portion of the building, with a maximum footage equal to the allowable square footage in the respective land use category. This extra allowance shall only be used as a linear display and not as a second conventional attached sign. 
(3)  Non-commercial onsite directional signs. Non-commercial onsite directional signs, not exceeding three square feet in sign area, and three feet in height shall be allowed on each parcel or lot. These signs may not exceed 15 square feet in the aggregate. 
(4)  Public/semipublic land uses shall follow the sign provisions of section 66-256. 
(c)  General commercial subcategory. 
(1)  Freestanding signs shall be permitted only as follows: 
a.  Number. A maximum of one sign per zone lot is permitted. One additional sign may be permitted for each additional street frontage. For parcels with over 500 feet of street frontage on one right-of-way, one additional freestanding sign may be permitted, such additional sign to be spaced at least 300 feet from the other. 
b.  Area. The total maximum area for any freestanding sign or signs shall be that area calculated according to section 66-182(a) or 100 square feet per sign face, whichever is less. 
c.  Height. Maximum height for a ground sign is 20 feet. 
d.  Setbacks. A minimum setback of ten feet from the property line to the leading edge of the sign is required. For each additional ten-foot setback, the applicant shall be permitted an additional ten percent for area and height not to exceed 30 percent. 
e.  Time and temperature signs. The maximum area for the time and temperature portion only shall be 20 square feet per sign face. 
f.  Theater/movie announcement sign. These signs are allowed in the commercial General district, with one additional sign for listing. The maximum size is 100 square feet. 
g.  Menu display. One attached menu display sign of no more than six square feet of sign face area, located at the entrance, or service window of a restaurant, and one freestanding drive-through menu sign. The drive-through menu sign shall be placed so as to be viewed from the drive-through lane and shall contain only a listing of products offered for sale by the business with prices and may provide a mechanism for ordering products while viewing the drive-through menu sign. The drive-through menu sign shall have a surface area not exceeding 40 square feet. The top of the sign and its surrounding or supporting framing/structure shall not exceed nine feet above ground level. The drive-in menu sign lettering will be no larger than necessary in order to be read from a vehicle located in the drive-through lane. Drive-in restaurants may have one additional attached sign, not exceeding six square feet in total sign area, per drive in stall or bay. 
h.  Gasoline pumps. Gasoline service stations shall be permitted pump signage per pump as follows: two single-sided or one double-sided gasoline price sign not to exceed one square foot per sign face. 
(2)  Attached signs shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  Area. The maximum total area for all attached signs shall be that area calculated according to section 66-182(b), or 100 square feet, whichever is less. Structures or portions of structures with a single occupant or single use utilizing in excess of 250 linear front feet may exceed the allowable square footage in increments of 25 square feet, maximum of three increments. To gain the next increment, the applicant must have at least half an increment or 12½ linear feet. 
b.  Permitted signs. The following attached signs may be permitted, provided the cumulative area of the attached signs does not exceed the maximum area according to subsection (2)a. above: 
1.  Wall sign. 
2.  Canopy or awning sign. Canopy or awning sign may be permitted in lieu of a wall or window sign. Such canopy or awning and signage square footage combined shall not exceed the total permissible square footage for a wall or window sign. 
3.  Permanent window sign. 
4.  Projecting sign. 
c.  Tube graphics. The city will permit in addition to the allowable attached signage area one linear foot of tube graphics for each linear front footage of building or appropriate portion of the building, with a maximum footage equal to the allowable square footage in the respective land use category. This extra allowance shall only be used as a linear display and not as a second conventional attached sign. 
(3)  The maximum area for all gasoline price display signs shall total no more than 24 square feet per sign face. 
(4)  Non-commercial onsite directional signs. Non-commercial onsite directional signs, not exceeding three square feet in sign area, and three feet in height shall be allowed on each parcel or lot. These signs may not exceed 15 square feet in the aggregate. 
(5)  Public/semipublic land uses shall follow the sign provisions of section 66-256. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Secs. 66-308—66-330. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VI. - Industrial Limited Warehouse Classifications 
 
Sec. 66-331. - Permitted signs. 
(a)  Generally. The types of signs specified in subsections (b)—(f) of this section are permitted in industrial land use classifications, as depicted on the city's future land use plan map, and the city's land use plan or zoning district correlation as determined by the respective local jurisdiction. 
(b)  Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be permitted only as follows: 
(1)  Number. A maximum of one sign per zone lot is permitted. One additional sign may be permitted for each additional street frontage. For parcels with over 500 feet of street frontage on one right-of-way, one additional freestanding ground sign may be permitted. Such additional sign must be spaced at least 300 feet from the other. 
(2)  Area. The total maximum area for any ground sign or signs shall be that area calculated according to section 66-182(a) or 75 square feet per sign face, whichever is less. 
(3)  Height. The maximum height for a ground sign is 20 feet. 
(4)  Setbacks. A ten-foot minimum setback from the property line to the leading edge of the sign is required. 
(5)  Time and temperature signs. The maximum area for the time and temperature portion only shall be 20 square feet per sign face. 
(6)  Menu display. One attached menu display sign of no more than six (6) square feet of sign face area, located at the entrance, or service window of a restaurant, and one freestanding drive-through menu sign. The drive-through menu sign shall be placed so as to be viewed from the drive-through lane and shall contain only a listing of products offered for sale by the business with prices and may provide a mechanism for ordering products while viewing the drive-through menu sign. The drive-through menu sign shall have a surface area not exceeding 40 square feet. The top of the sign and its surrounding or supporting framing/structure shall not exceed nine feet above ground level. The drive-in menu sign lettering will be no larger than necessary in order to be read from a vehicle located in the drive-through lane. Drive-in restaurants may have one additional attached sign, not exceeding six square feet in total sign area, per drive in stall or bay. 
(7)  Gasoline pumps. Gasoline service stations shall be permitted pump signage per pump as follows: two single-sided or one double-sided gasoline price sign not to exceed one square foot per sign face. 
(c)  Attached signs. Attached signs shall be permitted only as follows: 
(1)  Area. The maximum total area for all attached signs shall be that area calculated according to section 66-182(b) or 75 square feet per sign face, whichever is less. 
(2)  Permitted signs. The following attached signs may be permitted, provided the cumulative area of the attached signs does not exceed the maximum area according to subsection (1) above: 
a.  Wall sign. 
b.  Canopy or awning sign. Canopy or awning sign may be permitted in lieu of a wall or window sign. Such canopy or awning and signage square footage combined shall not exceed the total permissible square footage for a wall or window sign. 
c.  Permanent window sign. 
d.  Projecting sign. 
e.  Integral roof sign. 
(3)  Tube graphics. The city will permit, in addition to the allowable attached signage area, one linear foot of tube graphics for each linear front footage of building or appropriate portion of the building, with a maximum footage equal to the allowable square footage in the respective land use category. This extra allowance shall only be used as a linear display and not as a second conventional attached sign. 
(d)  Gasoline price display signs. The maximum area for all gasoline price display signs shall total 24 square feet per sign face. 
(e)  Non-commercial onsite directional signs. Non-commercial onsite directional signs, not exceeding three square feet in sign area, and three feet in height shall be allowed on each parcel or lot. These signs may not exceed 15 square feet in the aggregate. 
(f)  Public/semipublic land uses. Public/semipublic land uses shall follow the sign provisions of section 66-256. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Secs. 66-332—66-355. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SEVERABILITY 
 
Sec. 66-356. - In General. 
If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-357. - Severability where less speech results. 
Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in section 66-356, or elsewhere in this chapter, this Code, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter, even if such severability would result in a situation where there would be less speech, whether by subjecting previously exempt signs to permitting or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-358. - Severability of provisions pertaining to prohibited signs. 
Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in section 66-356, or elsewhere in this chapter, this Code, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article or any other law is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter that pertains to prohibited signs, including specifically those signs and sign-types prohibited and not allowed under section 66-8 of this chapter. Furthermore, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of section 66-10 is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of section 66-8. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 66-359. - Severability of prohibition on billboards. 
If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article and/or any other Code provisions and/or laws are declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect the prohibition on billboards as contained in this chapter and Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Chapter 70 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted May 12, 2015, amended Ch. 70 in its entirety to read as herein set out. The subsection numbering has been maintained per said ordinance. The former Ch. 70 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1991, §§ 2.00.01—2.03.00; 7.00.00—7.01.06; 9.00.01—9.01.07; 12.00.01—12.09.07; Ord. No. 03-97, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 23-2000, 8-8-00; Ord. No. 24-2000, 8-22-00; Ord. No. 01-2001, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 08-2002, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 09-2005, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 23-2005, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 11-2007, 8-14-07; and Ord. No. 29-2009, 9-23-09. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis. 
Cross reference— Any rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(9); buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and certain other public property, ch. 38; concurrency management and and multi-modal impact fees, ch. 54; development standards, ch. 58; natural resources, ch. 62; signs, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Provisions to regulate the use of land and water for those land use categories included in the land use element and ensure the compatibility of adjacent uses and provide for open space., F.S. § 164.3202(2)(b). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Purpose and intent. 
As provided for in F.S. ch. 163, it is "found and declared that the preservation or enhancement of the tax base from which a taxing authority (city) realizes tax revenues is essential to its existence and financial health; that the preservation and enhancement of such tax base (city tax base) is implicit in the purpose for which the taxing authority (city) is established." Therefore, the purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish regulations to preserve and enhance the city's tax base, as well as providing for the health, safety, and welfare of the residents and the businesses. 
Further, the purpose of this chapter is to describe the specific uses and restrictions that apply to zoning districts in the city. This chapter is intended to allow development and use of property only in compliance with the purpose and intent of this chapter, the goals, objectives and policies of the city as expressed in the future land use element of the city's comprehensive plan, and to help protect the stability of neighborhoods within the city. Further, limitations on uses and/or other restrictions within the zoning districts may also be governed by Pinellas Planning Council (PPC) countywide rules. Where there is a conflict between regulations contained in this chapter and the countywide rules, the countywide rules shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-2. - Definitions. 
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this chapter shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed so as to implement its intents and purposes and for implementation of the mandates of the comprehensive plan. Terms used in this chapter, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall have the meanings prescribed by reference to generally accepted engineering, planning, or otherwise professional terminology if technical; and otherwise, according to common usage or where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Except as otherwise noted, all other words shall have the meaning normally attributed to them. 
Abandonment means to discontinue or cease a use or activity or use of a building/structure for a period as specified in the Code, including but not limited to, vacating of a premises or building, discontinuance of utility service or non-operative status. 
Accessory means a building, structure or use that: 
(1)  Is subordinate to and serves a principal building and principal use; 
(2)  Is subordinate in area, square footage, height and purpose to the principal building and principal use served, except as provided for in this chapter; 
(3)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessities of the users or occupants of the principal building and principal use; and 
(4)  Is located on the same lot or parcel as the principal building and principal use, provided such use is in keeping with the purpose and intent of the district in which it is located. 
Accessory dwelling unit means an ancillary or secondary living unit that may or may not have a separate kitchen, bathroom and sleeping area, existing either within the same structure or on the same lot, as the primary dwelling unit. 
Acreage means the fee simple deeded acreage contained in a given lot or tract as platted and recorded in the official records of the county. 
Agricultural activities means crop production, including plant nurseries; the maintaining of livestock, including horses, dog kennels, animal boarding, and like uses. 
Alteration means any change to a development and/or site, including but not limited to, rearrangement, enlargement, extension, reduction, or moving of any structure or part thereof, and any change of electrical wiring, plumbing or heating system. 
Ancillary nonresidential use means a nonresidential use such as off-street parking, drainage retention areas, and open space buffer areas for an adjacent, contiguous, nonresidential use. 
Apartment building means a structure containing four or more rental living units. 
Assisted living facility (ALF) means a residential equivalent facility providing assisted living care for adults which may be independently sited or a component of a retirement community, comprised of dwelling units, a centralized kitchen facility (no unit kitchens or kitchenettes), whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide for a period exceeding 24-hour housing, food service and personal or therapeutic services as needed for seven or more persons, not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage, who require such services and to provide limited nursing services, when specifically licensed to do so by the state. 
Automobile or salvage yards or lots means a lot, group of contiguous lots or parcels used for the dismantling or wrecking of used vehicles and/or the storage and sale of used automotive parts. 
Base flood elevation means the elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
Building height means the vertical distance from the finished ground elevation to the highest point of the coping or roof, whichever is higher. 
Building lines means the extreme outer dimension of any structure, whether constructed or staked out for construction, including all structural components except the chimneys, cornices, sills or eaves; however, where the projection of any chimney, cornice, sill or eave extends more than three feet beyond the building line, the building line shall be considered to be three feet inside the outermost extension of any such projection. 
Building site area requirements means those portions of this chapter which regulate the size of the land areas upon which structures and development may be located. 
City manager designee (designee), means the city staff authorized by the city manager to perform the duties as described in this chapter. 
Clinic means a facility wherein professional services concerning personal health of humans are administered by medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths, optometrists, dentists or any other such profession, which may lawfully be practiced in the state. Persons treated shall not be lodged therein overnight. 
Coastal high hazard area (CHHA) means the area below the elevation of the category 1 storm surge line as established by a sea, lake and overland surges from hurricanes (SLOSH) computerized storm surge model, as reflected in the most recent regional evacuation study, storm tide atlas (hurricane evacuation level A). 
Conditional use means a use permitted in a zoning district only after it is authorized by the city council after a public hearing pursuant section 70-226 et seq. 
Condominium dwelling unit means a building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually and the structure, common areas and ancillary facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional undivided basis, and is typically governed by an owner's association. 
Continuing care means furnishing, pursuant to an agreement between the provider and a resident, shelter, food, and either nursing care or personal services. 
Conversion means the structural and spatial alteration of a residence to produce a different number of dwelling units than presently exists or any change from one use occupancy to another use. 
Countywide rules are administrative rules that apply to all municipalities adopted by the Pinellas Planning Council (PPC) that establish definitions, standards, criteria and procedures to implement and administer the countywide future land use plan, including but not limited to, what local government land use plan amendments require PPC review. 
Day care center includes any day nursery school, kindergarten, or other facility, as defined by state law which with or without compensation cares for five or more children 17 years of age or under, not related to the operator by blood, marriage or adoption, away from the child's own home. Such facilities shall be licensed and operated in strict accord with the provisions of state law. This term includes adult day care (over the age of 17 years) as defined by state law but does not include a family day care center as defined by state law. 
Density means the total number of dwelling units divided by the net land area of the building site. 
Design compatibility, means sensitivity of a building and site design to the existing character of a neighborhood, surrounding blocks, or historic or special area. This is measured by how the design of a building or project relates to the design elements of the adjacent building(s), surrounding natural/physical and manmade environment. Compatibility measures include, but are not limited to the following: building relationship to the street and adjacent development such as height, facade details, landscaping, activities); the rhythm of spacing between buildings; the use of building materials which match in dimension, color, pattern and finish/texture; architectural style and building scale and mass. These same measures apply to building additions. 
Development or development activity/site means the addition to, or improvement of, property, including but not limited to the following activities: 
(1)  Construction, clearing, filling, excavating, grading or paving or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil of the site. 
(2)  A change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure or on land or a material increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, or dwelling units in a structure or on land. 
(3)  Building or installing a new building/structure, walls/fences, sign, required landscaping or parking areas. 
(4)  Enlarging, replacing or substantially restoring a building/structure, sign or parking areas. 
(5)  Subdividing land into three or more parcels. 
Dwelling means a structure designed for residential occupancy with complete living facilities (such as separate cooking, bathroom and sleeping facilities), including single family, duplexes, triplexes, multifamily dwelling units and modular homes, but not including temporary lodging uses that contain one or more rooms including kitchen facilities. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means four or more dwelling units contained in one structure on a single lot or parcel and attached by common vertical walls. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a detached dwelling unit structure designed for and occupied exclusively by one family or group living home with six or fewer individuals. 
Dwelling, three-family (triplex) , means a building designed with three dwelling units attached to each other for occupancy by a single family in each unit. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex) , means a building designed with two dwelling units attached to each other for occupancy by a single family in each unit. 
Excavation means altering of earth material for purposes other than that incidental to and on the site of construction, including land balancing, authorized by site plan approval. (See section 70-911.) 
F.A.C. means Florida Administrative Code. 
Family means two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or of more than two unrelated persons living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit. 
Floor area, gross, means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but not including interior parking spaces or loading spaces for motor vehicles. 
Floor area ratio means a measurement of the intensity of building development on a site. The ratio is the relationship between the gross floor area on a site and the net land area and is derived by adding together the gross floor area of all buildings on the site and dividing by the net land area. 
F.S. means Florida Statutes. 
Group living home, category A, means a residential facility designed to be occupied by seven to 14 individuals along with a maximum of two full-time supervisors or house parents. These facilities shall provide a physical appearance and a style of life that makes them compatible with other dwellings existing in the neighborhood. Facilities may include foster care facilities, ALFs, displaced youth and adult shelters, care of the developmentally disabled (as defined by state and federal law) and similar family group living facilities. Such facilities are subject to separation requirements pursuant to F.S. ch. 419. 
Group living home, category B, includes those uses allowed in category A group living home designed to be occupied by more than 14 individuals along with a maximum of two resident supervisors or house parents. Additionally, these facilities may offer a higher level of personal and therapeutic care and may include mental health care, spouse abuse care, offender halfway houses, and similar care facilities. These facilities shall provide a physical appearance and a style of life that makes them compatible with other dwellings existing in the neighborhood. Such facilities are subject to separation requirements pursuant to F.S. ch. 419. 
Guest cottage aka mother-in-law suite and like terms means sleeping quarters within a detached accessory structure, which is to be used exclusively for housing members of the family occupying the main structure, or other nonpaying guests. A guest cottage shall not have kitchen facilities nor to be rented nor otherwise used as a separate dwelling. A guest cottage shall not be permitted to have a separate electric or water meter. 
Height of building/structure means the vertical distance measured from the finished grade at the base of the building/structure to the highest point of the building/structure or roof peak or as may be defined in other sections of this chapter. For buildings/structures within the floodplain, height is measured from base flood elevation. 
Home occupation means an accessory use in a residential area consisting of an occupation or activity performed entirely within a dwelling and only by members of a family permanently living therein. The home occupation is to be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and is not to change the residential character thereof. (See article X.) 
Hospital means a medical facility providing overnight care licensed to operate by the state department of children and family services as such. 
Hotel means a structure containing a temporary lodging use with sleeping accommodations in which guests are lodged without provision for the hook-up of a stove in any individual room or suite. 
Household pets means animals that are normally considered as household pets and that can be maintained and cared for within the living space of a residence. Such animals may include but are not limited to dogs, cats, small rodents, small reptiles, fish, small birds, such as parrots and parakeets and other similar animals. 
Impervious surface means a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant or prevents infiltration by stormwater. It includes surfaces such as compacted sand, limerock, or clay, as well as building foundations and paved surfaces such as streets, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar surfaces. 
Impervious surface ratio is a measure of the intensity of land use that is determined by dividing the square footage of all impervious surfaces by the square footage of the net land area of a building site or lot. 
Improvement means any manmade, immovable item (including but not limited to buildings, fences/walls, signs walls, roofs, and accessory structures) that becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to real estate or development site. 
Independent-living unit means a dwelling unit with kitchen facilities for a resident where the residents are capable of caring for themselves and do not require a provider to provide food or personal services. 
Junkyard means a parcel of land upon which the principal or accessory use is the accumulation of used, discarded or worn-out materials or manufactured products, which may or may not be reusable or saleable. This shall not include recycling operations for metal, paper or similar materials when located entirely within an enclosed building. 
Intensity means the measure of permitted development expressed as a maximum impervious surface ratio and/or floor area ratio per acre of net land area. 
Kennel means an establishment where domestic animals are bred, boarded, sold or treated for profit or public service. 
Land development code (LDC or code) means the city's set of regulations governing land development, which includes, but is not limited to, chapters 46, 50, 54, 58, 59, 62, 66 and this chapter. 
Livestock means those animals normally considered as farm animals such as cattle, goats, sheep, horses, ponies, mules, pigs, chickens, ducks, geese, other similar farm animals and wild animals licensed pursuant to state law. This definition is not intended to include household pets or wild animals living within their native habitat. 
Living area, residential, means the floor area of any residential structure (measured in square feet), including only those areas of such a structure which are habitable the year round. Garages, screened porches, breezeways, terraces, stoops, carports, patios or other similar areas shall not be considered part of the living area. 
Loading space means a space that provides for the loading or unloading of delivery vehicles. 
Lot means an area of land designated on a recorded plat as an individual tract. 
Lot, corner means a lot with boundaries abutting two intersecting streets. 
Lot depth means the distance measured in the mean direction of the side lines of the lot from the midpoint on the front lot line to the midpoint of the opposite main rear line of the lot. 
Lot, double-frontage, means a lot having frontage on two or more streets, but not necessarily at the intersection of two streets. 
Lot of record, means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the circuit court clerk of the county or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the circuit court clerk of the county prior to the enactment of this chapter. 
Lot width means the width of the lot as measured along the front building setback line. 
Manufactured home means a modular home which is built to state standards and approved by the state department of community affairs and meets the requirements of the state building code. 
Mobile home means a modular home which is built to federal standards and approved by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development but does not meet the requirements of the state building code. 
Mobile home park means a lot or parcel of land upon which there are four or more mobile home sites. 
Mobile home site means a space or plot of ground within a mobile home park, designated for the accommodation of not more than one mobile home. 
Mobile home subdivision means a platted residential subdivision in which the dwelling units consist of mobile homes and accessory residential structures. 
Modular homes means one or more rooms including kitchen facilities designed as a unit for one-family occupancy that is wholly manufactured to include electrical and plumbing facilities at an off-site location and requiring no on-site inspection of interior components. 
Motel means a structure containing a temporary lodging use that provides lodging for guests and having rental units that may provide food preparation facilities for occupants. 
Net land area means that for the purpose of computing density/intensity it shall be that total land area within the property boundaries of the subject parcel or lot, and specifically exclusive of any submerged land or public right-of-way. 
Nonconformance means any lot, use or structure or site development that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter and which use or building/structure was legally in existence prior to the enactment of the Code. 
Nursing home means any institution, building, residence, private home, or other place, whether operated for profit or not, including a place operated by a county or municipality, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide for a period exceeding 24 hours, nursing care, personal care, or custodial care for three or more persons not related to the owner or manager by blood or marriage, who by reason of illness, physical infirmity, or advanced age require such services. This definition does not include hospitals, clinics or similar establishments devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured and providing care and treatment primarily for the acutely ill when specifically licensed to do so pursuant to state regulations. The facility may be permitted as an accessory use and shall be considered a sheltered nursing facility that is designed for the exclusive use of the residents of a specific community and not the general public. 
Official maps means those land use and zoning maps adopted by the city council. 
Open space means the land and/or water areas (excluding Lake Seminole, and Long and Cross Bayous) between and around structures, including required recreation areas, up to 25 percent of stormwater detention areas, landscaped areas or preservation areas that are required to be maintained with vegetative growth. This shall not include parking, vehicular use or any paved or graveled areas. 
Owner means a person who, alone, jointly or severally with others, or in a representative capacity (including without limitation, an authorized agent, attorney, executor, personal representative or trustee) has legal or equitable title to any property in question, or a tenant, if the tenancy is chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of the property. 
Parcel means any individual unplatted tract of land under uniform ownership, within legally established property lines. If, however, the property lines are such as to defeat the purposes of this land development code or lead to absurd results, then the community development director shall delineate the parcel boundaries. 
Parcel, corner, means a parcel with boundaries abutting two intersecting streets. 
Parcel depth means the distance measured in the mean direction of the side lines of the parcel from the midpoint of the front parcel line to the midpoint of the opposite main rear line of the parcel. 
Parcel, double-frontage, means a parcel having street frontage on two or more streets, but not necessarily at the intersection of the streets. 
Parcel width means the width of the parcel as measured at the building front setback line. For corner or through lots, width shall be measured at the building front setback line on the narrowest property line width abutting a street. 
Personal services include but are not limited to such services as individual assistance with or supervision of essential activities of daily living, such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, ambulating, housekeeping, supervision of self-administered medication and arrangement for appropriate medical, dental, nursing or mental health service. 
Professional office means a business or professional use intended to serve the public on or from the premises but not including the on-premises storage for sale and/or the sale of any product or equipment nor the providing of personal services such as barbershop, beauty parlor, tailoring, and shoe repair. 
Property line means a line that separates a lot or parcel from an adjoining lot or parcel or right-of-way. 
Provider means the owner or operator, whether a natural person, partnership, unincorporated association, or corporation, whether operated for profit or not, which owner or operator undertakes to provide continuing care to individuals for remuneration for the period of care. 
Public/semipublic uses means institutional uses such as facilities and services of a public, private or quasi-public nature, including educational, medical and government, civic uses such as schools, hospitals, community centers and religious facilities; and transportation/utility uses that serve the community. 
Recreational vehicle means the following types of vehicles: 
(1)  Travel trailer means a vehicle, portable structure built on a chassis and towed with a standard automobile, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses, permanently identified "travel trailer" by the manufacturer on the trailer and when factory-equipped for the road. 
(2)  Pickup coach means a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses. 
(3)  Motor home means a portable dwelling designed to be used for travel, recreation and vacation uses, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
(4)  Camping trailer means a collapsible temporary dwelling structure covered with a water-repellent fabric, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses. 
(5)  Auto camper means a lightweight, collapsible unit that fits on top of an automobile or into the trunk with the cover removed, and designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses. 
Recreational vehicle park means a lot or parcel of land upon which spaces are occupied or intended for occupancy by recreational vehicles designed for travel, recreation and vacation use. 
Religious facility/institution means a structure in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. A place of religious assembly shall also include structures for related religious activities on the same site such as educational buildings, administrative buildings and sleeping quarters for personnel (parsonage, convent, monastery, etc.). As part of this definition, uses such as daycare, elementary or secondary schools, colleges/universities, assisted living facilities, professional residential facilities, and emergency shelters are not included as "related religious activities" without proper approval for such use. 
Residential equivalent use means a residential-like accommodation other than a dwelling unit, including bed and breakfast, group home, congregate care, nursing home and comparable assisted living facilities. Such uses are eligible to employ the residential equivalent standards as set forth in this chapter for the calculation of density/intensity. No such use shall be eligible to employ the residential equivalent standards for density/intensity for any household that qualifies as a dwelling unit, including any type of use authorized by F.S. ch. 419, community residential homes, which is entitled to be treated as a dwelling unit. 
Retirement community means a congregate community designed and intended to provide housing and specialized needs for a resident population of adults, age 55 years or older, and consisting of independent-living dwelling units, assisted-living dwelling units and/or nursing facilities, where continuing care is provided per a written agreement between the provider and resident. 
Right-of-way means the area of a highway, road, street or way reserved for public use, whether established by prescription, dedication, gift, purchase, eminent domain or any other legal means. Alleys are specifically excluded from the above provisions. 
Satellite antenna means any parabolic or spherical antenna designed to receive television or other signals from orbiting satellites or other devices. A satellite antenna shall be considered as an accessory structure except where it is part of a public utility. 
Setback means the shortest required dimension in feet from the nearest front, side or rear property line to a maximum permitted building line or area that permits a use or structure, as prescribed in section 70-865. 
Shopping center means a grouping of retail stores erected upon a parcel, lot or contiguous lots. 
Sign means any combination of structure and message in the form of an outdoor sign, display, device, figure, drawing, painting, message, placard, poster, billboard, advertising structure, advertisement, logo, symbol, or other form, whether placed individually or on a V-type, back-to-back, side-to-side, or used to advertise or inform, any part of the advertising message or informative contents of which is visible any place and as further defined in chapter 66. 
Solar energy system means a solar collection (such as solar panels) or other device or structural design feature of a structure that relies upon sunshine as an energy source and is capable of collecting, distributing and storing the sun's radiant energy to use for water heating, space heating or cooling or other applications. 
Special exception means a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the particular zoning district or classification and which must be approved pursuant to this chapter, article III. 
Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of the structure such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders except for the repair or replacement thereof. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the land or attachment to something having a permanent location on the land. Fences a maximum of six feet in height, sidewalks, patio slabs, driveways, paved parking lots, and utility poles shall not be considered as structures. Above-ground propane/utility tanks and generators on single-family lots shall not be considered a structure, but placement of these tanks will be determined by the city upon application and a subsequent site visit before permit approval. 
Submerged land means the area situated below the mean high water line or the ordinary high water line of a standing body of water, including estuary, lake, pond, river or stream. For the purpose of this definition, drainage detention areas created as a function of development that are recorded on an approved final site plan or other authorized development order action of the city, and wetlands landward of the mean and/or ordinary high water line shall not be considered submerged land, and thus may be included in the computation of net land area for the purpose of determining permitted density/intensity. 
Substantial deviation means any change to an accepted overall development plan, which creates a reasonable likelihood of adverse impact to any devoted portion of the project or adjacent properties. 
Temporary lodging unit means an individual room, rooms or suite within a temporary lodging use designed to be occupied as a single unit for temporary occupancy. 
Temporary lodging use means a facility containing one or more temporary lodging units, the occupancy of which occurs, or is offered or advertised as being available, for a term of less than one month, more than three times in any consecutive 12-month period. In determining whether a property is used as a temporary lodging use, such determination shall be made without regard to the form of ownership of the property or unit, or whether the occupant has a direct or indirect ownership interest in the property or unit; and without regard to whether the right of occupancy arises from a rental agreement, other agreement, or the payment of consideration. 
Tourist facility use means those facilities and services, such as retail shops, eating and drinking establishments, meeting space and recreation facilities designed primarily to serve tourists, visitors, and seasonal residents in conjunction with the residential and temporary lodging uses where provided for in the resort facilities categories. 
Variance means a modification of some particular requirement of this chapter that may be granted by the developmental review board in order to alleviate some unique and unnecessary hardship that may result from a literal enforcement of the provisions of this land development code with respect to the parcel involved. 
Vehicle use area means an area used for circulation, loading and parking, except the display of automobiles for sale, lease or repair, motorized vehicles or vessels for sale, lease, repair, or a junk automobile, vehicle or vessel salvage yard. 
Veterinary clinic or hospital means an establishment where domestic animals or pets are bred, boarded, sold or treated for profit or public service. 
Yard means that open area of a lot or parcel provided as a setback area or unoccupied by any structure. 
Yard, front, means a yard across the full width of the lot or parcel extending from the nearest wall or other vertical portion of the structure to the front line of the lot or parcel. 
Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot or parcel and measured between the rear line of the lot or parcel and the nearest wall or other vertical portion of the main structure. 
Yard, side, means an open unoccupied space, on the same lot or parcel with a structure between the nearest wall or other vertical portion of the structure and the side line of the lot or parcel extending through from the front yard to the rear yard or to the rear line of the lot or parcel where no rear yard is required. 
Zoning district means an area of the city designated by a single zone classification with uniform use regulations. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-3. - Conflicting provisions. 
(1)  Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of the chapter are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the more restrictive will control, to the extent permitted by law. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions or more stringent controls as determined by the city. 
(2)  Conflict with county regulations. If the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the county countywide plan and/or rules, of if they conflict with said plan or rules, the more restrictive provision will control. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes the greater restrictions or more stringent controls as determined by the city. 
(3)  Conflict with other city regulations. If the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the goals, objectives or policies of the city's comprehensive plan, the comprehensive plan shall govern. If the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with or in conflict with provisions found in other city adopted ordinances or land development regulations, the more restrictive provision shall apply. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes the greater restrictions or more stringent controls as determined by the city. 
(4)  Conflict with private agreements and covenants . This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties, except as provided for by state or federal law, judicial decision, or in this chapter. If the provisions of this chapter impose a greater restriction than imposed by a private agreement, the provisions of this chapter will control as allowed by law. If the provisions of a valid, enforceable private agreement impose a greater restriction than this chapter, the private agreement will control. The city does not enforce nor maintain a record of private agreements. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-4—70-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-36. - Authority. 
The city manager or city manager authorized designee shall interpret, administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-37. - Other employees. 
There shall also be employed by the city such other employees as the city council may authorize and determine for the purpose of assisting the city manager in the performance of his/her duties. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-38. - Duties. 
In administering, interpreting and enforcing this land development code, the city manager or city manager designee shall issue all permits as required under this land development code and collect all fees as required. The city manager, or city manager designee, shall also perform such other duties that are normal to the operation of the community development department, including the supervision of any employees hired under section 70-37. Interpretation and application of any provisions of this chapter shall be pursuant to chapter 46. Where any provision of this chapter conflicts with other code provisions or the comprehensive plan, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-39. - Enforcement procedure. 
Any person may report a violation of this chapter to the community development department. Enforcement provisions shall be pursuant to chapter 46. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-40. - Zoning. 
(a)  General information. Prior to the use of any land or structure or the expansion of any use of land or structure and prior to the issuance of a building permit, a zoning approval must be obtained. For the purpose of this land development code a zoning approval is defined as a lawful written certification granted to an applicant indicating that the zoning district classification, property legal description, authorized use, required setbacks, street frontage, site area requirements, height and other such similar requirements of this land development code are in compliance with this Code. A zoning approval shall be dated and signed by an authorized employee of the community development department. The issuance of a business tax receipt may serve as one form of such approval. The issuance of a zoning approval does not exempt an applicant from complying with all laws (state, regional regulatory authorities and federal) properly affecting the use or development of land. The applicant is responsible for acquiring such approvals regardless of any other provisions of this land development code. Failure to obtain such approval shall be deemed a violation of this land development code. 
(b)  Issuance and conditions. 
(1)  Zoning approvals shall be issued by the community development department. 
(2)  All requests for zoning approval, except for the issuance of a local business tax receipt, shall include: 
a.  A legal description of the property for which the request is made. 
b.  A survey of the subject property prepared by a surveyor registered to practice in the state (this shall only be required for those approvals that will permit additional structures, fences or walls on site, but this requirement shall exclude the siting of a mobile home within an existing mobile home park or subdivision). 
c.  A description of the work for which the approval is requested. 
d.  A detailed plot plan, drawn to scale, showing all existing structures and uses, and all proposed structures and uses. 
e.  A drainage plan may be required per the applicable section(s) of the code. 
(3)  Fees are as set forth by the city council. 
(4)  No zoning approval shall be issued for any proposed development until a final site plan has been approved (if required) as provided in this chapter. 
(5)  No zoning approval or approval for building permit shall be issued unless the request for such meets all applicable requirements of this land development code. 
(6)  The issuance of a zoning approval does not exempt an applicant from complying with all other laws properly affecting the use or development of land, including but not limited to other zoning requirements, building regulations, environmental regulations, subdivision requirements, and other similar laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(c)  Submittal of application to department. Prior to issuance of any local business tax receipt to any new applicant for a local business tax receipt or to any applicant who wishes to change the location of any existing licensed occupation with a local business tax receipt within the incorporated area of the city, the licensing officer is requested to submit the application to the community development department for its approval. No such application or local business tax receipt shall be approved or issued by the department unless the use for which applied conforms to all the requirements of this land development code. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-41—70-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 
 
Sec. 70-191. - Definition, purpose and intent. 
Special exception uses are those uses that because of the nature of the use and/or its intensity (density, FAR, building types), would not be appropriate generally, but may by addressing their impacts have some degree of design and use compatibility with the uses within a zoning district. Special exception uses require additional development design standards or conditions to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses and the development character of the surrounding neighborhood. Conditions of approval may require more restrictive development standards than established within a zoning district or code, such as setbacks, building height and landscape buffer requirements to mitigate adverse impacts and ensure compatibility. 
Special exceptions are reviewed by the developmental review board, pursuant to public hearing notice requirements of section 50-199(b), which makes a recommendation to the city council. A special exception may be permitted in any specified zoning district when authorized by the city council at a public hearing pursuant to notice requirements of section 50-199(b) and only after the applicant demonstrates compliance with the standards specified in this article and chapter, and the code. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-192. - Applicant requirements. 
A completed application for a special exception must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An application form completed by the applicant along with all required supporting documents, as listed on the application form. 
(2)  A fee as established by the city council. 
(3)  A detailed survey or site plan, as required by the community development director, drawn to scale, no larger than 11 inches by 17 inches, showing location, setbacks and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures and other improvements such as signs and provisions for off-street parking, landscaping, stormwater. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-193. - General standards. 
The standards described for special exception uses contained in this section shall supplement and be in addition to all other standards and criteria required within this chapter and the code. Prior to recommending approval of a special exception use and site plan, the developmental review board shall ensure that: 
(1)  All structures and site development uses shall be adequately separated from adjacent and nearby uses by screening devices and/or open area and provide for compatibility with the existing natural environment of the site and adjacent uses and neighborhoods. 
(2)  Concentration of the same or similar uses and/or structures, in surrounding the neighborhood. 
(3)  Provides sufficient off-street parking and creates no vehicular parking circulation or traffic problems on residential streets. 
(4)  Appropriate drives (location of entry and exit points), walks and buffers are installed. 
(5)  The proposed use will be in keeping with the purpose and intent of this chapter and code and will not adversely affect properties in the vicinity of the proposed use. 
(6)  The setback requirements of the district in which the use is to be located shall be complied with, unless varied by the developmental review board at the hearing. 
(7)  The use shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to state law. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-194. - Additional standards. 
In recommending approval of a special exception, the developmental review board may also establish and require additional safeguards to ensure proper operation of the use and provide protection to the surrounding area. Such safeguards may include but are not limited to: 
(1)  A time limit for acquiring development authorization and/or development completion; 
(2)  Hours of operation; and 
(3)  Any other appropriate requirements to ensure mitigation of adverse impacts and compatibility as determined by the developmental review board. 
The board shall have authority to grant variances at the hearing. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-195. - Special exception approval and changes. 
(1)  In granting any special exception, the developmental review board may recommend or city council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards to ensure proper compliance with the general spirit, purpose and intent of the land development code. Noncompliance with such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the land development code and subject to code enforcement action pursuant to chapter 2. 
(2)  The special exception use and site plan, once approved, shall become a condition upon which the use and structures shown thereon are permitted, and any change or addition shall constitute a violation of the special exception approval unless such change is submitted to and approved by the city council. 
(3)  Prior to the issuance of a zoning approval for a special exception use, a final site plan as specified in chapter 50, shall be completed and approved, when required. All site plan requirements, including any specific conditions of the conditional use, shall be adhered to; and the approval of any special exception use shall not be deemed an automatic approval of the site plan. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-196. - Appeals. 
An appeal of a special exception use decision by the city council is to circuit court pursuant to state law procedures. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-197. - Expiration and reapplications. 
(1)  A special exception use issued under the provisions of this article shall automatically expire and become void if no construction has begun on a new building or an existing building has not been occupied within one year from the date of granting such special exception use by the city council. In the event of an appeal to circuit court, then the expiration date will be from the date of decision by the circuit court, including any appeals. 
(2)  A special exception use granted by the city council shall be deemed to automatically expire and become void if a structure or use of land that is the subject of the special exception has been discontinued or removed for a period of 180 consecutive days. A statement of this provision shall be included as a condition of any approval granted by the city council. 
(3)  No new application for an identical special exception on the same parcel shall be accepted for consideration within a period of six months following a decision of denial by the city council (unless denied without prejudice). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-198—70-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONDITIONAL USES 
 
Sec. 70-226. - Definition, purpose and intent. 
A conditional use may be permitted in any specified zoning district when authorized by the city council. Conditional uses may be essentially desirable, necessary or convenient to the community, its citizenry or to substantial segments thereof, but which by their nature or in their operation have potentially adverse or objectionable features that are occasionally attributable to such use. Such use shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan. Conditional uses require additional development design standards or conditions to ensure design and use compatibility with adjacent uses and the development character of the surrounding neighborhood. Conditions of approval may require more restrictive development standards than established within a zoning district or the code, such as setbacks, building height and landscape buffer requirements to mitigate adverse impacts and ensure compatibility with surrounding properties. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate compliance with the standards and requirements of this article, chapter, and the code, as well as with specific conditions that may be required by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-227. - Application requirements. 
An application for a conditional use must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  A completed application form, along with all required supporting documents. 
(2)  A fee as established by the city council. 
(3)  A detailed survey or site plan, as required by the community development director, drawn to scale no larger than 11 inches by 17 inches showing location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures and other improvements and setbacks of same and provisions for signage, off-street parking, and landscaping. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-228. - Hearing procedures. 
All requests for conditional use shall be heard pursuant to public hearing requirements outlined in section 50-200(c)(2). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-229. - General standards. 
The standards described for conditional uses contained in this section shall supplement and be in addition to all other standards and criteria required within this chapter and the code. Prior to granting conditional use approval, the city council shall ensure that: 
(1)  All structures and site development uses shall be separated from adjacent and nearby uses by appropriate screening devices or landscaped open area and provide for compatibility with adjacent uses and neighborhoods. 
(2)  Excessive vehicular traffic is not generated on residential streets, and no vehicular parking or other traffic problem is created. 
(3)  Appropriate drives (location of entry and exit points), walks and parking areas are proposed so that no vehicular traffic or parking problems are created. 
(4)  Drainage problems will not be created on the subject property or adjacent properties. 
(5)  All provisions and requirements of the zoning district in which the project is located will be met. 
(6)  The conditional use shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan. 
(7)  In approving a conditional use, the city council may establish and require additional safeguards to ensure proper operation of the use and provide protection to the surrounding area. Such safeguards may include but are not limited to: 
a.  A time limit for acquiring development authorization; 
b.  Hours of operation; 
c.  Additional setbacks; 
d.  Capacity of the use; and 
e.  Any other appropriate requirements to ensure mitigation of adverse impacts and compatibility as determined by the city council. 
If any variance is requested for the project, the developmental review board shall consider the variance request and make a recommendation to the city council prior to the city council hearing for a conditional use request. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-230. - Conditional use approval and amendments. 
(1)  In granting any conditional use, the city council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards to ensure proper compliance with the general spirit, purpose and intent of the land development code. Noncompliance with such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the land development code and subject to code enforcement action pursuant to chapter 2. 
(2)  The conditional use and site plan, once approved, shall become a condition upon which the use and structures shown thereon are permitted; and any change or addition shall constitute a violation of the conditional use approval unless such change is submitted to and approved by the city council. 
(3)  Prior to the issuance of a zoning approval, for a conditional use, a final site plan as specified in chapter 50, article III, shall be completed and approved, when required. All site plan requirements, including any specific conditions of the conditional use, shall be adhered to; and the approval of any conditional use shall not be deemed an automatic approval of the site plan. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-231. - Expiration and reapplication. 
(1)  A conditional use issued under the provisions of this article shall automatically expire and become void if no construction has begun or an existing building has been occupied by said use within one year from the date of granting such conditional use by the city council. In the event of judicial proceedings to appeal the city council's decision, then the expiration date will be from the date of entry of the final order in such proceedings, including all appeals. 
(2)  A conditional use granted by the city council shall be deemed to automatically expire if a structure or use of land that is the subject of the conditional use has been discontinued or removed for a period of 180 consecutive days. A statement of this provision shall be included as a condition of any approval granted by the city council. 
(3)  No new application for an identical conditional use on the same parcel shall be accepted for consideration within a period of six months following a decision of denial by the city council (unless denied without prejudice). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-232. - Judicial review. 
A party seeking judicial appeal of a conditional use decision shall have 30 calendar days from the date of the public hearing or as prescribed by Florida Statutes, that resulted in the decision to bring the appropriate legal action. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-233—70-305. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-306. - Districts established. 
Land use classifications for the city are established by the comprehensive plan. These land use classifications and the zoning districts must be consistent. Refer to the comprehensive plan for the definitions and general allowable uses of each use classification. The zoning districts match the land use classifications, and the specific types of uses and development standards are enumerated in more detail in this article and the code. Where a use is not specifically enumerated as a permitted, special exception or conditional use within a zoning district, such use is deemed to be prohibited, unless such use is approved by the city manager or designee, as being similar in nature to the range of permissible uses within the applicable zoning district, and is consistent with the intent and purpose of said district and underlying future land use category. 
In addition, certain uses are subject to additional standards and/or limitations as prescribed in the comprehensive plan and this chapter, including but not limited to, article VII, accessory structures and uses; article IX, supplementary development regulations; article X, specific use supplemental development regulations; and uses located within environmentally sensitive lands are subject to chapter 62, article III. Further, limitations on uses and development may also apply to properties located within the coastal high hazard area. 
Subject only to consistency with the city comprehensive plan and the countywide plan and rules, any public facility(ies) or project(s) shall be a permitted use or activity in any zoning district when approved by the city council through the city's capital improvement program, through a capital budget approval or approvals by the city council, through the city council's approval of the city's annual fiscal year budget, or any other formal approval of the city council. Said city council approved public facility(ies) or project(s) shall automatically be deemed to have met all of the provisions contained within all of the chapters of the land development code. 
Existing development is also subject to chapter 50 related to nonconforming structures, sites, uses and other land development code standards and requirements. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-307—70-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL RURAL (RR) 
 
Sec. 70-321. - Purpose. 
The RR district is comprised of large lot, rural/agricultural type of development. Urbanization of these areas is intended to be very limited with primary uses to consist of single-family dwellings in a rural environment, including limited agricultural activities. This district shall include those areas indicated on the zoning atlas maps as RR. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-322. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(2)  Agricultural activities, including the boarding of horses provided the three animals per acre limit is not exceeded; and the sale of products raised or produced on the premises. 
(3)  Home occupations (see article X). 
(4)  Accessory dwelling unit (see article X). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-323. - Special exceptions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article III, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Day care center (see article X). 
(2)  Group living homes, category B. The maximum number of beds shall be three beds times the permitted density. 
(3)  Religious facilities/institutions. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-324. - Conditional uses. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article IV, the following conditional uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Agricultural activities other than those permitted in section 70-322. Such activities shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Livestock raising. 
b.  Dairy farming. 
c.  Poultry and egg production. 
d.  Apiculture. 
e.  Aviaries. 
f.  Kennel facilities. 
g.  Plant nurseries. 
h.  Other similar agricultural pursuits. 
(2)  Utility substation. 
(3)  Government buildings and public uses (subject to applicable thresholds pursuant to the comprehensive plan). 
(4)  Bed and breakfast facilities, regulated as residential equivalent uses, governed by the applicable comprehensive plan category standard. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-325. - Property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure in the RR district shall exceed 45 feet, except as otherwise provided in article IX. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site area requirements are as follows (see chapter 50 for lots or parcels of substandard dimensions): 
Minimum Area two acres 
Minimum Lot Width 90 ft. 
Minimum Lot Depth 100 ft. 
(c)  Maximum building coverage. The maximum area of the lot or parcel which may be covered by vertical structures shall not exceed 25 percent. The impervious surface ratio shall not exceed 0.60. 
(d)  Setback requirements . The following minimum setbacks shall be required, except as otherwise provided in article IX: 
(1)  Front: 50 feet. 
(2)  Side: 25 feet. 
(3)  Rear: 25 feet. 
(e)  Maximum density. The density of the RR district shall not exceed one-half dwelling unit per 43,560 square feet of land area, or the density permitted by the comprehensive land use plan, whichever is less. 
(f)  All uses considered as nonresidential approved under this section shall not exceed a floor ratio of 0.30. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL ESTATE (RE) 
 
Sec. 70-326. - Purpose. 
The RE district is comprised of rural estate residential type of development. Complete urbanization of these areas is not intended as the development of them is primarily of the home/garden residential type and a rural atmosphere is maintained. This district shall include those areas indicated on the zoning atlas maps as RE. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-327. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(2)  Agricultural activities, including the boarding of horses provided the three animals per acre limit is not exceeded; and the sale of products raised or produced on the premises. 
(3)  Home occupations (see article X). 
(4)  Accessory dwelling unit (see article X). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-328. - Special exceptions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article III, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Day care center (see article X). 
(2)  Group living homes, category B. The maximum number of beds shall be three beds times the permitted density. 
(3)  Religious facilities/institutions. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-329. - Conditional uses. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article IV, the following conditional uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Utility substations. 
(2)  Government buildings and public uses (subject to applicable thresholds pursuant to the comprehensive plan). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-330. - Property development regulations. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure in the RE district shall exceed 45 feet except, as otherwise provided in article IX. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. The minimum building site area requirements are as follows (see chapter 50 for lots or parcels of substandard dimensions): 
(1)  Area: one acre. 
(2)  Width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 125 feet. 
(c)  Maximum building coverage. The maximum area of the lot or parcel which may be covered by vertical structures shall not exceed 50 percent. The impervious surface ratio shall not exceed 0.60. 
(d)  Setback requirements . The following minimum setbacks shall be required except as otherwise provided in article IX: 
(1)  Front: 25 feet. 
(2)  Side: 15 feet. 
(3)  Rear: 20 feet. 
(e)  Maximum density. The density of the RE district shall not exceed one dwelling unit on each 43,560 square feet of land area or the density permitted by the comprehensive land use plan, whichever is less. 
(f)  All uses considered nonresidential approved under this section shall not exceed floor area ratio of 0.30. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL SUBURBAN (RS) 
 
Sec. 70-331. - Purpose. 
The RS district is comprised of rural estate residential type of development. Complete urbanization of these areas is not intended as the development of them is primarily of the home-garden residential type and a rural atmosphere is maintained. This district shall include those areas indicated on the zoning atlas maps as RS. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-332. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(2)  Agricultural activities, including the maintaining of livestock with no more than three ungulate animals per acre, but only to the extent as to supply the occupant's needs, with the exception that maintaining livestock may include boarding of horses provided the three animals per acre limit is not exceeded. A minimum of one acre is required to maintain ungulate animals and horses. 
(3)  Home occupations (see section 70-895). 
(4)  Accessory dwelling unit (see section 70-891). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-333. - Special exceptions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article III, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Day care center (see article X). 
(2)  Group living home category B. The maximum number of beds shall be three beds times the permitted density. 
(3)  Religious facilities/institutions. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-334. - Conditional uses. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article IV, the following conditional uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Utility substation; government buildings, and other public uses (subject to applicable thresholds pursuant to the comprehensive plan). Any such use, alone or when added to existing contiguous like uses, that exceeds the applicable threshold shall require a plan amendment, which shall include such use and all contiguous like uses. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-335. - Property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure in the RS district shall exceed 45 feet except, as otherwise provided in article IX. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site area requirements are as follows (see chapter 50 for lots or parcels of substandard dimensions): 
(1)  Area: 17,424 square feet. 
(2)  Width: 90 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 100 feet. 
(c)  Maximum building coverage. The maximum area of the lot or parcel which may be covered by vertical structures shall not exceed 50 percent. The impervious surface ratio shall not exceed 0.60. 
(d)  Setback requirements. The following minimum setbacks shall be required, except as provided in article IX: 
(1)  Front: 25 feet. 
(2)  Side: ten feet. 
(3)  Rear: 15 feet. 
(e)  Maximum density. The density of the RS district shall not exceed one unit per 17,424 square feet or the density permitted by the comprehensive land use plan, whichever is less. 
(f)  All uses considered as nonresidential approved under this section shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.30. 
(g)  Special requirements. 
(1)  Public/semipublic uses. A public/semipublic ancillary nonresidential use (except public educational facilities) shall be subject to applicable comprehensive plan thresholds and requirements. Such use or contiguous like uses in excess of thresholds shall require a plan amendment. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-336—70-355. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESIDENTIAL LOW (RL) 
 
Sec. 70-356. - Purpose. 
The RL district provides areas of single-family residential development located where lower density single-family uses are desirable. This district shall include all those areas indicated on the zoning atlas maps as RL. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-357. - Permitted uses. 
Within any RL district, only the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(2)  Accessory dwelling unit (see article X). 
(3)  Home occupations (see article X). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-358. - Special exceptions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article III, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Day care center (see article X). 
(2)  Group living home, category A, to be occupied by no more than ten individuals along with a maximum of two full-time supervisors or house parents. The maximum number of beds shall be three beds times the permitted density. 
(3)  Religious facilities/institutions. 
(4)  Parking lot for abutting commercial or office use (see article X). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-359. - Conditional uses. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article IV, the following conditional uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Utility substations. 
(2)  Government buildings and other public uses, subject to applicable thresholds pursuant to the comprehensive plan. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-360. - Property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure shall exceed 35 feet in height except as otherwise provided in article IX. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site requirements are as follows (see chapter 50 for lots or parcels of substandard dimensions): 
(1)  Area: 8,712 square feet. 
(2)  Width: 70 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 90 feet. 
(c)  Maximum intensity. A residential use shall not exceed an impervious surface ratio of 0.75. A nonresidential use shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.40 or an impervious surface ratio of 0.65. 
(d)  Setback requirements. The following minimum setbacks shall be required except, as otherwise provided in article IX: 
(1)  Front: 25 feet. 
(2)  Side: seven and one-half feet. 
(3)  Rear: 15 feet. 
(4)  The front setback may be reduced to 20 feet in order for development or redevelopment to maintain consistency with abutting lots which are developed with a 20-foot front setback. For lots with 100 feet or less in depth, the rear setback may be reduced to ten feet. 
(5)  For additions to single-family residential dwellings that propose to follow an existing building line, but which said addition would not otherwise meet the required side setbacks or the front setback for the non-address side of a dwelling located on a double frontage lot, may at the sole discretion of the city manager or designee be approved without the requirement for a variance hearing before the developmental review board, subject to the proposed addition being within the limits of the district setback requirements and said addition is architecturally compatible with the principal building. 
(e)  Maximum density. The density shall not exceed one dwelling unit per 8,712 square feet of land area or the density permitted by the comprehensive land use plan, whichever is less. 
(f)  Special requirements. 
(1)  Public/semipublic uses. A public/semipublic ancillary nonresidential use, except public educational facilities, shall not exceed a maximum area of three acres. Such use or contiguous like uses in excess of this threshold shall require a plan amendment. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-361—70-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RESIDENTIAL URBAN (RU) 
 
Sec. 70-381. - Purpose. 
The RU district is comprised of single-family dwellings with maximum density of land use by single-family residences. This district will provide smaller lots and dwellings for those areas in the city where this type of development is practical. This district shall include those areas indicated on the zoning atlas maps as RU. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-382. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(2)  Accessory dwelling unit (see article X). 
(3)  Home occupations (article X). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-383. - Special exceptions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article III, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Day care center (see article X). 
(2)  Group living homes, category A to be occupied by no more than ten individuals along with a maximum of two full-time resident supervisors or house parents. The maximum number of beds shall be three beds times the permitted density. 
(3)  Religious facilities/institutions. 
(4)  Parking lot for abutting commercial or office use (see article X). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-384. - Conditional uses. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article IV, the following conditional uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Utility substations. 
(2)  Government buildings and other public uses, subject to applicable thresholds pursuant to the comprehensive plan. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-385. - Property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structures in the RU district shall exceed 35 feet in height except, as otherwise provided in article IX. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site area requirements are as follows (see chapter 50 for lots or parcels of substandard dimensions): 
(1)  Area: 5,808 square feet. 
(2)  Width: 60 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 80 feet. 
(c)  Maximum intensity. A residential use shall not exceed an impervious surface ratio of 0.75. A nonresidential use shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.40 nor an impervious surface ratio of 0.65. 
(d)  Setback requirements. The following minimum setbacks shall be required except, as otherwise provided in article IX: 
(1)  Front: 20 feet. 
(2)  Side: six feet. 
(3)  Rear: ten feet. 
(e)  Maximum density . The density shall not exceed one dwelling unit per each 5,808 square feet of land area or the density permitted by the comprehensive land use plan, whichever is less. 
(f)  Special requirements. 
(1)  Public/semipublic uses. A public/semipublic ancillary nonresidential use, except public educational facilities, shall be subject to applicable thresholds pursuant to the comprehensive plan. Such use or contiguous like uses in excess of applicable thresholds shall require a plan amendment. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-386—70-405. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - RESIDENTIAL LOW MEDIUM (RLM) 
 
Sec. 70-406. - Purpose. 
The RLM district is comprised of areas where the development of single-family, dwellings, duplexes or triplexes is appropriate. It is intended that such areas be located in or near urbanized areas where good transportation facilities and urban services are readily available. The district shall include all areas indicated on the zoning atlas maps as RLM. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-407. - Permitted uses. 
Within the RLM district, only the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Duplex dwellings. 
(3)  Triplex dwellings. 
(4)  Accessory uses. 
(5)  Home occupations (section 58-526 et seq.). 
(6)  Guest cottages (only on lots where one single-family residence is located). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-408. - Special exceptions. 
Upon application to the developmental review board and favorable action thereon, pursuant to section 70-191 et seq., the following uses may be permitted in the RLM district: 
(1)  Day care center. 
(2)  Group homes, category I. The residential equivalent for such facilities shall be 2.3 times the permitted units per acre, to determine the maximum number of beds permitted per acre. 
(3)  See section 70-195 for other special exceptions that may be permitted in this district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-409. - Conditional uses. 
Upon application to and favorable action by the city council, pursuant to section 70-226 et seq., the following conditional uses may be permitted in the RLM district: 
(1)  Utility substations. 
(2)  Government buildings and public uses. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-410. - Property development regulations. 
(a)  Minimum building regulations. No structure in the RLM district shall exceed 35 feet in height unless otherwise provided in section 70-862. 
(b)  Building site area requirements. Building site area requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Area: 7,500 square feet. 
(2)  Width: 75 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 80 feet. 
Platting of single-family attached dwellings to allow individual unit ownership is permitted; provided the duplexes or triplexes subject to platting were initially approved, subject to the provisions of RLM zoning. No such platting shall be approved by the community development department until such time as a final site plan for the project has been reviewed and approved by the community development department for construction purposes. Provisions for parking and easements for access to units and parking areas are required and are to be recorded as part of the plat, and must be shown on the submitted site plan. Easements for maintenance shall be required where necessary. The unit access easements are to be a minimum of four feet in width. It is the intent of this section to allow individual dwelling unit fee simple ownership without creating a nonconforming building area requirement. 
(c)  Public/semipublic uses. A public/semipublic ancillary nonresidential use shall not exceed a maximum area of three acres. Such use or contiguous like uses in excess of this threshold shall require a plan amendment. 
(d)  Maximum building area. A minimum of 25 percent of the site must remain in open permeable area. 
(e)  Setback requirements. The following minimum setbacks shall be required: 
(1)  Front: 25 feet. 
(2)  Side: six feet. 
(3)  Rear: ten feet. 
(f)  Maximum density. The maximum density of the RLM district (no structure may contain more than three dwelling units). 
(g)  Special requirements. 
(1)  Maximum density. The maximum density of the RLM district shall be one unit for each full 3,500 square feet of lot area (no structure may contain more than three dwelling units). 
(2)  Nonresidential uses. Nonresidential uses shall not exceed a maximum floor area ratio of 0.50 nor a maximum impervious surface ratio of 0.75. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-411—70-430. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - MOBILE HOME PARKS AND SUBDIVISION (MH) 
 
Sec. 70-431. - Purpose. 
The MH district is composed of residential areas comprised of mobile homes. Utilization of contemporary design practice is encouraged and developers shall avoid the monotony of obsolete rectilinear patterns. This district shall include those areas indicated on the zoning atlas maps as MH. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-432. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Mobile homes in subdivisions. 
(2)  Mobile homes in mobile home parks. 
(3)  Accessory uses such as maintenance areas, laundry areas, recreational facilities, and storage facilities for residents. 
(b)  No new mobile home park or subdivision or additions thereto will be permitted in any coastal high-hazard area (hurricane evacuation zone level A) designated without regard to a mobile home use, or floodway designated pursuant to the flood insurance rate maps as published by the federal government. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-433. - Special exceptions. 
Application shall be submitted pursuant to the provisions of article III. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-434. - Mobile home park property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site area requirements are as follows (see chapter 50 for lots or parcels of substandard dimensions): 
(1)  Area: ten acres. 
(2)  Width: 150 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 200 feet. 
(4)  Each mobile home site or space shall be at least 3,500 square feet in area and be at least 40 feet wide and 80 feet deep. Lot area shall be exclusive of street or drive. 
(c)  Maximum building area intensity. A residential use shall not exceed an impervious surface ratio of 0.65. A nonresidential use shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.40 or an impervious surface ratio of 0.65. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-435. - Setback requirements. 
Minimum setbacks shall be required in the MH district as per the county fire prevention ordinance and pursuant to the explanatory memo dated October 18, 1995, written by the director of the county development review services (also see section 70-865 and F.A.C. 64E-15). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-436. - Special requirements for mobile home parks. 
(a)  Maximum density. Units in a mobile home park shall not exceed the density permitted by the comprehensive land use plan. Mobile home parks existing prior to the adoption of the comprehensive land use plan and legally permitted at the time of development shall be grandfathered as to density. 
(b)  Street requirements. Roadways or streets within a mobile home park may be private, but the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Internal collector streets shall be 30 feet in width, with a minimum of 24 feet of paved surface. 
(2)  Internal minor streets shall be 25 feet in width, with a minimum of 20 feet of paved surface. 
(3)  A collector street shall be defined as a street from two or more internal minor streets to dedicated rights-of-way. All streets that provide ingress and egress from dedicated public rights-of-way shall be deemed to be collector streets. All other streets within the park may be internal minor streets. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the design and construction of roads, streets, drives, utilities and drainage installations shall be in compliance with the minimum standards of this land development code. 
(5)  Street lighting shall be installed to the standards established by the utility/service provider for residential areas. City will require an approved plan for street illumination from the utility/service provider. 
(c)  Recreation area requirements. Not less than ten percent of the gross site area shall be devoted to open space and recreation facilities, generally provided in a central location, or in larger sites decentralized. Such areas may include space for community buildings, swimming pools and open space. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-437. - Mobile home subdivision property development standards. 
(a)  Development standards for mobile home subdivisions are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(2)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site area requirements for individual lots are as follows: 
a.  Area: 5,808 square feet. 
b.  Width: 60 feet. 
c.  Depth: 80 feet. 
(3)  Total site area. The total area provided for a new mobile home subdivision shall consist of a minimum of ten acres with a minimum width of 150 feet and a minimum depth of 200 feet. 
(4)  Maximum building area. A residential use shall not exceed an impervious surface ratio of 0.65. A nonresidential use shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.40 or an impervious surface ratio of 0.65. 
(5)  Setback requirements. Minimum setbacks shall be required in the MH district as per the county fire prevention ordinance and pursuant to the explanatory memo dated October 18, 1995, written by the director of the county development review services (also see section 70-865 and F.A.C. Chapter 64E-15). 
(6)  Special requirements. 
a.  Maximum density. Units in a mobile home subdivision shall not exceed the density permitted by the comprehensive land use plan. Mobile home subdivisions existing prior to the adoption of the comprehensive land use plan and legally permitted at the time of development shall be grandfathered as to density. 
(b)  Street requirements. Roadways or streets within a mobile home subdivision shall be private, but the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Internal collector streets shall be 30 feet in width, with a minimum of 24 feet of paved surface. 
(2)  Internal minor streets shall be 25 feet in width, with a minimum of 20 feet of paved surface. 
(3)  A collector street shall be defined as a street from two or more internal minor streets to dedicated rights-of-way. All other streets within the park may be internal minor streets. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the design and construction of roads, streets, drives, utilities and drainage installations shall be in compliance with the minimum standards of this land development code. 
(c)  Recreation area requirements. Not less than ten percent of the gross site area shall be devoted to open space and recreation facilities, generally provided in a central location, or in larger sites decentralized. Such areas may include space for community buildings, swimming pools and open space. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-438—70-460. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM (RM) 
 
Sec. 70-461. - Purpose. 
The RM district is intended to provide a broad range of residential development types and densities and intensities. This district shall include those areas indicated on the zoning atlas maps as RM. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-462. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(2)  Duplex dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(3)  Triplex dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(4)  Multifamily dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(5)  Home occupations (see article X). 
(6)  Accessory dwelling unit (see article X). 
(7)  In conjunction with a multifamily development, storage areas for use by residents only. Such areas shall be screened by opaque fencing or landscaping a minimum of six feet in height, with the fencing to comply with all other applicable portions of this land development code. 
(8)  Group living homes, category A to be occupied by no more than 14 individuals along with a maximum of two full-time resident supervisors or house parents. The maximum number of beds shall be three beds times the permitted density. Locational requirements shall be governed by F.S. ch. 419. 
(9)  Religious facilities/institutions, provided such facilities are not located adjacent to a single-family zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-463. - Special exceptions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article III, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Day care center (see article X). 
(2)  Group living homes, category B to be occupied by more than 14 individuals, along with a maximum of two full-time resident supervisors or house parents. The maximum number of beds shall be three beds times the permitted density. Locational requirements shall be governed by F.S. ch. 419. 
(3)  Assisted living facilities. The maximum number of beds shall be three beds times the permitted density. (See section 70-195.) 
(4)  Public/semi-public uses. Shall be subject to applicable thresholds pursuant to the comprehensive plan. Such use or contiguous like uses in excess of applicable thresholds shall require a plan amendment. 
(5)  Religious facilities/institutions adjacent to a single-family zoning district. 
(6)  Parking lot for abutting commercial or office use (see article X). 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-464. - Conditional uses. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article IV, nursing facilities may be permitted as conditional uses. The maximum number of beds shall be three times the permitted density. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-465. - Property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure in the RM district shall exceed 65 feet in height except as otherwise permitted in article IX. When located within 50 feet of any residential single-family zoned property, no structure shall exceed 35 feet in height except as otherwise permitted in article IX. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site area requirements are as follows (see chapter 50 for lots or parcels of substandard dimensions): 
(1)  Area: 7,500 square feet. 
(2)  Width: 75 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 80 feet. 
(4)  Platting of single-family attached dwellings to allow individual unit ownership is permitted; provided the two-family or three-family dwellings subject to platting were initially approved, subject to the provisions of RM zoning. No such platting shall be approved by the community development department until such time as a final site plan for the project has been reviewed and approved by the community development department for construction purposes. Provisions for parking and easements for access to units and parking areas are required and are to be recorded as part of the plat, and must be shown on the submitted site plan. Easements for maintenance shall be required where necessary. The unit access easements are to be a minimum of four feet in width. It is the intent of this section to allow individual dwelling unit fee simple ownership without creating a nonconforming building area requirement 
(c)  Maximum intensity. A residential use shall not exceed an impervious surface ratio of 0.75. For multifamily development, the minimum common area open space and recreation area shall be 25 percent of the development site, and at least one-third of the open space area shall be consolidated in one location on the site. A nonresidential use shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.50 or an impervious surface ratio of 0.75. 
(d)  Setback requirements . The following minimum setbacks shall be required except, as otherwise provided in article IX: 
(1)  For single-family dwelling structures and their customary accessory uses: 
a.  Front: 25 feet. 
b.  Side: six feet. 
c.  Rear: ten feet. 
(2)  All structures shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the pavement edge of any private street lying within the RM district. For the purposes of this section, a private street is considered to be a roadway, not dedicated to the public, providing general access and circulation of traffic through this district. Private streets do not include the drive-through areas of parking lots. 
(3)  All principal structures shall be separated by not less than 12 feet. 
(4)  No multifamily structure shall be located within 25 feet of any parcel zoned, utilized or approved for single-family dwellings. 
(e)  Maximum density. The allowed density shall not exceed the maximum density permitted by the comprehensive plan future land use plan category. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-466—70-485. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (RPD) 
 
Sec. 70-486. - Purpose. 
The RPD district allows variable density residential areas along with supporting accessory uses. Within such districts single-family, duplexes, triplexes and multifamily dwellings may be permitted. Construction in this zone is not authorized without prior approval of an overall development site plan that satisfies the special requirements and standards established for this district to ensure adequate open space; appropriate densities; proper ingress/egress and circulation of traffic. The intent of this district is to encourage use of imaginative design to avoid monotonous repetition of pattern, and to permit flexibility of site design. It is further the intent that adequate spatial and/or vegetative buffers be required between uses that are characteristically different by density or design. This district shall include those areas on the zoning atlas maps designated as RPD, residential planned development district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-487. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(3)  Three-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(4)  Multifamily dwellings and their customary accessory uses. 
(5)  Group homes category A to be occupied by no more than 14 individuals along with a maximum of two full-time resident supervisors or house parents under the following conditions: 
a.  The facility shall meet F.S. ch. 419, locational requirements. 
b.  The maximum number of beds shall be three beds times the permitted density. 
(6)  Accessory uses to primarily serve the residents of the district as follows: 
a.  Public and semipublic parks, playgrounds, schools, religious facilities/institutions, day care center in multifamily areas, community buildings, recreation rooms, meeting facilities, and other related community facilities. Structures and playground areas, when used for these facilities, shall be located at least 50 feet from any adjacent parcels used for residential purposes. 
b.  Marinas that provide launching, docking, storage of boats, for use of the residents of the residential planned development. (See article X.) 
c.  Golf courses. These may be calculated as required recreational space. The clubhouse and associated structures shall be located at least 150 feet from any residential dwelling structure. 
d.  Public or private utility substation, lift station and other like accessory uses, provided there is no storage of trucks or materials on the site. 
e.  Storage areas for personal use only by residents of the residential planned development. Such areas shall be screened by opaque fencing or landscape material a minimum of six feet in height, with the fencing to comply with all other applicable portions of this land development code. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-488. - Special exceptions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article III, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Assisted living facilities (except in single-family areas). The maximum number of beds shall be three beds times the permitted density. 
(2)  Specially designed residential developments. Since the intent of the RPD district is to encourage imaginative design, avoid monotonous repetition of pattern, provide adequate open space, and permit flexible site design, the developmental review board may, upon proper finding, grant special exceptions for specially designed residential developments that may not comply with all specific requirements of section 70-490. Such developments, however, shall substantially be in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter. All setbacks as required from the perimeter of the district and from public rights-of-way shall be met. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-489. - Conditional uses. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article IV, the following conditional uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Nursing facilities. The maximum number of beds shall be three beds times the permitted density. 
(2)  Government buildings and other public uses. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-490. - Property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure in the RPD district shall exceed 65 feet in height except as otherwise permitted in article IX. When located within 50 feet of any residential single-family zoned property, no structure shall exceed 35 feet in height except as otherwise permitted in section 70-862. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site area requirements are as follows (see section 70-274 for lots or parcels of substandard dimensions): 
(1)  Area: five acres. 
(2)  Width: 275 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 300 feet. 
(c)  Maximum intensity. A residential use shall not exceed an impervious surface ratio of 0.70. Minimum common open space and recreation area required shall not be less than 30 percent of the total site area. Common open space and recreation area shall be defined as the total amount of area, including outdoor space, permanently set aside and designated on the site plan specifically for open space and recreational areas for the residential planned development. It is further required that a minimum of a third of the space must be contained in one location. A nonresidential use shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.40, or an impervious surface ratio of 0.60. 
(d)  Setback requirements . The following minimum setbacks shall be required, except as otherwise provided in this section or in article IX: 
(1)  Front: 25 feet. Every structure containing dwelling units shall have access to a public right-of-way directly or via a court, walkway or other area dedicated to public use or owned and maintained by a homeowners association, but need not front on a right-of-way. 
(2)  Side: 15 feet. 
(3)  Rear: 15 feet. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the minimum distance between principal structures in the RPD district shall be 15 feet from wall to wall, and a minimum 25-foot setback shall be required to the edge of any publicly dedicated right-of-way. A minimum of 25 feet from the pavement edge of any private street lying within the RPD district to any structure shall be required. For the purposes of the this section, a private street shall be considered to be a roadway not dedicated to the public providing general access and circulation of traffic through this district, not including the drive-through areas of parking lots. 
(5)  A minimum 25-foot setback shall be maintained between all structures (except detached single-family dwelling and their accessory uses) and the perimeter of the RPD district. 
(6)  A multifamily dwelling shall not be located within 25 feet of any area designed on the site plan for use of single-family dwellings. 
(7)  Detached open carports supported by columns that have a maximum cross sectional dimension of six inches or less may be permitted with no required front yard setback, providing no portion of the carport, including overhang, extends into the vehicular street or roadway. This provision shall not be permitted in single-family areas, nor shall any carport be permitted within 25 feet of any publicly dedicated street or roadway. 
(e)  Maximum density. The maximum permitted density is the density permitted by the comprehensive plan future land use plan category for the property. 
(f)  Special requirements. 
(1)  Public/semipublic uses. A public/semipublic ancillary nonresidential use except public educational facilities shall not exceed a maximum area of three acres. Such use or contiguous like uses in excess of this threshold shall require a plan amendment. 
(2)  Single-family detached dwelling. All portions of planned developments that propose single-family detached dwellings shall be platted in accordance with F.S. ch. 177, with lots of 6,000 square feet minimum. Setback requirements shall be 20 feet front, and six feet side and ten feet rear. (Also see section 70-865.) This provision shall permit single-family cluster development provided each lot has a minimum of ten feet of frontage on an easement dedicated on the plat to the homeowners for ingress and egress. Such easement shall not be greater in length than 200 feet measured from the point between the furthest lot to a publicly dedicated right-of-way. 
(3)  Platting of multifamily dwellings or attached single-family dwellings. All portions of a planned development that propose platting of multifamily dwellings or attached single-family dwellings shall require all platted lots to contain a minimum of ten feet of frontage on a permanent easement for access that has been legally described and recorded as a part of the plat. Any such easement shall be of a minimum width of 24 feet. This provision for platting of attached dwelling units shall only be permitted in those areas where there is only one level of ownership. This subsection shall not permit platting of multilevel condominium-type ownerships. No such platting shall be approved by the community development department until such time as a final site plan for that portion of the project in question has been reviewed and approved by the community development department for construction purposes. 
(4)  Zero lot line. Zero lot line single-family detached dwellings may be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  All zero lot line single-family detached projects shall be platted in accordance with F.S. ch. 177, with lots a minimum of 4,500 square feet. 
b.  All structures shall have a required front setback of 20 feet, and a required rear setback of ten feet. 
c.  Side setbacks shall be none on one side lot line and a minimum of 12 feet on the opposite side of the lot. 
d.  The building envelope shall be shown on the final site plan and final plat with minimum setbacks shown. 
e.  A maintenance easement of five feet shall be designated on all lots adjacent to the zero lot line boundary. Eaves and awnings shall not project into this easement more than 12 inches except as may be required by building, fire or life safety codes. 
f.  Windows and doors shall not be permitted in the side of the structure adjacent to the zero lot line except as may be required by building, fire or life safety codes. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-491—70-515. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - OFFICE (O) 
 
Sec. 70-516. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the O district is to permit general professional office buildings of high character and attractive surroundings in areas where such uses are appropriate. It is intended that the O district be located in areas where high-intensity uses would not be appropriate; or where a buffer is needed from a high-intensity area to a less intense area along a main traffic corridor; or where the city wishes to exclude high-intensity uses along main corridors. This zone is not intended for use in areas predominantly single-family residential in character. However, the city recognizes that along certain main corridors, strict residential standards are not appropriate and that a mix use of office/residential is acceptable. 
The O district may be utilized within areas designated by the comprehensive future land use plan map as follows: 
(1)  Office/residential. 
(2)  Commercial neighborhood. 
(3)  Commercial limited. 
(4)  Commercial general. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-517. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Offices for professional services such as physicians (including clinics), attorneys, accountants, engineers, architects, real estate, stockbrokers or other similar service or any other type of office where the service of the office does not involve the transfer of a commercial product at the office site. The incidental dispensing of medicines or medical supplies is permitted from a doctor's office or clinic. 
(2)  Studios for an artist, photographer, sculptor, musician, or similar activities for the purpose of teaching or artistic instruction only. 
(3)  Lunch stands or snack bars within and accessory to an office building to serve the building's users. 
(4)  Schools, public or private, and religious facilities/institutions. 
(5)  Hospitals. These shall not be permitted in coastal high-hazard areas, hurricane evacuation zones level A, and floodways as designated by the national flood insurance program, with maps on file in the building/life safety services section. 
(6)  Funeral homes. 
(7)  Banking facilities, which may include drive-through lanes. 
(8)  Day care center, limited residential, in conjunction with an above-permitted use. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-518. - Special exceptions. 
No special exceptions may be authorized in the O district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-519. - Conditional uses. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article IV, residential use and residential equivalent use may be permitted, subject to the density, residential equivalent, and mixed use limitations contained within the overlaying plan category. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-520. - Nonresidential property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure shall exceed 50 feet in height except, as provided for in article IX. When located within 50 feet of any residentially zoned property, no structure shall exceed 35 feet in height, except, as provided for in article IX. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site area requirements are as follows (see chapter 50 for lots or parcels of substandard dimensions): 
(1)  Area: 7,500 square feet. 
(2)  Width: 75 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 90 feet. 
(c)  Maximum intensity. 
(1)  All development and redevelopment under the O zoning district shall be limited by and consistent with the allowable uses, maximum intensities (FAR and ISR) and densities, mixed use standards, and other standards as enumerated within the applicable future land use plan category overlaying the O zoning district. 
(d)  Setback requirements. The following minimum setbacks shall be required except, as otherwise provided in article IX: 
(1)  Front: 25 feet. 
(2)  Side: 15 feet. 
(3)  Rear: 15 feet. 
(e)  Special requirements. 
(1)  No retail sales, display or storage of merchandise is permitted except when in conjunction with and completely incidental to a permitted use such as the dispensing of medicines, medical supplies, optical products, from a doctor's office or clinic. 
(2)  Accessory lunch stands or snack bars may be permitted within office buildings to serve the users of the building. 
(3)  No machinery or merchandise may be stored except that which is customarily incidental to a permitted use on-site. 
(4)  A public/semipublic ancillary nonresidential use shall not exceed a maximum area of three acres. Such use or contiguous like uses in excess of this threshold shall require a plan amendment. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-521. - Residential property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure shall exceed 50 feet in height except, as otherwise permitted in article IX. When located within 50 feet of any residential single-family zoned property, no structure shall exceed 35 feet in height except, as otherwise permitted in article IX. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site area requirements are as follows (see chapter 50 for lots or parcels of substandard dimensions): 
(1)  Area: 7,500 square feet. 
(2)  Width: 75 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 80 feet. 
(c)  Maximum intensity. See section 70-520. The minimum common open space and recreation area shall be 25 percent. A third of the required open space area shall be in one location on the site. 
(d)  Setback requirements . The following minimum setbacks shall be required except, as otherwise provided in article IX: 
(1)  For single-family dwelling structures and their customary accessory uses: 
a.  Front: 25 feet. 
b.  Side: seven and one-half feet. 
c.  Rear: ten feet. 
(2)  All structures shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the pavement edge of any private street lying within the district. For the purposes of the this section, a private street is considered to be a roadway, not dedicated to the public, providing general access and circulation of traffic through this district. Private streets do not include the drive-through areas of parking lots. 
(3)  All principal structures shall be separated by not less than 15 feet. 
(4)  No multifamily structure shall be located within 25 feet of any parcel zoned, utilized or approved for single-family dwellings. 
(e)  Maximum density. The allowed density shall not exceed the following dwelling units per acre or the maximum density permitted by the comprehensive plan future land use plan category, whichever is less. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-522—70-540. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - COMMERCIAL NEIGHBORHOOD (CN) 
 
Sec. 70-541. - Purpose. 
The CN district provides areas for commercial development such as compact shopping areas located in the neighborhood which they serve. The location of such areas is intended to conveniently supply the immediate needs of the neighborhood where the types of services rendered and the commodities sold are those which are needed daily and purchased at frequent intervals. This district shall include those areas indicated on the zoning atlas maps as CN. The CN district may be utilized in areas designated by the future land use plan map as commercial general, commercial limited, commercial neighborhood, industrial limited and residential/office/retail. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-542. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any retail business or commercial use that does not involve the manufacture or processing of products, provided the use serves the immediate needs of the neighborhood, such as grocery, convenience shopping, including sale of gasoline from pumps, pharmacy, small restaurants (50 seats or less) with no-drive in or drive-through facilities, hardware or similar type business; but this subsection shall not permit the retail sale or display of vehicles, boats, mobile homes, model homes, or other outdoors sales use. 
(2)  Personal service establishments that attend primarily to one's personal care or apparel, including but not limited to: 
a.  Hair and beauty care. 
b.  Medical and dental clinics. 
c.  Professional and other offices. 
d.  Dry cleaning/laundry service (collection and distribution only). 
e.  Shoe repair. 
f.  Watch and clock repair and locksmith shops. 
(3)  Studios. 
(4)  Day care centers (see article X). 
(5)  A public/semipublic ancillary nonresidential use. 
(6)  Single-family, two-family, three-family, and multi-family dwelling units; up to ten units per acre, subject to use limitations of the underlying plan category. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-543. - Special exceptions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article III, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Restaurants with more than 50 seats. 
(2)  Commercial or office uses with a drive-through lane. 
(3)  Such other uses that would be similar to those permitted and special exception uses listed above and that would be consistent with the definition of this district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-544. - Property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure in the CN district shall exceed 35 feet in height except, as otherwise permitted in article IX. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site area requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Area: 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  Width: 85 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 100 feet. 
(4)  A public/semipublic ancillary nonresidential use shall be subject to comprehensive plan thresholds. Such use or contiguous like uses in excess of applicable thresholds shall require a plan amendment. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-545. - Maximum intensity. 
(1)  A residential use or residential equivalent use shall not exceed an impervious surface ratio of 0.75. 
(2)  A nonresidential use shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.40, or an impervious surface ratio of 0.80. 
(3)  All development and redevelopment under the CN zoning district shall be limited by and consistent with the allowable uses, maximum intensities (FAR and ISR) and densities, mixed use standards, and other standards as enumerated within the applicable future land use plan category overlaying the CN zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-546. - Setback requirements. 
The following minimum setbacks shall be required except, as otherwise provided in article IX: 
(1)  Front: 25 feet measured from any right-of-way line to a structure. 
(2)  Side or rear (interior lot or parcel): None required for commercial uses or structures; except when the side or rear of a lot abuts a less intense use district, there shall be a side or rear yard provided of a minimum of 20 percent of the lot width or depth, respectively, but this section shall not require more than 20 feet. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-547. - Special requirements. 
The following special requirements are applicable: 
(1)  Performance standards, see article XI. 
(2)  This district does not permit the storage of commercial vehicles. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-548—70-570. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - COMMERCIAL GENERAL (CG) 
 
Sec. 70-571. - Purpose. 
The CG district provides an area for the retailing of certain commodities, the furnishings of several limited services and certain selected trade shops, with related commercial activities conveniently located in a community of several neighborhoods. It is intended that this district shall serve a considerably greater population than the CN district and offer certain specialized services in addition to all other retail sales outlets for consumer products. This district shall include those areas indicated on the zoning atlas maps as CG. The CG district may be utilized in areas designated by the future land use plan map as commercial general, commercial limited, commercial neighborhood, and residential/office/retail. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-572. - Permitted uses. 
The following are permitted uses: 
(a)  Any use permitted in the O or CN district or any other retail sales outlet for products (except heavy equipment) sold directly to the consumer is permitted. This may include but is not limited to lumber, hardware, paint, electrical, and plumbing supplies provided that all sales and storage areas for these types of products are screened from view by an opaque fence or wall a minimum of six feet in height. All sales areas except as noted above shall be indoor locations. Outdoor displays of products sold at retail that by their nature or size dictates that the operation be outdoors are permitted. Such uses may include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Retail sales, display and rental of vehicles, boats, and mobile homes, farm equipment and supplies, sales and services, plant nurseries and sale of landscape materials, swimming pools, and spas and similar uses. Such uses, when abutting residential districts, shall be screened from view from the residential district with an opaque six-foot-high fence or wall in compliance with section 70-912. These uses shall also be in strict accord with the provisions of article II of this chapter. It is not the intent of this section to permit unrestricted outdoor sales, and the provisions of this section shall apply only to those types of uses listed above. The sale, storage or display of all products not normally found or used outdoors shall be conducted from indoor locations only. 
(2)  Hotels and motels, when licensed as such by the state. A temporary lodging use shall not exceed 40 units per acre. 
(3)  Veterinary hospitals, animal clinics, and kennels when entirely confined within a building. 
(4)  Bowling alleys, skating rinks, indoor theaters, or other similar indoor amusement and recreational facilities. 
(5)  Automobile repairs when conducted within a completely enclosed building, but not including body work or painting shops. 
(6)  Repair and sales of household appliances. 
(7)  Service stations. 
(8)  Detached accessory storage building provided the building does not exceed 50 percent of the area of the primary building. 
(9)  Wholesaling when in conjunction with a permitted retail use and dealing with the same product line. Wholesale volume of sales shall be incidental to the retail volume of sales and shall not exceed 25 percent of floor space devoted to such use. 
(10)  Display model houses provided they are removed or converted to nonresidential use when the retail sales effort is terminated. 
(11)  Hospitals and clinics. Hospitals shall not be permitted in coastal high-hazard areas (hurricane evacuation zones level A), or floodways as designated by the National Flood Insurance Program, with maps on file in the community development department. 
(12)  Government buildings and public uses consistent with the definition of this district and subject to applicable future land use plan thresholds. Such use or contiguous like uses in excess of applicable thresholds shall require a future land use map plan amendment. 
(13)  Nursing homes. A nursing home use shall not exceed an equivalent of three beds per permitted dwelling unit at 24 units per acre. 
(14)  Recreational vehicle park. 
(15)  Mini-storage warehousing when in accordance with the following: 
a.  Exterior storage is limited to motor vehicles, boats, motor homes or campers, and is prohibited in required parking spaces, drive aisles, landscape or drainage areas. 
b.  Maximum building height for all storage units shall be 12 feet. 
c.  Exterior storage shall not exceed 20 percent of the total building area. 
d.  Facilities shall be used for dead storage only and shall not be used for assembly, processing, fabrication, repair, business or sales, practice rooms, meeting rooms, or living units. The storage of explosives or highly flammable material is prohibited. Garage sales and/or flea market activities are also expressly prohibited. 
(16)  Marinas that provide only boat landing docking, wet or dry storage of boats, and sale of gas, oil and marine supplies. The following conditions shall apply: 
a.  Shall be for pleasure craft only. 
b.  No major repair or boatbuilding facilities. 
c.  The site shall contain sufficient upland areas to accommodate all needed utilities and support facilities such as off-street parking, restrooms, and dry storage. 
d.  All applications for marinas shall be accompanied by a hurricane plan, which shall be filed with the county civil emergency services department. 
e.  All water and navigation permits shall be obtained prior to site plan approval, when required. 
f.  No marina shall be permitted or expanded in areas determined by the state department of environmental protection to be critical to the survival of the West Indian manatee. 
g.  Also see article X. 
(17)  Restaurants. 
(18)  Professional offices. 
(19)  Studios. 
(20)  Personal service establishments. 
(21)  Funeral homes and their customary accessory uses. 
(22)  Day care centers (see article X). 
(23)  Residential and residential equivalent, subject to the density limit, mixed use standards, and other standards of the applicable overlaying future land use plan category. 
(24)  Religious facilities/institutions. 
(b)  A mixed use shall not exceed, in combination, the respective number of units per acre and floor area ratio permitted, when allocated in their respective proportion to the net land area. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-573. - Special exceptions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article III, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Assisted living facilities (residential equivalent use) that shall not exceed an equivalent of three beds per permitted dwelling units at 24 units per acre, or the density permitted by the overlaying plan category, whichever is less. 
(2)  Concrete mixing facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Shall be accessory to the primary business (i.e., building supplies, equipment rental, or other similar business) located on the site. 
b.  Only one concrete mixer with a total capacity of one cubic yard shall be located on the lot or parcel. 
c.  Shall not be located within 25 feet of any property line or within 50 feet of any residential district. 
(3)  Such other uses as may be approved that would be similar to the permitted or special exception uses listed above and which would be consistent with the definition of this district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-574. - Conditional uses. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article IV, a retirement community or manufacturing light use may be permitted as a conditional use. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-575. - Property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure in the CG district, except hotel/motel as regulated below, shall exceed 50 feet in height, or 35 feet in height when located within 50 feet of any residential single family zoning district boundary, except as otherwise provided in article IX. No hotel/motel structure shall exceed 65 feet in height, or 50 feet in height when located within 100 feet of any residential single family zoning district, except as otherwise provided in article IX. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site area requirements are as follows (see section 70-274 for lots or parcels of substandard dimensions): 
(1)  Area: 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  Width: 80 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 100 feet. 
(c)  Maximum intensity. 
(1)  Within the commercial general, commercial limited, commercial neighborhood, or residential/office/retail future land use designations: 
Use 	Maximum Floor Area Ratio 
General commercial, except mini-storage 	0.35 
Mini-storage warehouse 	0.40 
 
(2)  A nonresidential use shall not exceed an impervious surface ratio of 0.85, or 0.75 when developed or redeveloped under the requirements of the commercial corridor architectural standards (chapter 59). A residential or residential equivalent use shall not exceed an impervious surface ratio of 0.75. The minimum common area open space and recreation area shall be 25 percent of the residential area. A least one-third of the open space area shall be in one location on the site. 
(3)  A mixed use shall not exceed, in combination, the respective number of units per acre and floor area ratio permitted, when allocated in their respective proportion to the net land area. 
(4)  All development and redevelopment under the CG zoning district shall be limited by and consistent with the allowable uses, maximum intensities (FAR and ISR), mixed use standards, and other standards as enumerated within the applicable future land use plan category overlaying the CG zoning district, and shall be consistent with countywide rules, as amended. 
(d)  Setback requirements. The following minimum setbacks shall be provided: 
(1)  Front: 25 feet. 
(2)  Side or rear (interior lot or parcel): None required when the side of a lot abuts another commercial lot. When the side of a lot abuts a lot other than a commercial lot, the side setbacks shall be the same as the adjoining district. Except for a corner lot, there shall be a rear yard provided of a minimum of 20 percent of the lot depth, but this section shall not require more than 20 feet. 
(e)  Special requirements of the CG district. 
(1)  Performance standards, see article XI. 
(2)  Commercial vehicles may be stored on site within this district when utilized in conjunction with the permitted use. This shall not include the use or storage of heavy equipment or semi-tractor/trailers. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-576—70-600. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - INDUSTRIAL LIMITED (IL) 
 
Sec. 70-601. - Purpose. 
The IL district provides areas for general services, wholesale distributions, storage and light fabrications. These areas should be conveniently located to arterial highways and transportation facilities. This district is intended as a distribution center for products sold and for services stored and warehoused for retail or wholesale sales to a customer, jobber, sales outlet or wholesaler. Such districts shall be so located in the community as to minimize the flow of heavy trucking routes through residential areas. These areas may also provide support services to adjacent or nearby industrial areas. 
The IL district may be utilized in areas designated by the future land use plan map as industrial limited. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-602. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are be permitted: 
(1)  Bakeries, wholesale. 
(2)  Automobile body repairs including body work and painting shops when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(3)  Cold storage and frozen food lockers. 
(4)  Contractors storage and equipment areas. 
(5)  Dry cleaning, dyeing, and laundry plants. 
(6)  Wholesaling/distributing. 
(7)  Sale of building materials, including lumber, cement and plaster, plumbing and feed, also including mill work and storage when conducted within a building or an area enclosed within a solid wall a minimum of eight feet high. 
(8)  Repair, maintenance and storage terminals for automobiles, buses, cabs, trucks and heavy equipment; but specifically prohibited is storage of garbage vehicles or containers. 
(9)  Laboratories for testing materials, chemical analysis. 
(10)  Meat storage, cutting and distributing, but not butchering. 
(11)  Storage warehouses, including mini-storage. 
(12)  Motion picture studios and offices. 
(13)  Radio and television stations, studios and associated offices. 
(14)  Transportation/utility facilities subject to a maximum area of five acres. 
(15)  Production and assembly of scientific, optical and electronic equipment. 
(16)  Service operations, such as but not limited to milk bottling and distribution plants and ice cream manufacturing, printing, book-binding, lithography and publishing plants. 
(17)  Public/semipublic uses subject to a maximum area of five acres. 
(18)  Retail commercial, personal/business service, and commercial/business service use are limited to three acres. Any such use, alone or when added to existing contiguous like uses, that exceeds the threshold shall require a plan amendment that shall include such use and all contiguous like uses. 
(19)  Temporary lodging use not to exceed 40 units per acre and shall not exceed a maximum of three acres. Any such use, alone or when added to existing contiguous like uses, that exceeds the threshold shall require a plan amendment that shall include such use and all contiguous like uses. 
(20)  Research/development (light and heavy) uses. 
(21)  Marinas, subject to a maximum five acres in area. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-603. - Special exceptions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article III, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Transfer/recycling facilities subject to a maximum area of three acres. 
(2)  Such other uses that would be similar to those permitted and special exception uses listed above and that would be consistent with the definition of this district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-604. - Property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure in the IL district shall exceed 50 feet in height, nor 35 feet in height when located within 50 feet of any residentially zoning district boundary except, as otherwise provided in article IX. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum site area requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Area: 12,000 square feet. 
(2)  Width: 80 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 100 feet. 
(c)  Maximum intensity. No use shall exceed a floor area ratio of 0.50, or an impervious surface ratio of 0.85. 
(d)  Setback requirements. The following minimum setbacks shall be provided: 
(1)  Front: 25 feet measured from any right-of-way line to a structure. 
(2)  Side or rear: None required for structures when the side or rear of a lot abuts another lot in CG or IL districts. When the side of a lot abuts a lot of a less intense usage, the side setbacks shall be the same as the adjoining district. There shall be a rear yard provided of a minimum of 20 percent of the lot depth, but this section shall not require more than 20 feet. 
(e)  Special requirements. 
(1)  Performance standards, see article XI. 
(2)  When abutting a residential district, a solid fence or wall (subject to section 70-775) of at least eight feet in height shall separate the two uses. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-605—70-625. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - AQUATIC LANDS (AL) 
 
Sec. 70-626. - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of the AL district is to protect coastal waterways and coastal wetlands subject to tidal action or periodic tidal inundation. Coastal areas are characterized by mangrove stands and other salt-tolerant vegetation found in tidal fringe lands, and also include all adjacent coastal waters. Any significant alteration of these lands and waterways would result in damage to the aquatic ecosystem and its ecological value to the public. This district shall include those areas designated on the zoning atlas maps as AL. 
The AL district should be used in those areas designated by comprehensive plan future land use map as preservation; however, this district shall be compatible with any future land use plan category where the property in question meets the definition of the AL district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-627. - Permitted uses. 
Within any AL district, no building or structure shall be erected, altered or used, nor shall any land or water use be permitted except one or more of the following, upon showing that such use, building or structure will not result in a pollution discharge to the waters of the United States, or public waters of the state; result in injury to the aquatic ecosystem; alter the normal ebb and flow of tidal waters; and alter the normal water elevation of interior wetlands and/or lakes: 
(1)  Wildlife management structures and accessory uses. 
(2)  Docks and piers. 
(3)  Recreation and park uses and/or structures compatible with the above. 
(4)  Stormwater management facilities. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-628. - Special exceptions. 
No special exceptions may be authorized within the AL district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-629. - Conditional uses. 
No conditional uses may be authorized within the AL district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-630. - Property development standards. 
(a)  This division shall not conflict with other federal, state and local laws, articles and regulations; and to the extent of any such conflict, the more stringent shall prevail unless otherwise provided by law and may be subject to chapter 62, articles III and IV. 
(b)  All development standards, except maximum intensity, will be established in conjunction with site plan review. 
(c)  Any use, building or structure requiring alteration of the land and/or water shall meet the conditions of section 50-100 et seq. 
(d)  Maximum intensity . No use shall exceed a floor area ratio of 0.10, or an impervious surface ratio of 0.20. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-631—70-650. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - PRESERVATION (P) 
 
Sec. 70-651. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of the P district is to regulate the use of properties having unique environmental, biological or ecological features. This division provides criteria for development to: 
(1)  Protect areas containing endangered species of flora or fauna; 
(2)  Preserve areas considered vital to the maintenance and recharge of water resources; 
(3)  Preserve areas with unique or valuable topographic or subsurface features; 
(4)  Protect areas of significant environmental or ecological importance to the city; 
(5)  Protect areas of natural drainage; and 
(6)  Ensure the least intensive development compatible with the preservation of fish and wildlife in their natural state. 
These areas may consist of swamps and marsh characterized by cypress, maple or bay trees, willow, sawgrass, arrowhead and similar wetland species. 
(b)  It is further the intent of this division that all lands and water classified as preservation shall remain in an essentially undeveloped state with no appreciable impervious surface coverage and with as much natural vegetation retained as possible. This district shall include those areas indicated on the zoning atlas map as P. 
(c)  The P district is intended to be utilized in areas designated as preservation or water feature on the future land use plan map. However, it may be utilized under any future land use map designation provided the subject property meets the intent of the definition of this district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-652. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Facilities, structures and accessory uses for wildlife management. 
(2)  Passive recreation and park uses. 
(3)  Docks and piers, nature trails or boardwalks. 
(4)  Stormwater management facilities. 
(5)  Residential density credit of one unit per acre to be transferred to the contiguous non-preservation area of the site under uniform ownership provided the receiving area is appropriately zoned to receive such transfer. 
(6)  Nonresidential floor area credit (0.05 maximum) to be transferred to the contiguous non-preservation area of the site under uniform ownership provided the receiving area is appropriately zoned to receive such transfer. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-653. - Special exceptions. 
There are no special exceptions permitted within the P district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-654. - Conditional uses. 
There are no conditional uses permitted within the P district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-655. - Property development standards. 
(a)  This division shall not conflict with other federal, state and local laws, ordinances and regulations; and to the extent of any such conflict, the more stringent shall prevail unless otherwise provided by law. All development requirements will be established in conjunction with site plan review and may be subject to chapter 62, articles III and IV. 
(b)  Maximum height . No structures may exceed 35 feet in height. 
(c)  Minimum building site area requirements . None. 
(d)  Maximum intensity. No use shall exceed a floor area ratio of 0.10 or an impervious surface ratio of 0.20. 
(e)  Setback requirements . No structure shall be located within 25 feet of the property line. 
(f)  Special requirements. As may be required by the city manager or designee. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-656—70-675. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 17. - PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC (P/SP) 
 
Sec. 70-676. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the P/SP district is to regulate the location of public service facilities, government facilities and institutions throughout the city. This district shall provide services, facilities and institutions in appropriate areas accessible to the public or in areas with demonstrated demand or need for such uses and otherwise ensure development compatible with existing zoning in areas surrounding or adjacent to this district and with the comprehensive land use plan. This district shall include those areas indicated on the zoning atlas map as P/SP. 
The P/SP district may be utilized in areas designated by the comprehensive plan future land use plan map as public/semi-public or recreation/open space. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-677. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Schools (public or private) of general or special education. 
(2)  Colleges and universities. 
(3)  Museums, performing arts centers, cultural centers and similar uses. 
(4)  Nursing homes. A residential equivalent use shall not exceed an equivalent of three beds per permitted dwelling unit at ten units per acre. This use shall not be permitted in the coastal high-hazard area or hurricane evacuation zone level A. 
(5)  Hospitals or medical clinics. This use shall not be permitted in the coastal high-hazard area (hurricane evacuation zone level A). 
(6)  Parks, playgrounds or similar recreation complex. 
(7)  Beach or water access. 
(8)  Recreation/open space. 
(9)  Cemeteries if occupying two or more acres. Graves and/or burial crypts shall not be within 50 feet of an adjacent parcel. 
(10)  Child day care. 
(11)  Utility transmission line. 
(12)  Public works garage/storage. 
(13)  Electric power substation. 
(14)  Telephone switching station. 
(15)  Governmental facilities characterized as low intensity or primarily office uses such as a city hall, courthouse, police station, post office, library, government offices, and similar public service and government-oriented uses, and subject to applicable comprehensive plan future land use category thresholds. 
(16)  Religious facilities/institutions. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-678. - Special exceptions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article III, the following use may be permitted: 
(1)  Telecommunication facilities. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-679. - Conditional uses. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article IV, the following conditional uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Utility substations, such as electric power substation, water treatment, sewage treatment and similar utility uses. 
(2)  Government buildings and public uses other than those listed as permitted uses in this division (such as fire and similar uses) and subject to applicable future land use plan designation thresholds. 
(3)  Residential and residential equivalent use. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-680. - Property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure shall exceed 50 feet in height except as otherwise provided in article IX. In approving a conditional use within this district, the city council may increase maximum allowable heights where deemed appropriate. 
(b)  Minimum building site area requirements. Minimum building site area requirements are as follows (see chapter 50) for lots or parcels of substandard dimensions): 
(1)  Area: one acre. 
(2)  Width: 100 feet. 
(3)  Depth: 100 feet. 
(c)  Maximum intensity. 
(1)  All development and redevelopment within the P/SP zoning district shall be limited by and consistent with the allowable uses, maximum intensities (FAR and ISR), mixed use standards, and other standards as enumerated within the applicable future land use plan category overlaying the P/SP zoning district. 
(2)  A residential equivalent use shall not exceed an equivalent of three beds per permitted dwelling unit at 12½ units per acre and maximum impervious surface ratio of 0.75. 
(3)  A residential use shall not exceed 12½ dwelling units per acre, a maximum impervious surface ratio of 0.75 and a maximum land area of five acres. 
(d)  Setback requirements The following minimum setbacks shall be required except, as otherwise provided in article IX: 
(1)  Front: 25 feet. 
(2)  Side: 20 feet. 
(3)  Rear: 20 feet. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
DIVISION 18. - RECREATION/OPEN SPACE (R/OS) 
 
Sec. 70-681. - Purpose. 
The R/OS district is specifically designated to provide for public and private open space and recreational facilities in order to provide relief from the urban environment; to provide adequate, active and passive recreational areas; and to adequately provide for the need of the population. Development within this designated area is limited to provide for a variety of active and passive park and recreational uses. This district shall include those areas indicated on the future land use plan map and/or zoning atlas maps as R/OS. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-682. - Permitted uses. 
Any portion of a building, structure, or lot or other real property located within the R/OS zoning district shall be used for one or a combination of the following uses: 
(1)  Public parks. 
(2)  Public recreational facilities. 
(3)  Public beach or water access. 
(4)  Public open space 
(5)  Open space, nonprofit or private, such as landscaped entryways. 
(6)  Golf courses and related accessory facilities such as pools, tennis courts and clubhouse. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-683. - Special exceptions. 
No special exceptions are permitted within the R/OS district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-684. - Conditional uses. 
Pursuant to the provisions of article IV, the following uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Electric substations. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-685. - Property development standards. 
(a)  Maximum height. No structure in a R/OS district shall exceed 35 feet. Except, as otherwise provided in article IX. 
(b)  Maximum building area. The maximum area of the lot or parcel that may be covered by structure shall not exceed 50 percent. 
(c)  Other development standards. 
(1)  The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.25. 
(2)  All structures shall be set back 25 feet from all property boundaries. 
(3)  The impervious surface ratio shall not exceed 0.60. 
(4)  Illumination. Outdoor lighting thereon shall be designed and situated so as to maximize containment of the emitted illumination on a subject parcel. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-686—70-710. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ZONING DISTRICT AND ASSOCIATED LAND USE TABLE 
 
Sec. 70-711. - Table of zoning districts and related consistent future land use plan categories. 
Zoning District 	Associated Future 
Land Use Category 
Residential Rural (RR) 	RR, RE, RS, RL, RU, RM 
Residential Estate (RE) 	RE, RS, RU, RM 
Residential Suburban (RS) 	RS, RL, RU, RM 
Residential Low (RL) 	RL, RU, RM 
Residential Urban (RU) 	RU, RM 
Mobile Home Parks and Subdivision (MH) 	All residential land use categories 
Residential Medium (RM) 	RM 
Residential Planned Development District (RPD) 	All residential land use categories 
Office District (O) 	O/R, R/O/R, CN, CL, CG 
Commercial Neighborhood (CN) 	R/O/R, CN, CL, CG 
Commercial General (CG) 	R/O/R, CN, CL, CG 
Industrial Limited (IL) 	Industrial Limited 
Aquatic Lands District (AL) 	P, R/OS, Water/Feature 
Preservation (P) 	P, R/OS, I, Water Feature 
Public/Semi-Public (P/SP) 	R/OS, I 
Recreation/Open Space (R/OS) 	R/OS 
 
All uses, densities, intensities (FAR and ISR), mixed use standards, and other standards regulating a plan category shall operate so as to limit the potential range of uses, maximum densities, maximum intensities (FAR and ISR), and development entitlements otherwise enumerated within a zoning district that is implementing a plan category. It is specifically the intent of this Code that all development and redevelopment be consistent with (less than or no more than equal to) the applicable overlaying plan category criteria, regulations and standards, and the countywide rules. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-712—70-769. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES 
 
Sec. 70-770. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate the number, installation, configuration, location and use of accessory structures, in order to ensure that they are not harmful either aesthetically or physically to adjacent residents and surrounding areas, and are compatible with the principal structure and use on the parcel. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-771. - General standards and requirements. 
(a)  Basic requirements. Any number of different accessory structures may be located on a parcel, provided that the requirements of this section are met. 
(b)  Principal use required. 
(1)  There shall be a permitted principal use and development on the parcel, that is full compliance with all standards and requirements of this Code. 
(2)  All accessory structures shall comply with development standards and requirements pertaining to the principal use, unless exempted or superseded elsewhere in this Code. 
(3)  An accessory structure shall not exceed more than 50 percent of the total footprint area of the principal building/structure, which calculation shall include attached structures as a garage, a screen room, and any other areas under roof except car ports, that comprise the principal structure located on the lot or parcel, unless exempted or superseded elsewhere in this chapter or as approved by the city manager or designee. 
(c)  Determination of accessory structure and/or use. Except as provided for in this article, the city manager or designee shall determine if a structure and/or use is accessory to the principal use on the parcel. 
(d)  Location. Accessory structures shall not be located in a required buffer, landscape area, front yard setback or other minimum building setback area, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or as required by the city manager or designee. 
(e)  Number. Except as provide for in the chapter, the city manager or designee may limit the number of accessory structures on a parcel or development site in order to maintain compatibility with, and the character of, the area. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-772. - Satellite dish antennas. 
(a)  General regulations. The following regulations shall apply to the placement of satellite antennas within all zoning districts: 
(1)  A city building permit and all other necessary permits shall be required prior to construction and/or installation. 
(2)  Satellite antennas and associated guy wires shall meet all required zoning district setbacks. 
(3)  The satellite antenna shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the applicable requirements of the standard building code and National Electrical Code. Further, every satellite antenna must be properly grounded. 
(4)  Any part of the satellite antenna, including but not restricted to the reflector, probe, guy wires, and signal transmission cable, shall have vertical and horizontal clearance from any electric lines as required by the applicable provisions of the National Electrical Code. 
(5)  Prior to the issuance of any building permit for a satellite antenna, engineering plans sealed by an engineer registered in the state shall be submitted to the city. Such engineering plans shall contain a certification that the roof-mounted satellite antenna assembly meets or exceeds all applicable code requirements of the standard building code and capable of withstanding wind velocity of 110 miles per hour. 
(6)  No signage of any type is permitted on a satellite antenna. This restriction shall not apply to a properly licensed telecommunications business nor to a licensed satellite antenna dealer. 
(b)  Regulations for pole-mounted satellite antennas. 
(1)  A pole-mounted satellite antenna may only be mounted on a single pole. The pole portion of the satellite antenna assembly must be affixed to the principal structure on the lot or parcel. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of any building permit for a pole-mounted satellite antenna, engineering plans sealed by an engineer registered in the state shall be submitted to the city. Such engineering plans shall contain a certification that the pole-mounted satellite antenna assembly meets or exceeds all applicable code requirements of the standard building code. 
(c)  Height requirements. 
(1)  Ground-mounted satellite antennas shall not exceed 15 feet in height, including base, pedestal or other mounting devices. 
(2)  Roof-mounted satellite antennas shall not exceed 12 feet in height in multifamily residential districts or 15 feet in height in commercial or industrial districts, including base, pedestal or other mounting devices. The combined height of the satellite antenna assembly and building on which it is located shall not exceed the maximum building height of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(3)  Pole-mounted satellite antennas shall not exceed the maximum building height of the zoning district in which it is located. No supporting pole shall exceed 12 feet in height above the main ridge of the roof. 
(d)  Regulations for single-family and two-family lots. The following regulations shall apply to the placement of satellite antenna on lots or parcels developed for single-family and two-family residential purposes: 
(1)  Satellite antennas shall be located only from the centerline of the principal structure to the rear of the structure. 
(2)  No ground-mounted satellite antenna shall exceed 12 feet in diameter. 
(3)  There shall be no more than one satellite antenna per lot or parcel. 
(4)  No roof-mounted satellite antennas shall be permitted. 
(e)  Regulations for three-family and multifamily lots. The following regulations shall apply to the placement of satellite antennas on lots or parcels developed for triplex or other multifamily residential purposes: 
(1)  Satellite antennas are permitted anywhere on a lot within the buildable area for a principal or accessory structure, excluding the front yard. 
(2)  No ground-mounted or roof-mounted satellite antenna shall exceed 12 feet in diameter. 
(3)  There shall be no more than one satellite antenna per lot or parcel. 
(f)  Regulations for commercial districts. The following regulations shall apply to the placement of satellite antennas on lots or parcels developed for nonresidential purposes within the O, CN and CG districts. The restrictions in this subsection shall not apply to a properly licensed telecommunications business. 
(1)  Satellite antennas are permitted anywhere on a lot within the buildable area for a principal or accessory structure. 
(2)  No ground-mounted or roof-mounted satellite antenna shall exceed 12 feet in diameter. 
(3)  There shall be no more than one satellite antenna per lot or parcel. This restriction shall not apply to licensed satellite antenna dealers or a properly licensed telecommunications business. 
(g)  Regulations for the industrial district. The following regulations shall apply to the placement of satellite antennas within the IL zoning district. The restrictions in this subsection shall not apply to a properly licensed telecommunications business. 
(1)  Satellite antennas are permitted anywhere on a lot within the buildable area for a principal or accessory structure. 
(2)  Roof-mounted or ground-mounted satellite antennas are permitted on the roof of a principal or accessory structure, provided the satellite antenna does not exceed 12 feet in diameter. 
(h)  Regulations for planned unit developments. Residential, commercial and industrial planned unit developments may impose such additional regulations as deemed appropriate. In no case, however, shall such regulations be less stringent than those imposed within this section for similar developments. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-773. - Accessory structures in residential areas. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Buildings constructed of materials other than aluminum shall conform to the standard building code. 
(2)  Aluminum structures shall conform to the Aluminum Construction Reference Manual, 1989 and subsequent editions. 
(3)  Detached aluminum structures shall be anchored with a minimum of four anchors, each anchor with a minimum of 600-foot steady-pull holding strength. 
(4)  Accessory structures that abut another building or structure shall be bolted to the abutting building or structure, as directed by the building inspector. 
(5)  If any accessory structure is placed on any utility, sewer or stormwater drain easement, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove the structure at the property owner's expense should removal and replacement become necessary. 
(6)  Air conditioning structures shall comply with chapter 62, article IV, floodplain management. 
(b)  Requirements for guest cottages and greenhouses. 
(1)  Guest cottages and greenhouses shall not be located closer than ten feet to the main structure nor any other accessory structure on the same lot or parcel. 
(2)  Such structures shall not be within that portion of the lot or parcel that constitutes the minimum side yard or rear yard as measured from the side or rear property line of the lot or parcel. Guest cottages and greenhouses shall not be located in front of the front line of the main structure, unless located within the RR zoning district in which case the guest cottage or green house must meet the required front and side setbacks for the applicable district. 
(3)  Such structures shall not exceed 400 square feet in floor area nor one story in height (24 feet). The one-story height limitation for height for guest cottages located in the 100-year floodplain shall be measured from base floor elevation. Guest cottages located within the RR zoning district shall not exceed 800 square feet in size. 
(c)  Requirements for utility sheds. 
(1)  A building permit is required for the installation of a utility shed. Only two utility sheds are permitted per residential lot or parcel. On a residential lot or parcel with more than two legally permitted utility sheds in existence prior to May 12, 2015, such utility sheds shall be deemed to be grandfathered. Utility sheds are only permitted in the rear or side yard setback area. Utility sheds located in the rear yard shall be set back a minimum of two feet from the side or rear property line of the lot or parcel. Utility sheds located in the side yard shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the side property line of the lot or parcel. 
(2)  The total floor area of a utility shed shall not exceed 120 square feet. 
(3)  A utility shed shall not exceed ten feet in height, including any foundation. 
(d)  Requirements for solar energy systems . 
(1)  A building permit is required for the installation of a solar energy system. 
(2)  Solar energy systems are permitted within any residentially zoned district as an accessory use/structure. The following are permitted encroachments: 
i.  Roof-mounted systems may exceed maximum height requirements by ten percent of the maximum permitted height in the district or three feet, whichever is the greater limit. 
ii.  Freestanding systems may encroach into the required rear or side yard setback area by a maximum of three feet; however, shall be limited in height to ten feet. 
iii.  Solar panels shall be oriented as to not create glare into the windows of abutting properties. 
(3)  Solar energy systems are permitted within any nonresidential zoning district, subject to the setback and height limitations of the zoning district. 
(e)  Requirements for other use accessory structures, other than those enumerated above. 
(1)  A detached accessory structure shall not be closer than five feet to the main structure nor to any other accessory structure on the same lot or parcel. 
(2)  No detached accessory structure shall be located in front of the front line of the main structure. 
(3)  No detached accessory structure shall be located within that portion of the lot or parcel that constitutes the minimum side yard or rear yard as measured from the side or rear property line of the lot or parcel. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-774. - Swimming pools. 
(a)  Generally. Such accessory structure shall include permanent and portable swimming pools, except portable swimming pools less than 18 inches in depth. 
(b)  Use. Use of private swimming pools is restricted to the residents of the dwelling unit and their guests. 
(c)  Location. Swimming pools must meet the front yard setback requirement of the zoning district. The pool side and rear setbacks are as follows: 
(1)  No edge of the pool shall be closer than six feet to any property line. 
(2)  No detached accessory structure, except as otherwise identified in this chapter, shall not be closer than five feet to the side or rear property line, the main structure or to any other accessory structure on the same lot or parcel. 
(3)  On waterfront lots no edge of the pool shall be closer than six feet to the mean high water line or seawall, provided that certification from an engineer registered in the state, is submitted prior to issuance of a permit stating that the proposed pool and/or enclosure will not affect the integrity or functioning of the seawall or its deadmen. 
(d)  Fencing. Every outdoor swimming pool or family pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension except for doors and gates; and if a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal opening shall not exceed four inches. A dwelling house, accessory building or waterfront may be used as part of such enclosure. All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed and latched at all times when not in actual use; except the door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. The self-closing and self-latching devices shall be placed no less than four feet above the bottom of the enclosure or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children. Aboveground pools constructed with steps and a platform circling the pool and not otherwise enclosed shall have the platform enclosed and a gate provided at the top of the steps with such enclosure and gate meeting the security criteria described in this section. 
(e)  Requirements for swimming pool screen enclosures. Swimming pool screen enclosures may be located within a required side or rear yard setback area provided a minimum setback of five feet is maintained from the side or rear property line of the lot or parcel. 
(f)  When located on lots with frontage on two or more streets, pools and screen-only enclosures may be located within 15 feet of the public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-775. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  Permit required. No fences shall be constructed until a permit has been issued; and such permit shall be subject to easements of record. A survey may be required. In those cases where an existing fence is being replaced with a like fence (same materials, color, height and opacity) in the same location, then the requirement for a permit may be waived. 
(b)  Location. In any district, no fence, wall or other obstruction shall be erected or maintained at a corner within 15 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Fences or walls beyond the front building line in residential districts shall be limited to a maximum height of three and one-half feet above the existing natural grade. 
(2)  Except for public utility installations, no fence or wall in excess of six feet in height above existing grade shall be erected in a residential district. 
(3)  Barbed wire may be used on security fences erected in any commercial or industrial district or around any public utility in any district, provided such use is limited to a maximum of three strands, a minimum of six feet above ground. 
(4)  All fencing or walls shall be of uniform building materials and color, and shall be constructed of commonly used materials such as chain link, wrought-iron, aluminum (wrought-iron design), wood, plastic (PVC) or masonry. Masonry block walls, except brick, shall have a finished appearance such as a stucco finish on the exterior facing the street or abutting properties. All fencing shall have the finished side (as determined by the city manager or designee) along the street and abutting properties. Fences constructed of scrap metal, plywood or other offensive materials are prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-776. - Accessory structures permitted with nonresidential uses. 
(a)  Accessory structures such as vending machines, refrigeration containers, ice boxes, propane container racks, DVD rental boxes and other like structures, shall only be located adjacent to the building. 
(b)  Collection receptacles used for donation shall: only be permitted on properties designated as institutional (I) on the city's future land use map; only permitted under the direct control or ownership of the property owner; and, only as an accessory use to the principal use of the property (i.e., religious institution use). The siting/location of any collection receptacle shall require a zoning clearance and approval from the city as an accessory use/site element. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-777—70-830. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS, OVERLAY ZONES AND FLOATING ZONES 
 
Secs. 70-831—70-860. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SUPPLEMENTARY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 70-861. - Deed restrictions, covenants, easements, etc. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties; however, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the uses of structures, land and water, or requires more open space than is required by other rules or regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, recorded deed, plat or otherwise, the more restrictive provisions of this chapter or the code shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-862. - Boundary lines. 
Prior to construction on any lot or parcel, the boundaries of such lot or parcel shall be accurately marked with appropriate markers set by a surveyor registered to practice in the state. Markers shall thereafter be protected and shall be used by inspectors to determine required setbacks. A survey may be required with all applications for a zoning clearance. See section 50-101 et seq. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-863. - Road frontage. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no building shall be built, constructed, enlarged or structurally altered or moved on a lot, tract or parcel of land that does not abut a dedicated public right-of-way, or private roadway within a platted subdivision, for a distance equal to the minimum lot width required in the zoning district in which the property is located. Where the curvature of the public right-of-way prevents this requirement from being met then the road frontage required in this section may be reduced up to 30 percent. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-864. - Surface drainage. 
Prior to issuance of a building permit for any structure, a site drainage plan may be required if the proposed improvement is determined by the city engineer to affect existing drainage patterns. Such examination shall determine whether the drainage of the lot or parcel is compatible with the city drainage standard established in accordance with the chapter 58, article IV, and no zoning approval shall be issued in such instances where the city engineer finds the plans to be incompatible with established standards. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-865. - Measurement of setbacks and permitted setback and height encroachments. 
(a)  No portion of an alley or right-of-way shall be included as part of determining the required setback. 
(b)  For determination of setbacks, corner lots and multiple-frontage lots shall be considered to have front yards on all street frontages unless otherwise specified in this chapter. Side setbacks shall apply to all other sides of such a lot or parcel. 
(c)  Where right-of-way lines are established, or proposed by action of the city council, for the purpose of future roads or widening of existing roads, all street setbacks shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way line adjacent to the property. 
(d)  Sills, eaves, cornices, chimneys, flues, mechanical equipment and similar projections may project into a setback area not more than three feet, and shall not extend over adjacent property. 
(e)  Wing walls shall conform to the normal setback requirements whenever they exceed the allowable height of a fence. See section 70-775. 
(f)  An open, unroofed porch, patio, stairway, or paved terrace may project into a required front setback for a distance not exceeding ten feet. An enclosed roofed porch may encroach into the required front yard setback if consistent with the predominately established porch setback characteristics of adjacent properties within the same block street frontage. 
(g)  All residential structures, and their accessory structures, on waterfront lots or parcels, shall be set back 25 feet from the mean high water mark in tidal areas or normal high water on lakes; except where adequate seawalls or riprap stabilization exist, the setback requirement shall be 15 feet from the seawall or stabilization. 
(h)  No structure, except a utility shed, shall be placed on or erected within the area of a recorded drainage or utility easement. 
(i)  On a lot or parcel that does not abut a public right-of-way, or private roadway within a platted subdivision, the required front setback shall be measured from the edge of the unplatted roadway or access easement edge whichever is greater, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(j)  For nonconforming setbacks and height, see section 50-231 et seq. 
(k)  Height. Chimney, water, fire, radio and television towers, smokestacks, flagpoles and similar structures and their necessary mechanical appurtenances, such as elevator shafts and ventilation equipment, non-habitable, decorative and other functional elements, may be erected above the height limits herein established; however, the heights of these structures or appurtenances shall not exceed ten percent of the maximum height permitted within the district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-866. - Transferable development rights. 
Rules governing transfer of development rights shall be governed by the countywide rules. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-867. - Density/intensity averaging. 
Rules governing density/intensity averaging shall be governed by the countywide rules. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-868—70-879. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - SPECIFIC USE SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 70-880. - Required standards. 
Certain uses have unique characteristics that require the imposition of development standards in addition to those minimum standards which may pertain to the general group of uses encompassing the use. These uses are listed in this article together with the specific standards that apply to the development and use of land for the specified activity. These standards shall be met in addition to all other standards of this land development code, unless specifically exempted. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-881. - Hospitals and similar facilities. 
Hospitals, nursing homes, group homes, and assisted living facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  These facilities shall not be permitted in the coastal high hazard area (hurricane evacuation zone A), or floodway as designated by Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance rate maps. 
(2)  Location of these facilities shall governed by Florida Statutes. 
(3)  The maximum number of beds shall be three beds times the permitted density. For the purpose of this section, a bed shall mean the same as a resident or occupant. 
(4)  Prior to the receipt of a certificate of occupancy from the city, an emergency management plan, including evacuation strategy, will be submitted to the city as well as copies of all required state, county and local licenses. 
(5)  The granting of a special exception or conditional use shall not be deemed effective until all necessary state, county and local license necessary for the facility will have been procured. 
(6)  The developmental review board and/or city council shall ensure that nursing homes, group homes, and assisted living facilities shall be designed, maintained and operated so as to be compatible with the neighborhood and should provide a style of life substantially similar to other occupants living in the neighborhood. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-882. - Uses over open water. 
No buildings or structures, except decks, docks, bridges and piers, shall occur over natural water areas. Applications for such structures shall be submitted to the city for zoning approval and where applicable, approval by the county. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-883. - Alcoholic beverages. 
The dispensing of alcoholic beverages has the potential to contribute to undesirable impacts on adjacent or nearby properties such as litter, noise, and other disturbances. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish appropriate locational and distance standards that promote public safety and mitigate associated impacts. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverages means any beer, wine or liquor as defined by the state beverage law. 
Business establishment means and includes any place of business, whether or not licensed under the state beverage law, of any vendor, club organization, corporation, firm, person, partnership or similar entity which dispenses alcoholic beverages. This shall include any establishment commonly known as a bottle club, which may permit persons to carry alcoholic beverages onto the premises of such establishment with the knowledge, actual or implied, that the beverages will be consumed thereon. 
Dispense and dispensing means the storing, handling, preparation, distribution, serving, sale or gift of any alcoholic beverage. Permitting or allowing any person to carry alcoholic beverages onto the premises of a business establishment with the beverages to be consumed thereon shall be deemed as dispensing such beverages. 
State beverage law means F.S. chs. 561—565. 
(b)  Districts permitting dispensing, storage, distribution. The dispensing of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption only by any business establishment may be permitted only in zoning districts classified by this chapter as CN, CG, or IL. Such sales shall also be permitted within any authorized commercial building located in an RPD district. The wholesale storage and distribution only of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in zoning district IL. 
(c)  Dispensing for on-premises consumption; distance required from residential zoning districts. The dispensing of alcoholic beverages by any business establishment for on-premises consumption may be permitted only within the CN, CG and IL zoning districts. Such sales may also be permitted within any authorized commercial building located in an RPD district. No building or structure in which alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed, or consumed under this subsection shall be located within 100 feet of any residential zoning district boundary line (in the case of a building located in an RPD commercial area, such distance shall be measured to the boundary of the nearest property used for residential or accessory residential purposes), this distance to be measured along a straight line from the nearest residential zoning district boundary to the closest portion of the building or structure dispensing the alcoholic beverage or licensed area; except that in a multitenant or multiuser building, such as a shopping center, the distance requirements shall be measured from any residential district boundary along a straight line to the unit or portion of the building or structure in which alcoholic beverages are actually sold, dispensed or consumed under this subsection. It is further provided that a building or structure, located on a bona fide golf or country club premises, in which alcoholic beverages are dispensed for consumption by the members and guests thereof only, may be located in any zoning district, but shall be located within the boundaries of the golf or country club and shall be located not less than 200 feet from any residential structure. The dispensing of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption in conjunction with a bona fide restaurant located within a 100-foot distance of any residential zoning district may be permitted as a special exception. 
(d)  Dispensing for on-premises consumption by social clubs, or any veterans, fraternal, benevolent, civic or other organization described in F.S. § 561.20(7). Organizations described in F.S. § 561.20(7) may dispense alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption within any zoning district or location providing such location is approved by the city council, as a conditional use pursuant to section 70-226 et seq. Temporary dispensing permits shall be approved by the city manager, or designee. This subsection shall not apply to those areas which meet the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Prohibition of dispensing near a religious facility use which is located within a residential or a public/semi-public zoning district or any school which is located within a public/semi-public district. The dispensing of alcoholic beverages by any business establishment shall not be permitted from that portion of any building or structure licensed for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages that is within 750 feet, measured in a straight line, from the nearest point of a religious facility which is located within a residential or a public/semi-public zoning district, or a school building or structure which is located within a public/semi-public district. In a multitenant or multiuser building such as a shopping center, the distance may be measured from the unit or portion of the building where alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or consumed to the boundary of any tract of land on which a religious facility or school is located or which has received legal authority to locate. This subsection shall not be retroactive; and the subsequent erection of a religious facility or school within the distance of a legally authorized business establishment shall not be cause for the revocation or suspension of any permit, certificate or license, or cause for denial of any permit or certification thereafter requested for that use. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-884. - Automotive service, repair, auto body and/or filing stations. 
(a)  Standards. Automotive related services have the potential to produce negative secondary effects related to aesthetics, noise, dust, environmental, and odor, and it is the intent of this section to address issues surrounding automotive related uses. All automotive service stations must meet the following standards: 
(1)  All pump islands shall be set back at least 15 feet from a road right-of-way line and canopies shall be governed by zoning district setback requirements pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  All mechanical lifts or structures intended for the purpose of a lift must be housed in a completely enclosed automotive maintenance building. 
(3)  An establishment where gasoline and/or diesel fuel is supplied and dispensed at retail and where, in addition, the following services only may be rendered and sales made accessory to the sale of gasoline and/or diesel fuel: 
i.  Minor motor vehicle repair (excluding engine and transmission repairs); 
ii.  Sale of beverages, packaged food, tobacco products, and similar convenience goods for customers, as accessory and incidental to principal uses. 
iii.  No outdoor retail sales activities unrelated to service station operation are permitted on the property. 
(4)  No disassembled automobiles or automobiles under repair are permitted outside of the completely enclosed automotive maintenance building or area that is fully screened with a solid fence or wall and behind the front line of the building. 
(5)  The outdoor storage of trailers, motor homes or boats is permitted behind the front line of the building; and the total area of such storage, which is considered an accessory use, shall not exceed 2,000 square feet. 
(6)  The number of curb breaks for one establishment shall not exceed two for each 100 linear feet of street frontage, each having a minimum width of 30 feet and located not closer than 15 feet from the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines. Where the intersection of two right-of-way lines is an arc, the point of measurement of the 15-foot distance, shall be the midpoint of the arc and shall be measured along a straight line of the point. 
(7)  When located within 300 feet of a residential zone, all storage of tires, parts, equipment, trailers, motor homes and boats shall be within an area enclosed by a solid decorative wall or fence (pursuant to section 70-775) a minimum of eight feet in height. Storage of tires, parts and equipment is prohibited within the front yard setback, unless screened by a landscape buffer pursuant to section 58-329. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-885. - Temporary uses and structures. 
(a)  Construction offices, construction storage buildings for land under development, real estate offices and model homes shall be allowed in any district for the purpose of developing and marketing the property of the subdivision in which such uses are to be located. Authorization for a temporary use and structure shall only be granted after the filing of an acceptable preliminary site plan. A maximum of four model homes may be permitted on lots within subdivisions which have been platted, and which have received final site plan and construction plan approval. A legal property description of each lot to be permitted will be required, and such permit shall be reviewed for compliance with requirements of the final site plan. Any permit for temporary use and structure shall expire at the end of two years or upon completion of the project for which the temporary use has been authorized, whichever is sooner, and shall be removed or converted to a permitted use upon such expiration. Extensions to the original permit may be granted for a period of one year by the developmental review board as a special exception. 
(b)  Other temporary uses such as Christmas tree sales, pumpkin sales, rummage sales, temporary flea markets, carnivals, festivals, promotional activities and temporary post-disaster housing (pursuant to Pinellas County Code chapter 34, article II, division 2, emergency housing) or other temporary uses, as may be approved by the city manager, may be permitted under the following criteria: 
(1)  May be permitted in commercial, industrial or agricultural zones, or in other zones if on the site of an existing civic organization (e.g., church, Boy Scouts, school, fraternal organization or similar activity). 
(2)  A time limit of 30 consecutive days only, except as approved for temporary post-disaster housing. 
(3)  Applicant to provide site plan showing sales area, size and location of any temporary signage, any temporary structures that may be proposed, adequate off-street parking area, and a written statement of permission from the property owner to conduct the use. 
(4)  The provisions of section 70-886 shall be met for any tent. 
(5)  The zoning approval shall indicate the dates of operation. 
(c)  Garage sales at a single-family residence do not require a permit; however, garage sales shall be limited to not more than a three-consecutive-day event and not more than three such events during any calendar year (January—December). Garage sale items are limited to personal household goods, and not for the sale of items typically associated with a business or commercial uses. All associated signage shall be removed after the day of the sale. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-886. - Tents. 
Tents may be erected in any zoning district for a period not to exceed 30 days for the purpose of special sales, promotions, entertainment, educational, religious, evangelistic or similar special events subject to the following: 
(1)  The use of the tent shall be limited to an authorized use of the property in the zoning district where located. 
(2)  The tent shall comply with all setback requirements. 
(3)  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided. 
(4)  The applicant shall submit a detailed plot plan showing the location of the tent, the floor area and maximum capacity (number of persons) of the tent, the number and location of off-street parking spaces, a traffic circulation plan showing all ingress/egress locations, a signage plan and the location of any structures existing on the site. The plan shall be examined by the building/life safety services section to determine compliance with this chapter and other applicable codes, ordinances or regulations. No approval for a building permit shall be issued until the plan complies with these provisions. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-887. - Livestock. 
No livestock shall be maintained, raised or housed within any zoning district except where specifically authorized by this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-888. - Topographical alterations or excavations. 
(a)  A zoning approval shall be required for any topography alteration or excavation that is more than five cubic yards but less than 250 cubic yards. Prior to issuance of such approval, a scaled site and/or grading plan shall be submitted to and approved by the community development department, which shall show the following: 
(1)  Boundaries of the property. 
(2)  Location of all trees that are protected pursuant to chapter 62, article II, on the site. 
(3)  Location of proposed fill or excavation. 
(4)  Existing and proposed topography, including surface water areas. 
(b)  No zoning approval is required for fills or excavations of less than five cubic yards; however, no fill or excavation regardless of size shall detract from or interfere with the city's or county's ultimate drainage plans or adversely affect existing drainage patterns or cause drainage or water to flow onto adjacent properties. Where such interference or detraction appears possible, a zoning approval pursuant to this section may be required. Tree removal permits are required for fills and/or excavations. 
(c)  A zoning approval shall be required for any landfill or excavation that is 250 yards or more. However, the only permitted excavations of 250 yards or more are for removal of illegal fill, or fill that has been made illegal by subsequent legislation after the fill was originally placed, or excavation conducted under a development order issued as part of an approved site plan. The requirements contained in section 70-888 are required to be met prior to an approval being issued. 
(d)  Prior to the approval of any excavation, the site plan review agencies (as required) shall examine a preliminary site plan (a cross section of the excavation is required) to determine whether the proposed excavation will be detrimental to or interfere with the health, safety or general welfare. The plan, once approved, shall become a condition upon which the excavation is permitted; and any change or addition shall constitute a violation of this chapter unless the change or addition is examined by the city site plan review agencies according to the same criteria required for original issuance, and approved by the developmental review board. 
(1)  No excavation of earth shall be within 150 feet of any road right-of-way line, unless the excavation is conducted under a development order issued as part of an approved site plan. 
(2)  Unfenced excavations of earth shall be no closer than 50 feet to an adjoining lot or parcel. Fenced excavations shall be no closer than 25 feet to an adjoining lot or parcel. These restrictions shall not apply to an excavation that is conducted under a development order issued as part of an approved site plan. 
(3)  Depth and slope shall be determined by the city engineer and/or the county water system according to demands for safety from pollution of the underground watercourses to be determined according to the nature of the particular substrata soil structure. 
(4)  No excavation shall detract from or interfere with the county's or the city's ultimate drainage plans or existing patterns. No excavation may be approved that would pollute the underground watercourses. 
(5)  All plans for proposed excavation shall be required to bear the seal and signature of an engineer registered and licensed by the state and shall show a positive outfall of overflow into the city and county drainage system. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-889. - Marinas and other dependent uses. 
Site plans for marinas shall not be approved unless such plans are in substantial compliance with the goals, objectives and policies of the coastal management and conservation element of the city's adopted comprehensive plan. For purposes of this chapter, marinas and other water-dependent uses shall include any facility adjacent to and utilizing access to a body of water providing boat storage and launching, docking, building, repair, maintenance and outfitting of watercraft that requires access to water, or any similar water-dependent use. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-890. - Residential design manufactured homes. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to encourage the provision of affordable housing in a general residential environment by permitting the use of residential design manufactured housing in residential districts in which similar dwellings constructed on the site are permitted, subject to the requirements and procedures set forth in this section to assure similarity in exterior appearance between such residential designed manufactured housing and dwellings that have been constructed under these and other lawful regulations on adjacent lots in the same district. Manufactured homes approved as residential design manufactured homes, either individually or by specific model, shall be permitted in residential districts in which similar residential occupancy is permitted, subject to requirements and limitations applying generally to such residential use in the districts, including minimum lots, yard and building spacing, percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking requirements and approved foundations as described in this chapter. 
(b)  Procedures for approval of residential design manufactured homes. Approval for residential design manufactured homes shall be authorized by the city manager or designee. 
(1)  Application. Application for approval of manufactured homes as residential design manufactured homes shall be submitted to the city manager's office or his designee in such form as may reasonably be required to make determinations, in particular, in addition to such information as is generally required for permits and as is necessary for administrative purposes, such applications shall include all information necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the standards herein, including photographs of all sides of the residential design manufactured homes, exterior dimensions, roof pitch, roof materials, exterior finish, and other information necessary to make determinations. 
(2)  Actions by the city manager or designee; time limitations on determinations. Within seven days of receipt of the application and all required supporting materials, the city manager or designee shall make the determination as to conformity with the standards of this section, and shall notify the applicant of the approval, conditional approval, or denial of the application. Conditional approval shall be granted only where the conditions and reason therefore are stated in writing and agreed to by the applicant, and such conditions shall be binding upon the applicant. In the case of disapproval, the reasons therefore shall be stated in writing. 
(c)  Standards for determinations of similarity in exterior appearance. The following standards shall be used in determinations of similarity in appearance between residential design manufactured homes, with foundations approved as provided in this subsection, and compatible in appearance with site-built housing constructed in adjacent or nearby locations. 
(1)  Minimum width of main body. Minimum width of the main body of the residential design manufactured homes as located on the site shall not be less than 20 feet as measured across the narrowest portion. This is not intended to prohibit the offsetting of portions of the home. 
(2)  Minimum roof pitch; minimum roof overhang/roofing materials. Minimum pitch of the main roof shall be not less than one foot to rise for each two and one-half feet of horizontal run, and minimum roof overhang shall be one foot. In cases where site-built housing generally has been constructed in adjacent or nearby locations with lesser roof pitches and/or roof overhangs or less than one foot, the residential design manufactured homes may have less roof pitch and overhang similar to the site-built houses. In general, any roofing material, other than a built-up composition roof, may be used that is generally used for site-built houses in adjacent or nearby locations. 
(3)  Exterior finish; light reflection. Only material for exterior finish that is generally acceptable for site-built housing constructed in adjacent or nearby locations may be used; however, reflection for such exterior shall not be greater than from siding coated with clean white gloss exterior enamel. 
(4)  Approved foundations required in residential districts. No residential design manufactured homes shall be placed or occupied for residential use on a site in a residential district until such foundation plans have been submitted to and approved by the city manager or his designee as to the appearance and durability of the proposed foundation and being acceptably similar or compatible in appearance to foundations or residences built on adjacent or nearby sites. All homes shall be placed on permanent foundations. 
(5)  Site orientation of the manufactured home. Residential design manufactured homes shall be placed on lots in such a manner as to be compatible with and reasonably similar in orientation to the site-built housing constructed in adjacent or nearby locations. 
(6)  Garages, carports in residential neighborhoods. A residential design manufactured homes shall be required to be provided with a garage and/or carport compatible with the residential design manufactured homes and the site-built garages and/or carports constructed in adjacent or nearby residential neighborhoods that include garages and/or carports. 
(7)  Comparison with other housing. Residential design manufactured homes shall be compared to site-built housing in the neighborhood within the same zoning district. Approval for residential design manufactured homes shall not be granted unless it is found that the residential design manufactured home is substantially similar in size, siding, material, roof pitch, roof material, foundation and general appearance to site-built housing that may be permitted by the zoning and/or building code in the neighborhood in the same zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-891. - Accessory dwelling unit. 
(a)  Purpose. Accessory dwelling units (ADU) are intended to provide additional housing that is incidental to a primary use while ensuring that the intended neighborhood character is protected. Accessory dwelling units are intended to provide guest housing, security residence, and/or affordable housing options. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to the establishment of a new accessory dwelling unit and expansion of any existing legally permitted accessory dwelling unit. This provision does not supersede any provisions prohibiting or limiting ADUs within deed restricted communities. ADUs are subject to the applicable zoning district development standards. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Accessory apartments, garage apartments, and guest houses may be permitted as accessory uses to any single-family detached homes in all residential districts subject to the applicable district regulations and the following requirements: 
a.  No more than one accessory apartment, garage apartment, or guest house may be permitted on any single-family residential lot or parcel. 
b.  An accessory dwelling use shall be subordinate to the principal use as to location, height, square footage and building coverage. Units are limited to 750 square feet. 
c.  Mobile homes and recreational vehicles are prohibited from being used as guest houses or accessory dwelling units. 
d.  Separate utility meters from the principal use shall be allowed. 
e.  An accessory dwelling unit structure shall be architecturally compatible with the principal residential structure. 
f.  One of the units on the property is required to be owner-occupied. 
(2)  Accessory dwelling units are exempt from district density limitations and parking requirements; however, are subject to setback, height and ISR requirements of the zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-892. - Commercial parking lots in residential districts. 
Parking for a professional, commercial or industrial zoned use that proposes to utilize an abutting residentially zoned district for parking, subject to the following: 
(1)  No portion of the parking lot shall be located no greater than 150 feet from the common boundary between the professional, commercial or industrial zoned use and the residentially zoned property. 
(2)  Parking so provided shall count towards the parking requirements on adjacent professional, commercial or industrial property. 
(3)  Parking shall be designed so as to provide a transition between the professional, commercial or industrial zoned properties and the residential areas by providing appropriate screening and buffering and shall not be used for any business purposes other than parking. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-893. - Special events. 
Special event permits are administrative regulations intended to provide orderly and effective management of temporary events not otherwise provided for in the code. Such events are often found to be desirable for limited periods of time while they might not be keeping with the intent and purpose of the land uses, if allowed on a long term basis. 
The provisions of this section allow thorough administrative review of these special types of events a method of limiting them to their individual specifications. These provisions are designed to allow certain reasonable temporary events while minimizing adverse impact upon the public health and welfare. 
(a)  Permits. Application for a special event permit shall be made to the city for events as described herein, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A survey or legal description or plot plan of the property to be used for the special event, including all information necessary to accurately portray the property and to identify the area to be utilized for the event, shall be submitted. A statement from the property owner that the special event is permitted on the property and the special event representative is designated by the property owner. 
(2)  A description of the proposed special event and, if necessary, a drawing or narrative identifying details of event facilities, size and location of signage and the means of ingress and egress at the discretion of the reviewing official above mentioned. 
(3)  In addition to the above, sufficient information and assurances to determine the suitability of the proposed special event as required by the city, as may be applicable. This information may include but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Documentation from the county health department regarding arrangement for temporary sanitary facilities and such assurances as the city may require concerning compliance. 
b.  Such information and assurances as the city may require concerning length of the special event. 
c.  Such information and assurances as the city may require concerning hours of the special event. 
d.  Provision for and, if deemed necessary, a financial guarantee, in the amount determined by the city and in a form approved by the city, to assure that the premises will be cleared of all debris during and after the special event. A formula to determine the amount required will be established by city staff to allow flexibility to change as market conditions change. 
e.  Provision for adequate parking. 
f.  A financial guarantee in an amount determined by the city and in a form approved by the city guaranteeing the repair of public right-of-way of any damage resulting to the right-of-way as a result of the special event. A formula to determine the amount required will be established by city staff to allow flexibility to change as the market conditions change. 
g.  The city may require that security be required if alcohol is to be served at a special event. If required by the city, the applicant must provide documentation that security has been provided on site, by either the county sheriff's office or a uniformed private security company. There shall be a minimum of two security personnel for each special event. The number of security personnel may be increased dependent upon the size of the special event. 
(b)  Criteria and requirements for special event. A permit for a special event shall be issued upon such conditions as the city may reasonably require to assure compliance with all information and assurances submitted with the application and shall, in addition, be expressly conditioned upon the following: 
(1)  Documentation from the county health department regarding arrangements for temporary sanitation, health and safety facilities or equipment. Condition shall be based on number of people attracted to the event and if alcoholic beverages will be served. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverage service allowed at special events will be determined by the city council for those zoning districts that do not allow for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  No permanent or temporary lighting is to be installed without an electrical permit and an inspection and shall not adversely impact adjacent uses. 
(4)  No tents or structures are to be erected without acquiring a separate permit and an inspection and shall not adversely impact adjacent uses. 
(5)  The special event site is to be cleared of all debris at the end of the special event and cleared of all temporary structures within two days after closing of the event. 
(6)  If required by the city, traffic control and pedestrian safety arrangements in the vicinity of the special event are to be arranged by the operators of the special event with the county sheriff's department. Traffic generation will not adversely impact flow of traffic and traffic volumes on adjacent roadways. Use of existing access drives will be encouraged, when possible. 
(7)  Specific limits as to time, not to exceed three days for any one special event, shall apply. 
(8)  Levels of noise volume shall not adversely affect adjacent residential areas. 
(9)  Special events shall be substantially compatible with adjacent uses dependent upon dates and hours of operation and the other requirements set forth herein. 
(c)  Administration. 
(1)  General. Upon application as provided for above, the city may issue a special event permit subject to any conditions imposed in this article. Upon finding that the application does sufficiently comply with those general standards set forth above as well as other applicable standards contained in the code as conditioned, as provided for herein, the city shall issue a special event permit, setting forth the duration of the permit and specifying such conditions as to hours, location, parking, traffic, access and any other conditions of the activity. The permit shall, otherwise, be denied. 
(2)  Application time. The application for a special event permit for all uses shall be filed at least 14 days prior to the date on which the permit is to take effect. The city manager may approve a lesser time period. The application forms shall provide such information as the city shall find to be reasonably necessary for fair administration. 
(3)  Public notice discretionary. At the discretion of the city manager, public notice to abutting property owners of the proposed location shall be required. The decision to require public notice shall be made within two days after receipt of a complete permit application. The applicant shall provide a certificate of notice within five days after notification of the requirement. 
(4)  Right of appeal. Any special event permit denial may be appealed by the applicant to the city council. 
(5)  City council authority. Upon filing of such an appeal, the permit shall be withheld until the city council hears the appeal and renders a decision. The city council shall have final authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the permit application. 
(6)  Revocation of permit with stay. The city manager or his designee, upon finding that the terms of any permit are being violated, may revoke the permit and order the immediate cessation of the special event. The holder of the permit may appeal that revoking to the city council and denial shall be stayed pending the appeal. 
(7)  Revocation of permit without stay. Upon finding imminent and hazardous threats to public health and safety caused by any special event, the city manager may take reasonable steps to prevent public access thereto and to eliminate such hazard and may revoke or suspend a permit. An appeal of such action may be taken as provided above, but without a stay of the revocation or suspension. A permit may be reinstated provided that the applicant has met all conditions required by the city manager and city council. 
(8)  Charitable and nonprofit organizations. Consideration for permitting a special event may be given to charitable or nonprofit organizations. 
(d)  Events. The following special events are subject to, but not limited to, the regulations contained in section 70-885, where applicable. 
(1)  Carnival or circus. 
(2)  Events of public interest. A special event permit may be issued for any special event of public interest, including but not limited to, outdoor concerts, speeches and rallies. 
(3)  Tent meeting. 
(4)  Charitable promotional activities involving the outdoor display of goods and merchandise. In non-commercial zones, a special event permit may be issued for a period of not more than three consecutive days to display and sell merchandise. 
(5)  Charity auctions. 
(6)  Exhibitions. 
(7)  Artists and craftsmen. 
(e)  Penalty for failure to comply. Any person, organization, society, association or corporation, or any agent or representative thereof, who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be subject to code enforcement, or upon conviction in court, to a fine not exceeding the sum of $500.00. 
(f)  Fees. There shall be no fee for a special event permit for the special events which are organized and controlled by a charitable or non-profit sponsor. For other types of special events, in particular commercially related special events, the fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-894. - Recreational vehicle parks. 
Recreational vehicle park means a development designed specifically to allow temporary and/or permanent living accommodations for recreation, camping or travel use. 
(a)  General requirements. A recreational vehicle park shall meet the following general requirements: 
(1)  It shall be primarily for recreational use by persons with transportable recreational housing, with appropriate accessory uses and structures. 
(2)  The land on which it is developed shall be under unified control and shall be planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or programmed series of development operations for recreational vehicles and related uses and facilities. Subsequent subdivision of lots is prohibited. 
(3)  The principal and accessory uses and structures shall be substantially related to the character of the development in the context of the district of which it is a part. 
(4)  The park shall be developed according to comprehensive and detailed plans that include not only streets, utilities, lots or building sites and the like, but also site plans, floor plans and elevations for all buildings as intended to be located, constructed, used and related to each other, and detailed plans for other uses and improvements on the land as related to the building. 
(5)  The park shall have a program for provision, maintenance and operation of all areas, improvements and facilities for the common use of all or some of the occupants of the park, but will not be provided, operated or maintained at general public expense. 
(b)  The allowable uses in a recreational vehicle park include the following: 
(1)  Recreational vehicles. 
(2)  Park trailers (park models) as defined by state and/or federal law. 
(3)  Convenience establishments for the sale or rental of supplies or for provision of services, for the satisfaction of daily or frequent needs of campers, within the park may be permitted. These establishments may provide groceries, ice, sundries, bait, fishing equipment, self-service laundry equipment, bottled gas and other similar items needed by users of the park. These establishments shall be designed to serve only the needs of the campers within the park and shall not, including their parking areas, occupy more than five percent of the area of the park, and shall not be so located as to attract patronage from outside the grounds, nor have adverse effects on surrounding land uses. 
(4)  Marinas or launching ramps may be permitted where allowed in the land use/zoning district, subject to either minimum requirements or supplemental standards, within the district. Marinas or launching ramps shall not include facilities for storage of boats other than those rented in connection with the park operation. There shall be no facilities for the repair or overhaul of boats. 
(c)  Site design requirements. The following site design requirements in a recreational vehicle park shall be met: 
(1)  The minimum land area shall be eight acres. 
(2)  The maximum density shall be 18 spaces per acre. Storage spaces shall be included in the density calculation. 
(3)  Individual spaces shall take access to internal streets and shall not take direct access to adjoining public rights-of-way. 
(4)  Access to the recreational vehicle park shall be from a collector or arterial roadway. 
(5)  Internal streets shall provide safe and convenient access to spaces and appropriate park facilities. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography. Construction and maintenance shall provide a well-drained and dust-free surface that is of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic, and in any case, shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
a.  One-way, no parking, 12 feet. 
b.  Two-way, no parking, 20 feet. 
(6)  Streets serving less than 50 spaces may be used as part of the pedestrian circulation system. Elsewhere, if the relation of space locations to facilities within the park calls for establishment of pedestrian ways, they shall be provided, preferably as part of a common open space system away from streets, but otherwise sidewalks. No common access to the pedestrian ways, or to facilities within the park, shall be through a campground space. 
(7)  Not less than eight percent of the area of the district shall be devoted to recreation area. The recreation area may include space for common walkways and related landscaping in block interiors, provided that the common open space is at least 20 feet in width as passive recreation space. At least half of the total required recreation area shall be comprised of facilities for active recreation, such as swimming pools or beaches, ball fields, shuffleboard courts, or play lots for small children. These facilities shall be so located as to be readily available from all spaces, and free from traffic hazards. 
(8)  Camping spaces shall be so located in relation to internal streets as to provide for convenient vehicular ingress and egress if the space is intended for use by wheeled units. Where back-in or back-out spaces are used, appropriate maneuvering room shall be provided in the adjacent internal street and within the space. 
(9)  Where spaces are to be used exclusively for erection of tents on the ground, provision for vehicular access onto such spaces shall not be required; but parking areas shall be located within 100 feet, except in circumstances in which providing such vehicular accessibility would result in excessive destruction of trees or other vegetation, or where it would be impractical to provide such parking areas within such distances for particularly desirable campsites. 
(10)  Spaces shall be so related to pedestrian ways and principal destinations within the park as to provide for convenient pedestrian access to such destinations by the pedestrian systems. 
(11)  No minimum dimensions are specified for spaces, but each shall provide a stand and the clearances and open spaces specified herein; and the boundaries of each stand and space shall be clearly indicated. 
(12)  Spaces for dependent units shall be located within 200 feet by normal pedestrian routes of toilet, washroom and bath facilities. 
(13)  Spaces for self-contained units, operating as such, may not be located more than 400 feet by normal pedestrian routes from toilet, washroom and bath facilities. 
(14)  Stands shall be of such size, location and design to provide for the type of units that will use them. Thus where use by wheeled units is intended, vehicular access to the stand itself is essential. If use is to be restricted to tents to be erected on the ground, vehicular access to the stand itself is not essential; but the dimensions required may be different and it will be of primary importance that the stand have a level surface suitable for erection of a tent, composed of material suitable for driving and holding tent pegs, free of rocks, roots or other impediments to the driving of pegs to the depth of at least eight inches, and graded and drained to prevent flow of surface water into or under tents erected on it. 
(15)  Stands shall be so located that when used, clearance from units, including attached awnings and the like, shall be as follows: 
a.  From units on adjoining stands, ten feet. 
b.  From internal streets of common parking area, ten feet. 
c.  From portions of building not containing uses likely to disturb stand occupants, or constructed or oriented so that noise and lights will not be disturbing to occupants of space, 25 feet. 
d.  From any other use or fueling facility, 50 feet. 
(16)  Within each space, there shall be an area suitably located and improved for outdoor use by occupants of units and not to be occupied by units or towing vehicles except during maneuvering incidental to location or removal. This space shall be at least eight feet in minimum dimensions and 160 square feet in area in route parks, ten feet in minimum dimension and 200 square feet in area in destination parks, and shall be so located as to be easily accessible from the entry side of units as normally parked and oriented on stands. 
(17)  Where fireplaces, cooking shelters, or similar facilities for open fires or outdoor cooking are provided within spaces or elsewhere, they shall be so located, constructed, maintained, and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance within the park and in adjoining areas. 
(18)  Design and construction of improvements shall comply with standards and specifications in the appendices. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-895. - Adult congregate living facility/nursing homes. 
When developed as an independently sited residential facility, an adult congregate living facility shall not receive a certificate of occupancy/use until the appropriate license has been issued by the state department of children and family services. When developed as a part of a retirement community, the adult congregate living facility portion of the retirement community shall conform to the minimum standards as set forth in this section. 
(a)  Retirement community. 
(1)  A retirement community may consist of independent living dwelling units, assisted-living dwelling units, a central dining facility, accessory supporting structures and amenities designed and intended for the needs and uses of the residents of the retirement community, and may consist of a nursing home licensed per F.S. § 400.062. 
(2)  Nursing care, if provided, shall be provided in licensed facilities, which may be located in the complex or in another setting as designated by the continuing care agreement. 
(3)  When located in a residential or a commercial zoning district, the retirement community complex may provide limited commercial facilities (i.e., hair salon, apothecary), which are designed and intended exclusively for the use and personal services of the residents of the complex and which shall not be for public use. 
(4)  Assisted-living dwelling units and nursing care facilities must be licensed by the state department of children and family services. No certificate of occupancy/use shall be issued by the city for any assisted-living dwelling units or nursing care facility until the appropriate license has been issued. 
(b)  Nursing home. When developed as an independently sited facility, a nursing home shall not receive a certificate of occupancy/use until the appropriate license has been issued by the state department of children and family services. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-896. - Home occupation. 
(a)  The use in a home used for a home occupation must be conducted entirely within a dwelling and not be visible from the street or neighboring dwellings, and must be carried on by members of a household living in the dwelling except as provided below. The home occupation is to be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for dwelling purposes and is not to change the residential character thereof. A home occupation shall include, but not be limited to, the following uses of the premises when conducted within the standards established in this section: 
(1)  Art studio; 
(2)  Dressmaking; 
(3)  Office of a lawyer, engineer, architect, IT or other profession or occupation meeting the requirements of this division. 
(4)  Phone sales, mailing service, accountant, handicrafts, consultant or similar profession. The preceding list is meant to be illustrative only and is not all inclusive. 
(b)  A home occupation shall not be construed to include uses such as tearooms, food processing establishments, restaurants, showrooms or commercial kennels, industrial, manufacturing, and personal service establishments such as hair salons, beauty shops and barbershops. Home occupations specifically prohibited would include auto and/or equipment repair, or any similar type of use which is not compatible with the residential neighborhood. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  No person shall be engaged in a home occupation other than members of the household residing on the premises except, up to one person may be engaged in a home occupation other than members of the household residing on the premises provided parking is available on site in a driveway or other standard parking area. 
(2)  The home occupation shall not create vapors or fumes; and no home occupation shall be permitted where noise, light, dust or vibration extends beyond the lot or parcel line of an abutting lot or parcel. 
(3)  Home occupations shall occupy no more than 20 percent of the total floor area of the dwelling. 
(4)  All activities associated with the home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the premises. There shall be no visible evidence other than provided in this division that the premises is being utilized for any other use than a dwelling unless such display or evidence is located inside of the premises in a fashion as not to be visible from the street. 
(5)  There shall be no physical change or alteration to the exterior appearance of a structure that would not be appropriate to its use as a dwelling. 
(6)  One non-illuminated sign identifying the home occupation shall be permitted provided that such sign has an area of not more than one square foot and is fastened to and parallel with the structure. 
(7)  The home occupation shall not generate traffic to the neighborhood so as to create a nuisance or a hazard. 
(8)  The business tax receipt shall not be transferable with the property ownership. 
(9)  No materials or stock in the trade are to be sold on the premises or stored outside the premises. 
(10)  Customers may not conduct business on the premises. 
(11)  Traditional home based instruction such as but not limited to tutoring and music where instruction is provided by only one instructor to only three students per class with no more than ten classes per day between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. shall be considered a home occupation. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-897. - Day care centers in residential districts. 
Day care centers in residential districts, subject to the following: 
(1)  Provide a gross land area of 500 square feet per child (does not apply to adult day care). 
(2)  Orient all children's play areas and provide buffering and separation, as deemed appropriate by the developmental review board, so as to prevent adverse impact to adjacent properties (does not apply to adult day care). 
(3)  Facilities to be licensed as required by appropriate governmental agencies. 
(4)  Parking required at one space per employee plus one space per each ten students or clients. 
(5)  Prior to the receipt of a certificate of occupancy from the city, an emergency management plan, including evacuation strategy, will be submitted to the city. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-898. - Junkyards. 
(a)  Must be located at least 300 feet from major arterial roadway and/or residential zoned area. 
(b)  Material that is not salvageable shall not be permitted to accumulate, except in bins or containers, and shall be disposed of in an approved sanitary landfill. The period of accumulation is limited to two months. 
(c)  In no case shall material that is not salvageable be buried or used as fill. 
(d)  Any items that can be recycled or salvaged shall be accumulated in bins or containers to be sold to a recycling firm. 
(e)  Recyclable material that cannot be stored in bins or containers may be stored in the open. 
(f)  Junkyard operators shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable federal and state regulations pertaining to the handling, storage and disposal of waste fluids. In no case shall disposal of waste fluids be permitted on the site, except with the express approval of the state department of environmental regulation. 
(g)  In any open storage area, it shall be prohibited to keep any icebox, refrigerator, deep-freeze locker, clothes washer, clothes dryer, or similar airtight unit having an interior storage capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more from which the door has not been removed. 
(h)  Screening. All junkyards shall comply with the following screening requirements: 
(1)  All outdoor storage facilities shall be surrounded by a decorative solid continuous wooden or PVC fence (not including chain link fences), or a masonry wall, any of which shall be a minimum of eight feet in height without openings of any type, except for one entrance and/or one exit, which shall not exceed 25 feet in width, or as required by the fire marshal or public utilities. 
(2)  Gates at entrance or exit shall be of a material without openings. 
(3)  The screen shall be constructed of the same type of material throughout. 
(4)  Screens shall be setback at least 25 feet from any street line or setback line, and no storage or dismantling shall be permitted outside the required screen. 
(5)  No screen shall be constructed of metal that will rust. 
(6)  Screens shall be maintained and in good repair at all times. 
(i)  Buffer in lieu of screening. Where an outdoor storage facility does not abut a public street or highway, a vegetative buffer may be permitted in lieu of screening. A buffer as described in chapter 58, section 58-330 shall be required. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-899—70-910. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-911. - Intent. 
All uses in districts where reference is made to this article shall conform to the standards of performance described below. It is the intent of this article to provide restrictions on properties so as to protect adjacent and nearby properties from noise, pollution, visual and other aesthetic distractions, and other similar undesirable effects. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-912. - Specific requirements. 
(a)  Noise. Every use shall be operated so as to comply with the county noise ordinance or any amendments thereto relating to noise. 
(b)  Screening. When located within 300 feet of a residential district, all industrial processes (welding, spray painting, fabrication or manufacture of products, equipment repair and similar processes) shall be within completely enclosed buildings. When located within 300 feet of a residential district, all storage areas, except storage of passenger vehicles, shall be effectively screened from view by a solid fence or wall a minimum of six feet in height. When directly abutting a residential district, all nonresidential uses of land shall be screened along such abutting property line by a solid fence or wall a minimum of six feet high in accordance with the provisions of section 70-775; and no storage, except storage of passenger vehicles, shall be permitted within 20 feet of any residentially zoned property. 
(c)  Pollution, visible emissions, dust, dirt, odors and fumes. Every use shall be operated so as to prevent the emission of smoke, dust, fumes or other pollutant as defined by the state department of environmental regulation and county air quality ordinances, as amended, from any source whatsoever in quantity or at a level that is or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life, or property or unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation, or in excess of that specified or allowed by any state or county permit. Any operation that emits or can reasonably be expected to emit any pollutant shall obtain an appropriate permit from the department of environmental regulation and/or the county. 
(d)  Industrial sewage and waste. Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the discharge into any stream, lake or the ground, of waste or other matter in amounts that will exceed the maximum standards established by local, federal or state law. 
(e)  Fire and safety hazard. Each use shall be so operated as to minimize the danger from fire and explosion. 
(1)  All uses determined to be of a hazardous nature, using the standards set forth by the National Fire Protection Association shall be provided with additional setbacks as determined by National Fire Protection Association standards. 
(2)  Such additional setbacks, if any, shall be determined by the fire marshal during review of plans. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-913—70-935. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - POLLUTION 
 
Sec. 70-936. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this division to provide appropriate standards relating to the operation of certain activities throughout the city. Such operations may create or maintain such excessive noise, vibration, air pollution, odor or electromagnetic interference as to be a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare. These standards are therefore provided to protect the public interest and promote the public health and welfare. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-937. - Applicability. 
This division shall apply to all uses including accessory uses within the jurisdiction of the city. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-938. - Procedure. 
Any applicant for zoning approval shall, where applicable, submit technical information and evidence to indicate that the performance standards of this article will be met. In addition, any use where a pollution emission is contemplated, shall, in accordance with state laws, secure a permit for a pollution emission. Such permits are issued by the state department of environmental protection. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-939. - Continued compliance. 
Continued compliance with this article is required and shall be enforced. If necessary, the city shall utilize the facilities and technicians of the state department of environmental regulation in enforcing this article. Certain uses established before the effective date of this chapter and nonconforming as to performance standards shall be given a reasonable time in which to conform therewith. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-940. - Performance bond. 
Certain uses, determined to be pollution-prone by the developmental review board or city council, may require the posting of a performance bond as a condition for the issuance of a building permit. The performance bond shall cover the full cost of the acquisition and installation of pollution control devices and materials. The city council or its designee shall seek expert advice on matters of pollution control, and payment for this expertise shall be provided by the applicant as part of the cost of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-941. - Standards. 
(a)  Noise. The county noise ordinance, as amended, is adopted as the noise ordinance of the city, and such law is incorporated herein by reference to the same extent as if set out in full. 
(b)  Air pollution. 
(1)  Smoke. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any fuel-burning equipment or incinerator the shade or appearance of which is darker than shade No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart to be emitted into the outdoor atmosphere. 
(2)  Open burning. No person shall conduct a salvage operation or destroy refuse by open burning. 
(3)  Air contamination. 
a.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of any noxious or offensive odor from any air contamination source. 
b.  No emission of fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air pollution shall be permitted that may constitute a nuisance or that can cause any damage to health of animals, vegetation or other forms of property, or that can cause excessive soiling. 
(c)  Water pollution. The standards for water pollution shall be those of the state department of environmental protection. 
(d)  Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable without instruments at the property line of the property from which they are emitted. 
(e)  Radioactivity and electrical disturbance. The standards for radioactive emissions shall be those of the U.S. Federal Atomic Energy commission. No electrical disturbance is permitted that adversely affects the operation of any equipment. 
(f)  Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare visible at abutting property lines is permitted, whether from floodlights, high-temperature processes such as combustion or welding, or other source. 
(g)  Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted that is detectable without instruments at the property lines. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Secs. 70-942—70-980. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 
 
Sec. 70-981. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television communications, through the sending or receiving of electromagnetic or photovoltaic waves. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Height means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if the highest point on the tower or structure is an antenna. 
Home satellite dish means a device used to receive satellite broadcast signals, usually a parabolic, dish-shaped antenna, one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. 
User means any independent entity which is marketing a service to customers in the city. For the purpose of determining the number of users co-locating, no two users shall have any common ownership ties. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-982. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this article are to encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas; to minimize the total number of towers in the city; to encourage the use of existing structures as an alternative to new tower construction; to encourage the joint use of new towers; to encourage the design and construction of towers and antennas which minimize the adverse visual impacts and to enhance the ability of suppliers of telecommunications services to provide such services within our city quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-983. - Applicability of article. 
This article shall apply to all towers and antennas installed and maintained within the jurisdiction of the city. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-984. - Exceptions from provisions of article. 
(a)  Towers and antennas installed and maintained in accordance with this article are exempt from the height limitations for buildings and structures set forth elsewhere in this Code. 
(b)  Amateur radio antennas operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Towers and antennas located on city property are exempt from height limitations set forth elsewhere in this Code and are exempt from the requirements of this article, provided a lease or franchise agreement authorizing such tower or antenna has been approved by the city, or the tower or antenna is city-owned. 
(d)  Home satellite dishes are considered a residential accessory use and are exempt from the requirements of this article and are governed by article IX of this chapter. 
(e)  The installation of an antenna on a building which is nonconforming in terms of current height limitations shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-985. - Variances from provisions of article. 
Variances from this article may be granted in conformity with sections 50-293 through 50-295. In addition to the criteria set forth in chapter 50, article VI, the applicant must agree to accommodate co-location as the need or opportunity arises. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-986. - Antennas. 
(a)  Land use and zoning classification. Antennas may be installed in all land use and zoning categories in the city. 
(b)  Procedure for obtaining permit. All applicants for the installation of each antenna must obtain a permit from the building department of the city. The community development department reserves the right to require improvements, modifications and location revisions for proposed antennas in order to lessen the visual impact or adverse safety impact of such installations. 
(c)  Placement, height and color restrictions. Antennas may be installed on existing structures such as a building, lightpole or other freestanding structure, provided that: 
(1)  The antenna shall not add more than ten feet to the height of the building, lightpole or freestanding structure; 
(2)  If the antenna is installed on a flat roof of a structure which is 30 feet in height or greater, the antenna shall not add more than 15 feet to the height of the structure; 
(3)  The antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to or closely compatible with the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible; and 
(4)  No illumination or lighting shall be permitted unless required by the FAA. 
(d)  Federal requirements and safety standards. All antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations by the FAA, FCC and all other agencies of the federal government with the authority to regulate antennas. If such standards are changed, the owners of the antennas governed by this article shall bring such antennas into compliance with the revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for removal of the antenna at the owner's expense. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-987. - Towers. 
(a)  Land use and zoning classifications. Towers may only be installed and constructed in areas that have a future land use designation of commercial neighborhood, commercial general, institutional or public/semi-public, and that have a zoning classification of commercial neighborhood (CN), commercial general (CG), public/semipublic (PSP, excluding city) or industrial limited (IL). 
(b)  Procedure for obtaining permit. All applicants for the installation and construction of a tower must obtain a permit from the building department of the city. The permitting procedure is a two-step process: 
(1)  Step 1. The applicant shall submit a preliminary application to the community development department of the city in compliance with the requirements of subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  Step 2. Upon review and acceptance of the preliminary application and design plans and specifications by the building department, the applicant must request a hearing before the city council. Upon approval by city council and review and acceptance of all final construction documents, the building department shall issue a permit. 
(c)  Preliminary permit application. All applicants for new towers shall investigate the possibility of shared use of available space on existing towers prior to requesting approval for a new tower. Documentation of the applicant's efforts to obtain shared space on existing towers shall be submitted as part of any application for approval. 
(1)  Step 1. Criteria. The preliminary application submitted to the community development department shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the community development department that there is no existing tower or structure that can accommodate the applicant's proposed needs. 
a.  Evidence. Evidence that the applicant may submit to demonstrate step 1 may consist of, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Geographic area. No existing tower or structure is located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
2.  Insufficient height. Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
3.  Structural strength. Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment; 
4.  Electromagnetic interference. That placement of the applicant's antenna or existing towers or structures would result in electromagnetic interference; 
5.  Fees and costs. The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure for a time period of 25 years exceed the cost of developing a new tower; 
6.  Modification or replacement. It is not financially feasible to modify or replace an existing tower to accommodate the proposed antenna; and 
7.  Other limiting factors. Evidence of other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
b.  Community development department review and approval of preliminary application. The community development department will review the preliminary application and advise the applicant, in writing, whether the preliminary application establishes that there is no existing tower or structure that can accommodate the applicant's proposed needs. The community development department may verify applicant representations that a new tower is required with review by a state-licensed professional engineer, specializing in the technical aspects of communication tower siting. The expenses incurred by such review shall be borne by the applicant. 
(2)  Step 2. Additional criteria. Upon acceptance of the preliminary application, the applicant shall submit design plans and specifications which shall comply with all applicable codes, including but not limited to the Southern Building Code Congress International and the following additional criteria: 
a.  Single user. Single-user towers shall not exceed 90 feet in height. 
b.  Two users. Towers designed for two users shall not exceed 120 feet in height. 
c.  Three users. Towers designed for three users shall not exceed 150 feet in height. 
d.  Multiple users. Towers designed for multiple users may add 20 feet for each additional user, provided that additional height may not be added until the additional user actually commences use thereof, and provided further, that the total height shall not exceed 160 feet; proper clearance height, spacing and frequency for multiple use per all applicable codes is the responsibility of users. 
e.  Neutral color. Towers and supporting structures shall be a neutral, nonglare color or finish, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness, and shall meet applicable standards of the FAA. The city council may require as a condition of approval that the tower be constructed so as to be camouflaged or incorporate other stealth aspects to assure compatibility with the surrounding area. 
f.  Setback requirement. Towers shall be set back from existing residential or nonresidential uses a distance equal to the height of the tower. The distance shall be measured from the base of the tower to the residential or nonresidential property line. Tower guys and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum set back requirements set forth in this chapter for the particular zoning district. 
g.  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than eight feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate. The city council may require solid fencing or a wall as a condition of approval. 
h.  Landscaping. 
1.  Landscaping shall be required around the perimeter installed on the outside of fences. The community development department may waive this standard for those sides of the proposed communication facility that are located adjacent to nonresidentially zoned undevelopable lands or land not in public view; 
2.  Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute for, or in supplement toward, meeting the landscaping requirements; 
3.  Landscaping shall be in accordance with chapter 58, article V; and 
4.  Xeriscaping is encouraged, and in those cases where it is used, the requirement for an irrigation system is waived, provided such landscaping is sustained and is properly maintained. 
i.  Advertising. No tower or antenna shall be used for advertising of any type or the placement of signs, other than warning or required FAA signs, is strictly prohibited. 
j.  Federal requirements and safety standards. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations by the FAA, FCC and all other agencies of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers. If such standards are changed, the owners of the towers governed by this article shall bring such towers into compliance with the revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. On February 1, one year after each tower receives a certificate of completion, each tower owner/operator is required to present to the building department of the city a certification by a qualified, state-licensed professional engineer that the tower meets all applicable codes as to structural and aesthetic integrity. At that time the owner/operator also shall provide the community development department with written certification as to the current user occupancy at every level of its tower, including user type, name, address, telephone and fax numbers. Failure to bring towers into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for removal of the tower at the owner's expense. 
k.  Construction codes. 
1.  All towers must be constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with all applicable construction codes and engineering specifications which include ANSI/TIA/EIA standards as well as the standards set forth by the Electronic Industries Association. 
2.  If, upon inspection, the community development department finds that the structural integrity of a tower or antenna constitutes a danger to persons or property, the owner of the tower or antenna shall be given written notice of the condition and shall have 30 days to bring the tower or antenna into compliance in accordance with the standards set forth in the applicable codes. 
3.  Any related structural plans, specifications and structural repairs shall require sealed verification by a state-licensed, qualified and experienced engineer retained by the owner. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-988. - Appeal of rejection of preliminary application. 
If the building department fails to properly review and accept the preliminary application and/or the design plans and specifications, the applicant may appeal such actions to the city manager. The applicant shall notify the city manager in writing of the desire to appeal and the city manager shall schedule an appeal conference with the applicant within two weeks. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-989. - City council approval. 
Upon review and acceptance by the community development department of the preliminary application, including the design plans and specifications, the applicant shall submit a request for a public hearing in accordance with sections 70-227 and 70-228. The city manager shall schedule such public hearing before the city council within 21 calendar days of receipt of such request upon approval by city council, the applicant shall submit all final plans, specifications and related contractual documents evidencing that the applicant is ready to commence construction. Upon final review and approval by the community development department, a permit for the installation of the communication tower will be issued. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
Sec. 70-990. - Abandoned towers and antennas. 
Any tower or antenna that has not been used for a period of 90 consecutive days shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the city manager or designee who shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from the tower owner/operator regarding the active use of the tower or antenna. The owner/operator shall have 90 days from the date of the city manager or designee's determination of abandonment to: 
(1)  Notify the city and reactivate the use of the tower or antenna or to transfer the tower or antenna to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower. 
(2)  Remove the abandoned antenna(s) and reduce the tower height accordingly or if all users are abandoned, then dismantle and remove the entire tower. Such reduction or dismantling shall be accomplished within 60 calendar days of the discontinuance by the user, provided such reduction allows continued operations by the remaining users, subsequent to any appropriate height and equipment adjustments. If the owner/operator fails to dismantle and remove such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner of the land upon which such tower or antenna is located shall be responsible for such dismantling and removal. 
(3)  Failure to comply constitutes a violation of the City Code. Any previously granted variances or other approvals will terminate if the tower or antenna is not reactivated within 90 calendar days of such determination, or upon completion of dismantling and removal. 
( Ord. No. 09-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-12-15)  
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES[1] 
The following is a list of the franchises of the city: 
Ordinance 
Number 	Adoption 
 Date 	Effective 
 Date 	Franchisee 	Fee 
(% of 
revenue) 	Term 
of Years 
6 	12- 8-70 	 1- 1-71 	Florida Power Corporation 	6 	30 
17 	 5-11-71 	 5-11-71 	Peoples Gas Company 	6 	30 
14-84 	 6-13-84 		Time-Warner Cable 	3 	15 
30-86 	10-28-86 		Time-Warner Cable 	5 	15 
15-91 	11-26-91 	 5- 3-92 	General Telephone Company (GTE) 	1 	20 
06-98 	 6- 9-98 	 6- 9-98 	GTE Media Ventures Cable Franchise 	5 	10 
61-2000 	 1- 9-01 	 1- 9-01 	Florida Power Corporation 	6 	10 
07-2002 	 4- 9-02 	 5- 9-02 	Peoples Gas System 	6 	10 
10-2002 	 6-25-02 	 6-25-02 	Time Warner Entertainment—Advance/Newhouse Partnership 		15 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(4). 


