CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ST. PETE BEACH, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published in 1997 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
Adopted: June 16, 1998 
Effective: June 16, 1998 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
ST. PETE BEACH, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Alan Johnson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Terri Finnerty 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Doug Izzo 
Ward Friszolowski 
Melinda Pletcher 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Alex Rey 
City Manager 
____________ 
Rebecca C. Haynes 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Andrew Dickman 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1983 Code, as supplemented through May 21, 1996, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1983 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Jody Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Charles Boice, Chief of Police, Chris Brimo, Director of Planning and Development, Jane Ellsworth, CMC/AAE, former City Clerk, Danny Walker, former City Manager, James DeVito, City Attorney, and the other members of the city staff, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. 1997. 
ORDINANCE NO. 98-49 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida; Providing a General Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Whereas, the City contracted with the Municipal Code Corporation (MCC) to research, edit and reorganize the Code of the City of St. Pete Beach; and 
Whereas, MCC has submitted the Code which was amended by eliminating inconsistencies and conflicts with state law, eliminating ordinances preempted by state law, updating the terminology, and reorganization of ordinances and chapters making up the Code. 
Now Therefore Be It Ordained by the City Commission of the City of St. Pete Beach as Follows: 
Section One (1). The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of St. Pete Beach, Florida" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of chapters l through 134, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section Two (2). Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or a term of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or both a fine and term of imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section Three (3). Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section Four (4). Ordinances adopted after July 1, 1997, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section Five (5). Sections 2-106 through 2-108 and 16-16 through 16-22 of the 1983 Code were not printed in the Code adopted herein, but said code sections shall remain in full force and effect and are on file with the city clerk. 
Section Six (6). Unless otherwise provided, wherever the term "appropriate board of authority," used throughout the Code of Ordinances adopted by this ordinance, shall mean that that board, committee or commission designated by the City Commission. 
Section Seven (7). This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final passage. 
Passed on First Reading June 2, 1998 
Passed on Final Reading June 16, 1998 
	/s/   
      Ronald McKenney, Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Pamela Prell, City Clerk 	
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida, as adopted by Ordinance No. 266 on January 13, 1976, and referendum on March 2, 1976. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Adoption of home rule charters, F.S. § 166.031. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CREATION AND POWERS 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Creation and powers. 
The City of St. Pete Beach is created which shall have all governmental, corporate and proprietary powers to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions and render municipal services, and may exercise any power for municipal purposes except as otherwise provided by law. 
Editor's note— The name of the city has been changed to St. Pete Beach in this Charter, based on a referendum held on March 8, 1994. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166.  
Sec. 1.02. - City property; use and disposition. 
(a)  Any real estate owned by the City of St. Pete Beach shall not be leased for a term in excess of five (5) years except upon specific authorization of a majority of qualified electors voting at a city-wide referendum. 
(b)  Any real estate owned by the City of St. Pete Beach shall not be sold except upon specific authorization of a majority of qualified electors voting at a city-wide referendum. 
(c)  City-owned real estate may be leased for a term of five (5) years or less only upon specific authorization by an affirmative vote of a majority of the full commission. 
(Ord. No. 80-5, § 1, 1-29-80/3-4-80)  
Sec. 1.03. - Vacation of right-of-way. 
Any alleys, walkways, drainage facilities, dedicated streets or utility easements shall be vacated only upon specific authorization by an affirmative vote of four (4) members of the city commission after written notification to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet from the perimeter of the real estate sought to be vacated. 
Any lands conveyed to the public to be used for streets, parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, swimming pools, or libraries can only be disposed of in any way upon specific authorization of a majority vote of a city-wide referendum. 
No easement, dedicated or granted to the city, right-of-way, or access to the gulf, bay or other waterfront shall be vacated.  
ARTICLE II. - CORPORATE LIMITS 
 
Sec. 2.01. - Description of corporate limits. 
The following area shall constitute the corporate limits of the City of St. Pete Beach: From a point of beginning at the intersection of the center line of Blind Pass and a line which is 40 feet south of the south boundary of 74th Avenue extended in St. Pete Beach; thence run northerly along the center line of Blind Pass to a point 870 feet north of [and] measured at right angles from the center of Blind Pass Bridge where it now crosses Blind Pass on the present State Road No. 699; thence run north 81 degrees, 31 minutes, and 3 seconds east along a line parallel to Blind Pass Bridge to the center line of the Government Channel in Boca Ciega Bay; thence run southeasterly and southerly along the center line of said Government Channel in Boca Ciega Bay to where said channel intersects what is known as Pass-a-Grille Channel lying east of what is now Vina Del Mar, formerly known as Mud Key; thence run southerly along the center line of said Pass-a-Grille Channel to a point 500 feet south of the southernmost tip of Long Key as it now exists; thence run due west into the Gulf of Mexico 10 miles; thence run due north to a point which lies south 60 degrees west from the point of beginning; thence run north 60 degrees east to the point of beginning. Together with the tracts of land described in fee simple deed from Elsie S. Allen, widow, to the Long Key Sewer District, a political subdivision of the State of Florida, dated May 3, 1956, and filed May 4, 1956, in deed book 1594, page 526, as clerk's instrument No. 274302A, Pinellas County Records, and in fee simple deed from Kenneth Eriksen and Jacquelyn M. Eriksen, his wife, to the Long Key Sewer District, a political subdivision of the State of Florida, dated December 13, 1955, and filed October 16, 1956, in deed book 1625, page 261, as clerk's instrument No. 311304A, Pinellas County Records, said lands being the land on which the sewer plant of the Long Key Sewer District is to be located; and including any and all submerged lands lying between the side lines of said tracts extended in straight lines in a westerly direction to the center line of the Government Channel of Boca Ciega Bay. All of the lands described above lie in Pinellas County, Florida, and said descriptions include all of the keys known as Long Key, Boca Ciega Isle (Coon Key), Vina Del Mar (Mud Key), the Long Key Sewer District lands, and lands adjacent thereto in Boca Ciega Bay, together with all lands adjacent thereto. 
State Law reference— Municipal annexation, F.S. ch. 171.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 3.01. - City commission; powers, composition. 
There shall be a city commission with all legislative powers of the city vested therein, except as prescribed elsewhere in this charter, consisting of four (4) commissioners and a mayor-commissioner.  
Sec. 3.02. - Election, qualifications and terms of commissioners. 
(a)  [Reserved.] 
(b)  There shall be four (4) commissioners who shall be qualified electors of the city, shall reside in the district represented and shall be elected only by the district represented. No person shall be qualified to run for election as city commissioner, or to be elected to the position of city commissioner, unless he/she has first been a full-time resident of both the city and the district which he/she seeks to represent, for a period of twelve (12) months next preceding the last day on which he/she is allowed, by law, to qualify as a candidate for the position of city commissioner. 
(c)  Election for the office of commissioner from Districts 1 and 3 shall be held in even-numbered years, and elections for the office of commissioner from Districts 2 and 4 shall be held in odd-numbered years, in the manner prescribed by this charter and general Florida Law and shall be for a two-year term. 
(Ord. No. 80-3, § 1, 1-29-80/3-4-80; Ord. No. 93-39, § 1, 12-7-93/11-3-92) 
State Law reference— Authority to change municipal election date due to conflicts with other elections, emergencies, etc., F.S. § 101.75.  
Sec. 3.03. - Election, qualifications and term of mayor-commissioner. 
(a)  The mayor-commissioner shall be elected for a three (3) year term. 
(b)  The mayor-commissioner shall be a qualified elector who shall be elected at large by the qualified electors of the city. No person shall be qualified to be the mayor-commissioner or to run for the office of mayor-commissioner unless he/she shall have first been a full-time resident of the city for a period of one year prior to the last day he/she is allowed by law to qualify to run as a candidate for the position of mayor-commissioner. 
(c)  The mayor-commissioner shall preside at meetings of the commission, shall be recognized as head of city government for all ceremonial purposes, by the governor for purposes of military law, for service of process, execution of contracts, deeds and other documents, and as the city official designated to represent the city in all agreements with other governmental entities or certifications to other governmental entities, but shall have no administrative duties except as required to carry out the responsibilities herein. The mayor-commissioner shall have equal power with other commissioners to make a motion, second a motion, discuss a question, and cast a vote. 
(Ord. No. 80-2, § 1, 1-29-80/3-4-80; Ord. No. 93-39, § 1, 12-7-93/11-3-92; Ord. No. 98-65, § 1, 12-1-98/3-9-99; Ord. No. 01-34, § 1, 9-18-01/3-12-02)  
Sec. 3.04. - Compensation and expenses. 
The city commissioners of the city shall receive the sum of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month, and the mayor-commissioner of the city shall receive the sum of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per month as compensation for their respective services to the city during the time they hold office. In addition thereto, the mayor-commissioner and all other city commissioners shall be authorized to receive reimbursement of expenses incurred in connection with performing official duties for the city, and a fund shall be provided in the annual budget for that purpose, provided, however, that the city in no way shall be obligated for the payment of such expenses unless and until the city commission shall have expressly approved the same in open public meeting. 
The mayor-commissioner shall be paid the monthly sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00), and each commissioner be paid the monthly sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) as reimbursement for ordinary expenses. 
(Ord. No. 80-1, § 1, 1-29-80/3-4-80; Ord. No. 90-17, § 1, 9-4-90/11-6-90; Ord. No. 98-2, § 1, 1-20-98/3-10-98)  
Sec. 3.05. - Vice-mayor. 
The commission shall elect a vice-mayor by an affirmative vote of three (3) or more members. Election of the vice-mayor shall be done annually. The vice-mayor shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor-commissioner.  
Sec. 3.06. - Vacancies; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of a commissioner shall become vacant upon his death, resignation, or forfeiture of his office. 
(b)  Forfeiture of office. A commissioner shall forfeit his office if he (1) lacks at any time during his term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by this charter or by law, or (2) violates any standard of conduct or code of ethics established by law for public officials. Such forfeiture shall require the affirmative vote of four (4) members of the commission. 
(c)  Filling of vacancies . A vacancy on the commission shall be filled in one of the following ways: 
(1)  If there is less than six (6) months remaining in the unexpired term or if there are less than six (6) months before the next regular city election, the commission, by a majority vote of the remaining members shall choose a successor to serve until the newly elected commissioner is qualified. If one year remains in the term of the vacated seat at the time of the next election, that seat shall be filled by election for the remaining term; 
(2)  If there are more than six (6) months remaining in the unexpired term and no regular city election is scheduled within six (6) months, the commission shall fill the vacancy on an interim basis as provided in subsection (1), and shall schedule a special election to be held not sooner than sixty (60) days, nor more than one (1) year following the occurrence of the vacancy. 
(d)  Extraordinary vacancies. In the event that all members of the commission are removed by death, disability, or forfeiture of office, the governor shall appoint an interim commission that shall call a special election to fill all commission positions. Should two (2) or more vacancies occur simultaneously, on the commission, the remaining members shall, within fifteen (15) days, call a special election to fill the vacant commission positions; such election shall be held in the manner prescribed by the laws of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, § 1, 12-1-99/3-9-99; Ord. No. 14-04, § 1, 5-27-14)  
Sec. 3.07. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Appointments and removals. Neither the commission nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the commission may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(b)  Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations, the commission or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the commission nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. Nothing in the foregoing is to be construed to prohibit individual members of the commission from closely scrutinizing by questions and personal observation, all aspects of city government operations so as to obtain independent information to assist the members in the formulation of sound policies to be considered by the commission. It is the express intent of this charter, however, that recommendations for improvement in city government operations by individual commissioners be made to and through the city manager, so that the manager may coordinate efforts of all city departments to achieve the greatest possible savings through the most efficient means available. 
(c)  City officers limited to one office; not to have interest in city contracts. No officer of the City of St. Pete Beach shall hold more than one city office, whether such office be elective or appointive, and no official or any employee of the city shall have any personal interest in any contract of the city if he thereby directly or indirectly gains a profit in money, property or otherwise; and any such contract in which a city official or employee may be or become interested shall be voidable by the city and shall be voided without delay by the city commission. 
(d)  Standard of ethics. The commission shall upon adoption of this charter enact by ordinance a code of ethics for all elected and appointed officers and employees of the city which shall set standards of conduct equal to or stronger than the standards of conduct established by law. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.  
Sec. 3.08. - Procedure. 
(a)  Meetings. The commission shall meet regularly at least twice in every month at such times and places as the commission may prescribe by rule. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the mayor-commissioner or of a majority of the members upon no less than twenty-four (24) hours notice to each member and by posting of a notice of such special meetings in the city hall and two (2) other conspicuous places within the city. Absence from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall constitute a vacancy of the seat of commissioner or mayor-commissioner, except in cases of emergency or other excused absences. All meetings shall be public. 
(b)  Rules and journal. The commission shall determine its own rules of procedure and the mayor-commissioner shall set the order of business for each meeting. 
(c)  Voting. Voting on ordinances and resolutions shall be by roll call and shall be recorded in the journal. A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum; but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and subject to the penalties prescribed by the rules of the commission. No action of the commission except as otherwise provided in the preceding sentence and in section 3.06 shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of the majority of a quorum present. 
State Law reference— Public meetings, F.S. § 286.011.  
Sec. 3.09. - Commission appointments. 
The city commission shall appoint but not be limited to the following offices: 
(a)  City clerk, 
(b)  City manager, 
(c)  City attorney, 
and such other officials that they deem necessary; provided this power to appoint officials shall not be construed to authorize the city commission to make appointments of administrative officials or interfere with the powers granted to the city manager under sections 3.07(a), (b) and 4.04(a), (b) of this Charter. No person shall be appointed to more than one of the aforementioned offices. The duties of these officials shall be as prescribed by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-68, § 1, 12-1-98/3-9-99; Ord. No. 98-69, § 1, 12-1-98/3-9-99; Ord. No. 98-70, § 1, 12-1-98/3-9-99) 
Editor's note— Municipal courts were abolished effective January 3, 1977, Fla. Const. art. V, § 20(d)(4).  
Sec. 3.10. - Ordinances in general. 
"Ordinance" means an official, legislative action of the commission, which action is a regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law. 
(a)  Form. Each ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and shall embrace but one subject and matters properly connected therewith. The subject shall be clearly stated in the title. No ordinance shall be revised or amended by reference to its title only. Ordinances to revise or amend shall set out in full the revised or amended act, section, subsection, or paragraph of a section or subsection. 
(b)  Procedure. A proposed ordinance shall be read by title, or in full, on at least two (2) separate days, at either regular or special meetings of the commission, and shall, at least ten (10) days prior to adoption, be noticed once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice of proposed enactment shall state the date, time and place of the meeting, the title or titles of proposed ordinances and the place or places within the city where such proposed ordinances may be inspected by the public. Said notice shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard with respect to the proposed ordinance. 
(c)  Action requiring an ordinance. In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the city commission shall be by ordinance which: 
(1)  Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter or abolish any city department or agency; 
(2)  Establish a rule or regulation the violation of which carries a penalty; 
(3)  Levy taxes authorized by general law; 
(4)  Grant, renew or extend a franchise; 
(5)  Set service or user charges for municipal services or granting administrative authority for such charges; 
(6)  Authorize the borrowing of money not inconsistent with the limitations in the constitution and general law of the state; 
(7)  Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted, except as otherwise provided in Article VII with respect to repeal of ordinances reconsidered under the referendum power. 
(Ord. No. 84-65, § 1, 1-8-85/3-5-85) 
State Law reference— Uniform minimum mandatory procedure for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 3.11. - Emergency ordinances. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the commission may adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, set service or user charges for any municipal services or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided under the emergency appropriations provisions of this charter. 
(a)  Form. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated in a preamble as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. 
(b)  Procedure. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the commission shall be required for adoption. After its adoption the ordinance shall be published and printed as prescribed for other adopted ordinances. 
(c)  Effective date. Emergency ordinances shall become effective upon adoption or at such other date as may be specified in the ordinance. 
(d)  Repeal. Every emergency ordinance except emergency appropriations shall automatically stand repealed as of the sixty-first day following the date on which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance under regular procedures, or if the emergency still exists, in the manner specified in this section. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(e)  Emergency appropriations. The commission may make emergency appropriations in the manner provided in this section. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the commission may by such emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which the emergency appropriation was made. 
State Law reference— Emergency ordinances, F.S. § 166.041(1)(b).  
Sec. 3.12. - Budget adoption. 
The commission shall by ordinance adopt the budget on or before the thirtieth day of September of each year. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the commission by resolution may direct that the amounts appropriated for current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year for a period of fifteen (15) days and renewed by resolution each fifteen (15) days with all items in it prorated accordingly until such time as the commission adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. An ordinance adopting an annual budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated. 
Editor's note— The procedure for adoption of budgets is mandated in F.S. § 200.065.  
Sec. 3.13. - Appropriation amendments during the fiscal year. 
(a)  Supplemental appropriations. If during the fiscal year revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget are available for appropriation, the commission by ordinance may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess. 
(b)  Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the commission without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken by him and his recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The commission shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce one or more appropriations. 
(c)  Limitations; effective date. No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption.  
Sec. 3.14. - Authentication, recording and disposition of Charter amendments, ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)  Authentication. The presiding officer of the commission and the person charged with keeping the journal shall authenticate, by their signatures, all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the commission. In addition, when charter amendments have been approved by the electors, the presiding officer of the commission and the person charged with keeping the journal shall authenticate, by their signatures, the charter amendment, such authentication to reflect the approval of the charter amendment by the electorate. 
(b)  Recording. The person charged with keeping the journal shall keep properly indexed books in which shall be recorded, in full, all ordinances and resolutions passed by the commission. Ordinances shall, at the direction of the commission, be periodically codified. The person charged with keeping the journal shall also maintain the city charter in current form and shall enter all charter amendments and send a copy of the revised charter incorporating amendments to the secretary of state's office. 
(c)  Printing. The commission shall, by ordinance, establish procedures for making all resolutions, ordinances, technical codes adopted by reference, and this charter available to the people of the city for public inspection and available for purchase at a reasonable price.  
Sec. 3.15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-40, § 2, adopted January 6, 2011 and passed at an election held March 8, 2011, repealed the former section 3.15 in its entirety, which pertained to voter approval required for approval of comprehensive land use plan or comprehensive land use plan amendment, and derived from Ord. No. 06-33, § 1, adopted October 24, 2006 (election held November 7, 2006), and Ord. No. 2009-12, § 1, adopted August 11, 2009 (election held November 3, 2009).  
Sec. 3.16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-41, § 2, adopted January 6, 2011 and passed at an election held March 8, 2011, repealed the former section 3.16 in its entirety, which pertained to voter approval required for approval of or effectiveness of community redevelopment plan, and derived from Ord. No. 06-33, § 5, adopted October 24, 2006 (election held November 7, 2006).  
Sec. 3.17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3.17 has been deleted at the request of the city as being duplicative of section 3.16.  
Sec. 3.18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-42, § 2, adopted January 6, 2011 and passed at an election held March 8, 2011, repealed the former section 3.18 in its entirety, which pertained to voter approval required for change in allowable height of structure, and derived from Ord. No. 06-33, § 7, adopted October 24, 2006 (election held November 7, 2006), and Ord. No. 2009-17, § 1, adopted August 11, 2009 (election held November 3, 2009).  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE 
 
Sec. 4.01. - City manager. 
There shall be a city manager who shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He shall be responsible to the commission for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this charter.  
Sec. 4.02. - Appointment; removal; compensation. 
(a)  Appointment. The commission shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term by an affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the commission. 
(b)  Removal. The commission may remove the manager by a majority vote of all commission members and, upon demand by the manager, a public hearing will be held prior to a vote to remove the manager. 
(c)  Compensation. The compensation of the manager shall be fixed by the commission and shall not be reduced during his tenure, except as a part of a general salary cutback.  
Sec. 4.03. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the commission, the manager shall designate, subject to approval of the commission, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during his temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the commission may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the manager shall return or his disability shall cease.  
Sec. 4.04. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall: 
(a)  Appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this charter. He may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency. 
(b)  Direct and supervise the administration of a fire department, a police department and all other departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(c)  Attend all commission meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote. 
(d)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter and acts of the commission, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision are faithfully executed. 
(e)  Prepare and submit the annual budget, budget message, and capital program to the commission in a form provided by ordinance. 
(f)  Submit to the commission and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(g)  Make such other reports as the commission may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and supervision. 
(h)  Keep the commission fully and continuously advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the commission concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable. 
(i)  Sign contracts on behalf of the city pursuant to the provisions of appropriations ordinances. 
(j)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or may be required by the commission. 
(k)  The city manager and all department heads appointed by him shall devote their entire time to the discharge of their official duties and shall not engage in outside employment.  
Sec. 4.05. - City clerk. 
As provided in section 3.09, the city commission shall have the sole authority to hire the city clerk, and shall have the sole authority to discipline or discharge the city clerk. The city clerk shall keep and have the care and custody of the books, records, papers, legal documents and journals of proceedings of the city commission and shall carry out such additional duties as may be required by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-74, § 1, 12-1-98/3-9-99)  
Sec. 4.06. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, adopted July 24, 2012, adopted by referendum on November 6, 2012, repealed § 4.06, which pertained to the police department and derived from Ord. No. 98-3, § 1-2, adopted 1-20-98, adopted by referendum 3-10-98.  
Sec. 4.07. - City attorney. 
As provided in section 3.09, the city commission shall have the sole authority to hire the city attorney, and the sole authority to discipline or discharge the city attorney. The city attorney shall have the duties prescribed by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-72, § 1, 12-1-98/3-9-99)  
ARTICLE V. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 93-39, § 1, adopted December 7, 1993, adopted by referendum on November 3, 1992, repealed art. V. 
 
[Sec. 5.01. - Election code.] 
The City Commission shall enact an election code which shall be in compliance with the Election Code of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 93-39, § 2, 12-7-93) 
State Law reference— The Florida Election Code, F.S. chs. 97—106.  
Secs. 5.02—5.10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TRANSITION SCHEDULE 
 
Sec. 6.01. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-75, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 1998, repealed § 6.01, which pertained to continuation of former Charter provisions. See the Charter Comparative Table.  
Sec. 6.02. - Ordinances preserved. 
All ordinances in effect upon the adoption of this charter, to the extent not inconsistent with it, shall remain in force until repealed or changed as provided herein.  
Sec. 6.03. - Rights of officers and employees. 
Nothing in this charter except as otherwise specifically provided shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who are city officers or employees at the time of adoption. Elected officers shall continue to hold their offices and discharge the duties thereof until their successors are elected.  
Sec. 6.04. - Pending matters. 
All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings involving the city shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this charter.  
ARTICLE VII. - RECALL, INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Recall. 
The qualified voters of the city shall have the power to remove from office any elected officers of the city in accordance with the recall as provided in the Florida State Statutes. 
State Law reference— Municipal recall, F.S. § 100.361.  
Sec. 7.02. - Initiative. 
The qualified voters of the city shall have power to propose ordinances to the commission and, if the commission fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt it or reject it at a city election. 
(Ord. No. 87-2, § 1, 1-20-87/3-3-87)  
Sec. 7.03. - Referendum. 
The qualified voters of the city shall have power to require reconsideration by the commission of any adopted ordinance and, if the commission fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a city election. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 1, 1-20-87/3-3-87)  
Sec. 7.04. - Commencement of proceedings; petitions; procedure for filing; referendum petitions; suspension of effect of ordinance; action on petitions; results of election. 
(a)  Commencement of proceedings. Any five (5) qualified voters may commence initiative and referendum proceedings by filing with the City Clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioner's committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form; stating their names and addresses and specifying the addresses at which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioner's committee is filed, the City Clerk may, at the committee's request, issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioner's committee at the committee's expense. The petition blanks shall advise the voters that the referendum election, if any, shall be held at the next regular City election unless the City Commission elects to hold a special election and of the approximate cost to the City of such special election, if held. 
(b)  Petitions. 
(1)  Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters in each voting district of the City equal in number to at least ten (10) percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote in each such voting district of the City at the last general City election. 
(2)  Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(3)  Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it, when filed, an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity, before signing, to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(c)  Procedure for filing. 
(1)  Deadline for filing; Certificate of Clerk; amendment. Petitions must be filed with the City Clerk no later than ninety (90) days after commencement of proceedings under Section 7.04(a). No petition filed after that time will be valid. Within twenty (20) days after the petition is filed (five (5) days for referendum) the City Clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. Grounds for insufficiency are only those specified in section 7.04(b). A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the City Clerk within two (2) days after receiving the copy of his certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplemental petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (2) and (3) of section 7.04(b), and within five (5) days after it is filed the City Clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request commission review under subsection (2) of this section within the time required, the City Clerk shall promptly present his certificate to the commission and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(2)  Commission review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it, or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two (2) days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the commission. The commission shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the commission's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Action on petitions. 
(1)  Action by the commission. When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the commission shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided in Article III or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the commission fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within ninety (90) days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within ninety (90) days, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the City. 
(2)  Submission to voters. The vote of the City on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held at the same time as the next regular election, except that the commission may in its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls. 
(3)  Withdrawal of petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the City by filing with the City Clerk a request for withdrawal signed by at least four (4) members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
(f)  Results of election. 
(1)  Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the commission. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. An ordinance created by initiative referendum cannot be repealed except by referendum. 
(2)  Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
(Ord. No. 2010-45, § 2, 1-6-11/3-8-11)  
ARTICLE VIII. - CHARTER AMENDMENT[3] 
This charter may be amended in two (2) ways: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Charter amendments, F.S. § 166.031. 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Initiation by ordinance. 
The commission may, by ordinance, propose amendments to any part or all of this charter, except Article II prescribing the boundaries, and upon passage of the initiating ordinance shall place the proposed amendment to a vote of the electors at the next general election held within the city or at a special election called for such purpose. Amendment of Article II resulting from annexation done in accordance with general law shall be by ordinance of the commission and shall not be subject to a vote of the electors except as provided by general law. 
State Law reference— Annexation, F.S. ch. 171.  
Sec. 8.02. - Initiation by petition. 
The electors of the city may propose amendments to this charter by petition signed by at least ten (10) per cent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote in the last regular city election. 
(1)  Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the proposed charter amendment. 
(2)  Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it, when filed, an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the proposed charter amendment. 
(3)  Certification of petition. Upon certification of the petition by the designated official, such certification to include the validity of the names on the petition as qualified voters registered to vote in the last regular city election, the commission shall place the proposed amendment to a vote of the electors at the next general election held not less than sixty (60) days after certification or at a special election called for such purpose.  
ARTICLE IX. - CASINO GAMBLING 
 
[Sec. 9.1. - Generally.] 
(a)  Reservation of Power by the Electorate. The citizens of St Pete Beach reserve to themselves the power to approve or disapprove casino gambling of any nature within the boundaries of the City. Therefore, if and when casino gambling becomes lawful within the City of St. Pete Beach under the Constitution and laws of the State of Florida, no action may be taken by the City Commission, or by any elected or appointed bodies, officials or employees of the City the effect of which is to authorize, to approve, or in any manner, or to allow casino gambling to occur anywhere in the City unless and until casino gambling in the City is first authorized by an approving vote of sixty-five (65) percent of the votes cast of the qualified electors residing in the City and voting on the question at a referendum separate and apart from any other referendum, statewide or otherwise, on the question. 
(b)  Definitions. The term "casino gambling" means "playing or engaging in any game of chance for money or any other thing of value, regardless of how such game is named, labeled or otherwise characterized, which activity was unlawful under the Constitution or laws of the State of Florida as of June 10, 2008. 
(c)  Limitation. This charter provision shall be effective to the extent allowed by law. In the event that any portion of this charter section shall be unenforceable or unlawful, the remaining provisions shall be construed to be severable and enforced to the extent legally possible. 
(d)  Successive Ballot Measures. If the electors of the City fail to approve a ballot measure allowing casino gambling under the provisions of this charter section, no successive such ballot measure may be submitted to the electors of the City for approval within twenty-four (24) months of the date of the election at which such measure failed to gain approval. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 8-12-08/11-4-08)  
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of St. Pete Beach, Florida" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1960, § 1-1; Code 1983, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Ordinance codification, § 3.14(b).  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Beach access. The term "beach access" shall mean, as it relates to dogs on the beach, those boardwalks and walkways the public may lawfully use to access the beach from any right-of-way along with any parking areas provided for persons using such boardwalk and walkways. 
Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida, printed as part I of this volume. 
City. The term "city" shall be construed as if the phrase "of St. Pete Beach" followed it, and the term shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
City commission. Whenever the term "city commission" is used, it shall be construed to mean the city commission of the City of St. Pete Beach. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of St. Pete Beach, Florida, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by ordinance, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Fla. Rules of Civ. Proc. § 1.090(a). 
County. The term "county" shall mean the County of Pinellas. 
State Law reference— Boundary description of Pinellas County, F.S. § 7.52. 
F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." shall be construed to mean the latest edition or supplement of the official Florida Statutes. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent or employee of another. 
May. The term "may" is permissive and not mandatory. 
Must. The term "must" is mandatory and not permissive. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; however, technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things, as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall include the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, boards, committees, etc. The title of any office, officer, employee, board, committee or commission shall be used as though the phrase "of St. Pete Beach" were added. Whenever a provision appears authorizing or requiring a particular officer or employee of the city to do some act, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to delegate, designate and authorize subordinates to do the act, unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall include individual natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, or corporations and any officers, agents, employees, factors, or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto and all waterways. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Sand beach areas. The term "sand beach areas" shall mean the zone of unconsolidated material that extends landward from the mean high water line to the place where there is marked change in material or physiographic form. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory and not permissive. 
State. The term "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1960, § 1-2; Code 1983, § 1-2; Ord. No. 94-11, § 1, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 15-12, § 1, 7-28-15)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections nor as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1960, § 1-3; Code 1983, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
All references to chapters, articles, divisions or sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-7. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those of the "Code of Ordinances, City of St. Pete Beach, Florida," as adopted by Ordinance Number 83-54, or of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of the "Code of Ordinances, City of St. Pete Beach, Florida," as adopted by Ordinance Number 83-54, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-8. - Prior offenses, rights, etc., not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty for forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-9. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(2)  Prescribing personnel policies or the number, classification, benefits or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent with this Code. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(5)  Making any appropriation or adopting a budget. 
(6)  Levying or imposing taxes, fees, rates or charges. 
(7)  Establishing or prescribing grades in the city. 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(9)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(10)  Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city. 
(11)  Relating to rezoning of property. 
(12)  Prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, including but not limited to ordinances prescribing or designating one-way streets, parking prohibitions or restrictions, stop signs, yield signs, through streets and speed limits. 
(13)  Adopted for purposes which have been consummated. 
(14)  Which is temporary, although general in effect. 
(15)  Which is special, although permanent in effect. 
(b)  All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeal or amendment of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed or amended took effect or the obligation of any contract entered into under the prior ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal or amendment took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal or amendment, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the repealed or amended ordinance. 
(Code 1960, § 1-4; Code 1983, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following general form: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of St. Pete Beach, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language should be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of St. Pete Beach, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows:…." The new section should then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1960, § 1-6; Code 1983, § 1-8) 
Charter reference— Ordinance adoption procedures, §§ 3.10, 3.11. 
State Law reference— Uniform minimum mandatory ordinance adoption procedure, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1983, § 1-10)  
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 1-5; Code 1983, § 1-11)  
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty. 
(a)  The violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this Code shall constitute an offense against the city, and where no specific penalty is provided therefor shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to a fine of not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  The judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction imposing any fine or fine and cost of prosecution shall contain provision for a period of imprisonment in default of payment of the fine or cost. The payment of fines and costs of prosecution may also be enforced by attachment summarily against the property of the delinquent. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement by the city, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1960, § 1-8; Code 1983, § 1-9) 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of municipal ordinances, F.S. § 162.21; municipal ordinance violations as noncriminal violations, F.S. § 775.083.  
Sec. 1-15. - Award of attorney's fees and other costs. 
In all instances where a lawsuit is instituted or defended on behalf of the city to enforce any provision of the Code of Ordinances, to collect fees, liens, assessments or fines, or otherwise secure compliance with any provision of the Code of Ordinances, the city shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred, including reasonable attorney's fees and court costs through the trial and appellate levels. This section shall apply to all instances where the city is required to defend an appeal from any order, notice or determination by the city or its officials. 
(Code 1983, § 1-12; Ord. No. 87-24, § 1, 7-7-87)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration and enforcement of the adult entertainment establishment regulations, § 10-66 et seq.; boards, committees and commissions, ch. 22; administration of the police officers pension plan, § 66-181 et seq.; administration of the firefighters retirement system, § 66-291 et seq.; administration and enforcement of the flood hazard reduction regulations, § 106-121 et seq.; administration of the historic preservation requirements, § 110-36 et seq.; administration and enforcement of the sign regulations, § 122-41 et seq.; administration of the zoning regulations, § 134-31 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Pensions and retirement, ch. 66. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-26—2-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Code of ethics required, § 3.07(d). 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business entity means any proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or any organization which is engaged in business. 
City employee means any person employed by the city or any of its departments, agencies, commissions, authorities or boards, whether on a full-or part-time basis. 
City officer means any person elected or appointed to any public office or public body of the city, whether paid or unpaid and whether part-time or full-time. 
Ex parte communication means communication with a local public official by any person who has an interest in a pending quasi-judicial action, which is made in the absence of any adverse party to the action. 
Governmental body means the city or any of its departments, agencies, commissions, authorities or boards. 
Immediate family of a person means one's spouse and any child, parent, grandparent, brother or sister and the spouses of such persons. 
Local public official means any elected or appointed public official holding a city office who recommends or takes quasi-judicial action as a member of a board or commission. 
(Code 1960, § 2-39.1; Ord. No. 336, § 2; Code 1983, § 2-47; Ord. No. 96-10, § 1, 2-20-96) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-57. - Statement of purpose and policy. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to promote the welfare of the citizens of the city through the adoption of a code of ethics to govern all city officers and city employees, employed on either a part-time or full-time basis by the city. Within this framework, the general objectives of this division are to: 
(1)  Facilitate the proper operation of municipal government by providing officers and employees who are independent, impartial and responsible to the people and able to make governmental decisions and formulate policy within the established channels of governmental structure. 
(2)  Ensure that public office or public employment not be used for unwarranted personal gain. 
(3)  Ensure that the financial interests of employees and public officeholders present neither a conflict nor the appearance of a conflict with the public trust. 
(4)  Foster continued recognition of the concept that public employees and public officeholders are agents of the public and hold office or employment for the benefit of the public. 
(5)  Enhance public confidence in the integrity of its municipal government. 
(6)  Promote a recommitment to the concept that public employees and public officeholders are required to uphold the Constitution of the United States, the constitution of the state and the city Charter and are required to impartially carry out and enforce the laws of the nation, the state and the city. 
(7)  Continue high moral standards in government. 
(8)  Reaffirm the policy of the city to adhere not only to the "letter" but to the "intent" of F.S. chs. 119 and 286. 
(b)  To this end, there is established a code of ethics for the city. 
(Code 1960, § 2-39; Ord. No. 336, § 1; Code 1983, § 2-46) 
State Law reference— Public records act, F.S. ch. 119; public meetings, etc., F.S. ch. 286.  
Sec. 2-58. - Scope. 
The requirements set forth in this division shall constitute a code of ethics establishing reasonable standards and guidelines for the ethical conduct of public officers and employees of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 2-39.2; Ord. No. 336, § 3; Code 1983, § 2-48)  
Sec. 2-59. - Civil remedy. 
(a)  Violation of any of the sections of this division, including but not limited to any failure to file disclosures, in addition to any other penalty, shall subject the violator to a civil penalty not to exceed $5,000.00 or restitution of any pecuniary benefits received because of the violation committed. 
(b)  The civil penalty provided for in this section shall be recoverable by and shall accrue to the city in a civil action brought by the city. 
(Code 1960, § 2-40; Ord. No. 336, § 11; Code 1983, § 2-55)  
Sec. 2-60. - Representation in litigation and administrative proceedings. 
No city officer or city employee shall represent any group, person or corporation in any administrative proceedings under Chapter 120 Florida Statutes or any litigation in any court, where a party thereto, having an adverse interest in the action, is the city, a governmental body of the city, or a city officer or city employee exercising official duties. This standard of conduct shall not be construed to apply to collective bargaining and negotiation proceedings and activities permitted by Chapter 447 Florida Statutes and article 1, section 6, of the state constitution. This section shall not be construed to apply to city officers or members of their staffs when performing these functions provided for by the City Charter or by ordinance. 
(Code 1960, § 2-39.3; Ord. No. 336, § 4; Code 1983, § 2-49; Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 04-16, § 2, 6-22-04) 
State Law reference— Solicitation or acceptance of gifts, F.S. § 112.313(2).  
Sec. 2-61. - Disclosure of interest. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "participate" means any attempt to influence the decision by oral or written communication, whether made by the officer or at the officer's direction. 
(b)  No city officer shall vote in an official capacity upon any measure which would inure to his special private gain or loss; which he knows would inure to the special private gain or loss of any principal by whom he is retained or to the parent organization or subsidiary of a corporate principal by which he is retained, other than an agency as defined in F.S. § 112.312(2); or which he knows would inure to the special private gain or loss of a relative or business associate of the city officer. Such city officer shall, prior to the vote being taken, publicly state to the assembly the nature of the officer's interest in the matter from which he is abstaining from voting and, within 15 days after the vote occurs, disclose the nature of his interest as a public record in a memorandum filed with the person responsible for recording the minutes of the meeting, who shall incorporate the memorandum in the minutes. However, a commissioner of a community redevelopment agency created or designated pursuant to F.S. § 163.356 or F.S. § 163.357 or an officer of an independent special tax district elected on a one-acre, one-vote basis is not prohibited from voting, when voting in such capacity. 
(c)  No appointed city officer shall participate in any matter which would inure to the officer's special private gain or loss, which the officer knows would inure to the special private gain or loss of any principal by whom he is retained or to the parent organization or subsidiary of a corporate principal by which he is retained, or which he knows would inure to the special private gain or loss of a relative or business associate of the public officer, without first disclosing the nature of his interest in the matter. 
(d)  Such disclosure, indicating the nature of the conflict, shall be made in a written memorandum filed with the person responsible for recording the minutes of the meeting, prior to the meeting in which consideration of the matter will take place, and shall be incorporated into the minutes. Any such memorandum shall become a public record upon filing, shall immediately be provided to the other members of the agency, and shall be read publicly at the next meeting held subsequent to the filing of this written memorandum. 
(e)  If disclosure has not been made prior to the meeting or any conflict is unknown prior to the meeting, the disclosure shall be made orally at the meeting when it becomes known that a conflict exists. A written memorandum disclosing the nature of the conflict shall then be filed within 15 days after the oral disclosure with the person responsible for recording the minutes of the meeting and shall be incorporated into the minutes of the meeting at which the oral disclosure was made. Any such memorandum shall become a public record upon filing, shall immediately be provided to the other members of the agency, and shall be read publicly at the next meeting held subsequent to the filing of this written memorandum. 
(f)  Whenever a city officer or former city officer is being considered for appointment or reappointment to city office, the appointing body shall consider the number and nature of the memoranda of conflict previously filed under this section by such officer. 
(Code 1960, § 2-39.5; Ord. No. 336, § 6; Code 1983, § 2-51) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 112.3143(3)—(5).  
Sec. 2-62. - Disclosure statement. 
(a)  All city officers and city employees shall comply with any and all disclosure requirements set forth in F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 
(b)  The disclosure requirements required by subsection (a) of this section shall be public records within the meaning of F.S. § 119.07. 
(Code 1960, §§ 2-39.8, 2-39.9; Ord. No. 336, §§ 9, 10; Code 1983, § 2-54)  
Sec. 2-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, adopted June 22, 2004, repealed § 2-63, which pertained to incompatible employment. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-64. - Disclosure or use of certain information. 
No city officer or city employee shall disclose or use information not available to members of the general public and gained by reason of his official position for his personal gain or benefit or for the personal gain or benefit of any other person or business entity. 
(Code 1960 § 2-39.4; Ord. No. 336, § 5; Code 1983, § 2-50) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 113.313(8).  
Sec. 2-65. - Restrictions on appointment of relatives and members of the same household to boards and committees. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Member of the same household means any person who resides at the same residence with the city commissioner. 
(b)  No spouse or member of the same household of any city commissioner shall be appointed to serve as a member of a city board or committee. 
(Code 1983, § 2-56; Ord. No. 91-6, § 1, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 01-01, § 1, 2-6-01) 
State Law reference— Restriction on employment of relatives, F.S. § 112.3135.  
Sec. 2-66. - Access to local public officials permitted; disclosure procedure. 
(a)  Any person not otherwise prohibited by statute, Charter provision, or ordinance may discuss with any local public official the merits of any matter on which action may be taken by any board or commission on which the local public official is a member. Adherence to the following procedures shall remove the presumption of prejudice arising from ex parte communications with local public officials: 
(1)  The substance of any ex parte communication with a local public official which relates to quasi-judicial action pending before the official is not presumed prejudicial to the action if the subject of the communication and identity of the person, group, or entity with whom the communication took place is disclosed and made a part of the record before the final action on the matter. 
(2)  A local public official may read a written communication from any person. However, a written communication that relates to quasi-judicial action pending before a local public official shall not be presumed prejudicial to the action, and such written communication shall be made a part of the record before final action on the matter. 
(3)  Local public officials may conduct investigations and site visits and may receive expert opinions regarding quasi-judicial action pending before them. Such activities shall not be presumed prejudicial to the action if the existence of the investigation, site visit, or expert opinion is made a part of the record before final action on the matter. 
(4)  Disclosure made pursuant to subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section must be made before or during the public meeting at which a vote is taken on such matters, so that persons who have opinions contrary to those expressed in the ex parte communication are given a reasonable opportunity to refute or respond to the communication. 
(b)  In a quasi-judicial proceeding on local government land use matters, a person who appears before the decision-making body who is not a party or party-intervener shall be allowed to testify before the decision-making body, subject to control by the decision-making body, and may be requested to respond to questions from the decision-making body, but need not be sworn as a witness, is not required to be subject to cross-examination, and is not required to be qualified as an expert witness. The decision-making body shall assign weight and credibility to such testimony as it deems appropriate. A party or party-intervenor in a quasi-judicial proceeding on local government land use matters, upon request by another party or party-intervenor, shall be sworn as a witness, shall be subject to cross-examination by other parties or party-intervenors, and shall be required to be qualified as an expert witness, as appropriate. 
(c)  In a quasi-judicial proceeding on local government land use matters, a person may not be precluded from communicating directly with a member of the decision-making body by application of ex parte communication prohibitions. Disclosure of such communications by a member of the decision-making body is not required, and such nondisclosure shall not be presumed prejudicial to the decision of the decision-making body. All decisions of the decision-making body in a quasi-judicial proceeding on local government land use matters must be supported by substantial, competent evidence in the record pertinent to the proceeding, irrespective of such communications. 
(Code 1983, § 2-57; Ord. No. 96-9, § 1, 2-20-96; Ord. No. 01-12, § 1, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 2-67. - Representation by appointed city officer or city employee. 
No appointed city officer or city employee shall personally represent a person or business entity for compensation on any matter before the city commission, or any board or committee of the city, until two years after vacation of office or termination of employment, except for the purposes of collective bargaining. Notwithstanding the foregoing, appointed members of city boards and committees, who hold no other office or employment with the city, shall not be prohibited from representing any person or business entity before the city commission or any board or committee of the city on which said member has not served for a period of two years. 
(Code 1960, § 2-39.7; Ord. No. 336, § 8; Code 1983, § 2-53; Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 6-22-04) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinance prohibiting representation before an agency for two years after termination of employment, F.S. § 112.313(13).  
Secs. 2-68—2-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TRAVEL POLICY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Per diem and traveling expenses of public officers, employees and authorized personnel, F.S. § 112.061. 
 
Sec. 2-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized travel means travel as authorized by the city commission or as authorized in an appropriation ordinance. 
City official means an individual who in the performance of his official duties is vested by law with the powers of government and who is elected by the people or appointed by the city commission and has jurisdiction extending throughout the city or any person lawfully serving as either of such classes of individuals as designee or successor. 
Common carrier means a train, bus, commercial airline operating scheduled flights or rental cars of an established rental firm. 
Designated authority means the person, including the city commission, that may authorize travel. The city manager shall be the designated authority for his department. The city clerk shall be the designated authority for his department. The city commission shall be the designated authority for the office of city attorney. 
Employee or public employee means an individual, other than a city official as defined in this section, who is occupying a regular or full-time authorized position and is responsible to the city manager or the city clerk. 
Travel expense means the usual ordinary and incidental expenditure necessarily incurred by a traveler. 
Travel period means a period of time between the time of departure and time of return. 
Traveler means a city official or employee who is performing authorized travel. 
(Code 1960, § 2-33; Ord. No. 244, § 2; Code 1983, § 2-31; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 1-19-93) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-97. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall promulgate such rules and regulations and prescribe such forms as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1960, § 2-38; Ord. No. 244, § 7; Code 1983, § 2-36)  
Sec. 2-98. - Authority to incur travel expense. 
(a)  All travel by city officials must be authorized by budgetary appropriation or by direct authorization by the city commission. Additional authorization must be obtained from the appropriate designated authority for all employee travel. 
(b)  Travel expenses of travelers shall be limited to those expenses incurred by them in the performance of a public purpose and shall include but not be limited to city business, conventions, conferences and training or education by which attendance would serve a direct benefit for the city. 
(Code 1960, § 2-34; Ord. No. 244, § 3; Code 1983, § 2-32; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 1-19-93)  
Sec. 2-99. - Rates of per diem and subsistence allowance. 
For the purpose of reimbursement and to establish a method of calculation under this division, per diem and subsistence allowances may be authorized as follows: 
(1)  Up to the amounts permitted in subsection (2) of this section for meals, plus actual expenses for lodging, to be substantiated by receipts therefor. 
(2)  Authorized travelers may be allowed subsistence while on official business for the city in the amount as listed in the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) publication, "Travel, Entertainment, and Gift Expenses" for the amount of standard meal allowance. The standard rates published by the IRS shall be used for the following fiscal year. 
(3)  When reimbursement according to the terms of subsections (1) and (2) of this section results in out-of-pocket losses to the personnel involved, the designated authority may authorize payment of actual expenses incurred upon such proof as he may deem adequate and provided the expenditure is covered by a budgetary appropriation. 
(Code 1960, § 2-35; Ord. No. 244, § 4; Ord. No. 81-60, §§ 1, 2; Code 1983, § 2-33; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 1-19-93; Ord. No. 2005-42, § 1, 11-22-05)  
Sec. 2-100. - Transportation. 
(a)  Under this division, all travel shall be upon established direct routes. If a traveler elects to take an indirect air route for his convenience, costs in excess of the rate for a direct route passage shall be borne by him and he shall be reimbursed only for such direct route fare. The designated authority shall determine the most economical method of travel for each trip and, in making his determination, shall consider the following conditions: 
(1)  The nature of the business. 
(2)  The most efficient and economical means of travel, considering time, cost of transportation and per diem or subsistence required. 
(3)  The number of persons making the trip and the amount of equipment or material to be transported. 
(b)  The use of a privately owned vehicle for official travel in lieu of public vehicle or common carrier may be authorized by the designated authority, if a publicly owned vehicle is not available. If traveling by privately owned vehicle, the traveler shall receive reimbursement of a mileage allowance per the Internal Revenue Service standard mileage rate as listed in the IRS publication, "Travel, Entertainment, and Gift Expenses." The standard rates published by the IRS shall be used for the following fiscal year. All mileage shall be computed from the point of origin to the point of destination, including vicinity mileage necessary for the conduct of official business. 
(Code 1960, § 2-36; Ord. No. 244, § 5; Ord. No. 81-60, § 3; Code 1983, § 2-34; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 1-19-93; Ord. No. 2005-42, § 1, 11-22-05)  
Sec. 2-101. - Other allowable expenses. 
In addition to the travel expenses mentioned in this division, the following incidental travel expenses may be reimbursed: 
(1)  Taxi or limousine fares. 
(2)  Ferry fares and bridge, road and tunnel tolls. 
(3)  Storage or parking fees. 
(4)  Communication expenses. 
(5)  Conference or convention registration fees if attendance at such conference or convention serves a direct public purpose with relation to the person attending such meetings. 
(6)  Tips. 
(Code 1960, § 2-37; Ord. No. 244, § 6; Code 1983, § 2-35; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 1-19-93)  
Secs. 2-102—2-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY MANAGER AND CITY CLERK[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— City manager generally, § 4.01 et seq. 
Cross reference— Operation of helicopters and hot air balloon, authorization by city manager, § 18-29. 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Appointment; residency requirements. 
(a)  The city manager shall be chosen by the city commission solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office set forth in the Charter and this section. At the time of his appointment, he need not reside in close proximity to the city. However, within such time as shall be set by the city commission, the city manager shall reside within a radius of not more than ten miles from the city, measured from the location of the city hall. 
(b)  No commissioner shall be appointed city manger during the term for which he shall have been elected or within one year after the expiration of that elected term. 
(Code 1960, § 2-2; Ord. No. 8, § 2; Ord. No. 412, § 1; Code 1983, § 2-71; Ord. No. 88-37, § 1, 10-4-88) 
Charter reference— Appointment of city manager, § 4.02(a).  
Sec. 2-132. - Bond. 
The city manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the city commission, such bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1960, § 2-4; Ord. No. 8, § 7; Code 1983, § 2-73)  
Sec. 2-133. - Removal. 
(a)  The vote for removal of the city manager shall be as provided in Charter section 4.02(b). Removal may be raised and decided by appropriate motion. The city commission shall adopt an initial motion for removal designated as a preliminary motion of removal. 
(b)  Upon approval of the preliminary motion of removal, it shall be transmitted to the city manager, and the city manager shall have 15 days from the day of notification of the approval of the preliminary motion of removal to demand a public hearing. 
(c)  Upon the city manager's request for a public hearing, the city commission shall set a date for a public hearing to be held on or before 30 days from the city manager's request for such public hearing. 
(d)  The city commission at the public hearing will consider the preliminary motion of removal of the city manager. At the close of the public hearing, the city commission shall decide whether to adopt a final motion of removal of the city manager. The final motion of removal shall require majority vote of all of the commission members. 
(e)  The city manager shall be paid his full salary during the period from the adoption of the preliminary motion of removal through the adoption of a final motion of removal, whether the city manager is suspended from office or not during such period. 
(f)  Upon the adoption of a final motion of removal, the city manager shall be paid an amount equivalent to two months' salary as severance pay. This subsection shall not apply where the city manager's removal is based upon a violation of any state, county or municipal law. No severance pay shall be paid unless the city manager has been employed with the city for 12 full months. 
(Code 1960, § 2-3; Ord. No. 426, §§ 1—6; Code 1983, § 2-72) 
Charter reference— Removal of city manager, § 4.02(b).  
Sec. 2-134. - Commission authority over city clerk. 
(a)  The city commission shall have the sole and exclusive authority to hire, to fire and to discipline the city clerk. 
(b)  The city manager shall be entitled to recommend to the city commission that the city clerk be disciplined or fired; but thereafter, the commission shall determine if it wishes to follow said recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 2, 3-3-98)  
Secs. 2-135—2-149. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 2-150. - Powers, duties and responsibilities of city attorney. 
The city attorney shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities to: 
(1)  Be attorney of record in all civil suits, actions and legal proceedings wherein the city, city commission, city manager, departments, boards or city officials or employees are parties by virtue of their official positions or official actions except as provided in section 2-152. 
(2)  Institute and prosecute all eminent domain proceedings and other civil suits, actions and legal proceedings authorized by the city commission except as provided in section 2-152. 
(3)  Defend all civil suits, actions and legal proceedings brought against the city except as provided in section 2-152. 
(4)  Serve as legal advisor to the city commission, the city manager, and through the office of the city manager, advise personnel as designated by the city manager and city boards who are not authorized to retain separate counsel. 
(5)  Render written legal opinions requested by the city commission or city manager on matters relating to city government and the interpretation, construction and meaning of the Charter, statutes, ordinances, resolutions and contracts affecting or pertaining to city government. 
(6)  Prepare or review and approve as to form and legal sufficiency all city ordinances, resolutions, deeds, contract documents and other legal instruments affecting or pertaining to the city. 
(7)  Attend and be present at all regular and special meetings of the city commission unless excused from attending by the mayor. 
(8)  Perform such other duties, powers and responsibilities as assigned by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-73, § 1, 12-1-98)  
Sec. 2-151. - Limitations on city attorney's authority. 
The city attorney shall not compromise, settle or adjust any claims, debts, demands or causes of action in favor of or against the city without prior approval of the city commission, nor accept service of process in any suit or action against the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-73, § 1, 12-1-98)  
Sec. 2-152. - Employment of special counsel. 
The city commission may employ special counsel for specific needs of the city rather than utilizing the services of the city attorney. The city attorney shall not be responsible for the performance of any duties assigned to special counsel. 
(Ord. No. 98-73, § 1, 12-1-98)  
Secs. 2-153—2-179. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 2-180. - Definitions 
(a)  Law enforcement activity means any person who is appointed or employed by the City of St. Pete Beach; who is vested with the authority to bear arms and make arrests; and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of the penal, criminal, traffic, or highway laws of the state. This definition includes all certified supervisory and command personnel whose duties include, in whole or part, the supervision, training, guidance, and management responsibilities of full-time law enforcement officers, or auxiliary law enforcement officers but does not include support personnel employed by the employing agency. 
(b)  Law enforcement activity means the duties carried out by a law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, § 1, 1-20-98/3-10-98)  
Secs. 2-181—2-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 78. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-186. - Disposal of surplus city property. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Personal property includes every species of property except real property with a current value greater than $1,000.00 or any property with a fixed asset tag. 
Surplus personal property means personal property which the city commission, by resolution, has determined to be personal property which is no longer needed by the city and which may be disposed of by sale to the public at large. 
(b)  If the city owns personal property which is in no longer useful to the city or which is burdensome to the city, the city commission may adopt a resolution setting forth that the property is no longer useful or is burdensome and authorizing the sale of it to the public at large. 
(c)  The city manager may sell the property only upon such terms and conditions as are approved by the city commission and as are set forth in a duly adopted resolution. 
(d)  All revenue received from the sale of surplus property shall be paid into the general fund, except revenue received from the sale of surplus property connected with the sewer system. Revenue received from the sale of surplus property connected with the sewer system shall be paid into the sewer revenue fund. 
(Code 1960, § 2-67; Ord. No. 366, §§ 1—4; Code 1983, § 2-92; Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 6-14-11)  
Secs. 2-187—2-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FINANCIAL PLANNING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Finance and budget review committee, § 22-66 et seq. 
State Law reference— Adoption of the budget, F.S. § 200.065. 
 
Sec. 2-216. - Initiation, purpose and submission of plan. 
(a)  The city manager shall initiate a continuing program of long range financial planning. 
(b)  The plan shall forecast both estimated revenues and proposed expenditures for a minimum of five years. 
(c)  The financial plan shall be submitted to the city commission for periodic review and such other action as deemed appropriate. 
(Code 1960, § 2-64; Ord. No. 308, § 14; Code 1983, § 2-91)  
Sec. 2-217. - Budgetary control. 
(a)  Budgetary control shall be maintained through the use of encumbrances in the budgetary accounts, which reflect budgetary operations and conditions as distinguished from proprietary accounts which show actual financial position and operations, to ensure that appropriations are not exceeded. 
(b)  Budgeted items for which no liability has been incurred during the current fiscal year may be considered for reappropriation in the next fiscal year's budget. 
(Code 1960, § 2-61; Ord. No. 308, § 11; Code 1983, § 2-88)  
Sec. 2-218. - Budget and appropriations. 
(a)  The tentative annual budget shall be submitted to the city commission as provided in F.S. § 200.065. 
(b)  The appropriation ordinance shall state in clear and precise terms that the budget is adopted by reference and is made a part of the ordinance and that the amounts therein are appropriated for the purposes and for the accounts indicated. 
(c)  The total of appropriations (proposed expenditures) shall not exceed the total estimated revenues and other funds made available. 
(d)  At any time during the fiscal year, the city manager may transfer all or any part of an unexpended appropriation balance from one account to another account or to several accounts within the same fund. Requests for such transfers will be in writing and will include the justification, account number and title for both the original and receiving accounts and will indicate the balance in each account, both before and after the transfer. Each transfer request will be signed by the city manager, finance director and department head. A transfer between departments must be approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 2-63; Ord. No. 308, § 13; Ord. No. 387, § 6; Code 1983, § 2-90; Ord. No. 86-54, § 1, 12-2-86; Ord. No. 95-35, § 1, 8-15-95)  
Sec. 2-219. - Fixed assets. 
(a)  General fixed assets are those fixed assets that have: 
(1)  A tangible nature; 
(2)  A life longer than one fiscal year; 
(3)  A cost greater than $2,500.00; and 
(4)  Any categories of property with a lesser value that are determined by the city manager to require inventorying for proper control purposes. 
(b)  Fixed assets shall be classified according to the state uniform accounting system. 
(c)  The city manager shall make or cause to be made an annual inventory of the fixed assets of the city. The inventory will normally be completed not later than the end of the fiscal year. 
(d)  Depreciation will not be recorded as an expense but will be utilized in financial planning for projecting replacement requirements. 
(Code 1960, § 2-62; Ord. No. 308, § 12; Ord. No. 81-26, § 1; Code 1983, § 2-89; Ord. No. 89-19, § 1, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 99-50, § 1, 9-7-99)  
Sec. 2-220. - Disbursements. 
(a)  The city commission recognizes and reaffirms the principle that one person should not control all phases of a financial transaction without the intervention of some other person who affords a cross check. 
(b)  No disbursements (payments in cash, check or other legal tender) shall be made except upon approval by the city manager and the finance director. 
(Code 1960, § 2-60; Ord. No. 308, § 10; Ord. No. 81-61, §§ 1, 2; Code 1983, § 2-87)  
Secs. 2-221—2-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES 
 
Sec. 2-251. - Court cost assessed for law enforcement training purposes. 
(a)  There shall be assessed $2.00 as a court cost against every person convicted of a violation of a municipal ordinance. In addition, $2.00 from every bond estreature or forfeited bail bond related to such penal ordinance shall be collected and deposited. No such assessment shall be made against any person convicted for a violation of any ordinance relating to the parking of vehicles. All such costs collected by the court shall be deposited in the municipal treasury to the credit of a law enforcement training or a law enforcement education fund. 
(b)  The net proceeds of the costs collected shall be allocated to and used solely for law enforcement education or law enforcement training expenditures for the city law enforcement officers as provided in F.S. § 943.25(13). 
(Code 1960, § 1-8.1; Ord. No. 81-42, §§ 1, 2; Code 1983, § 2-3) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy the above fee, F.S. § 943.25(13).  
Sec. 2-252. - Fee schedule. 
The administrative fees of the city are printed in the fee schedule in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 2-01; Ord. No. 80-11, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 80-36, § 3; Ord. No. 80-47, § 1; Ord. No. 81-43, § 1; Ord. No. 82-35, § 1; Code 1983, § 2-5(g); Ord. No. 83-20, § 1; Ord. No. 83-58, § 1, 1-3-84; Ord. No. 84-11, § 1, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 84-70, §§ 1, 2, 1-8-85; Ord. No. 85-9, §§ 1, 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1, 5-7-85; Ord. No. 86-48, § 1, 10-21-86; Ord. No. 87-38, § 1, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 87-44, § 1, 11-17-87; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 1-19-93)  
Sec. 2-253. - Costs of individual bid information packages. 
Whenever projects of the city are subject to competitive bidding, the administration shall calculate the costs of each individual bid information package and shall charge that cost to any person wishing to obtain a copy of individual bid information packages. 
(Code 1960, § 2-01; Ord. No. 80-11, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 80-36, § 3; Ord. No. 80-47, § 1; Ord. No. 81-43, § 1; Ord. No. 82-35, § 1; Code 1983, § 2-5(h); Ord. No. 83-20, § 1; Ord. No. 83-58, § 1, 1-3-84; Ord. No. 84-11, § 1, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 84-70, §§ 1, 2, 1-8-85; Ord. No. 85-9, §§ 1, 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1, 5-7-85; Ord. No. 86-48, § 1, 10-21-86; Ord. No. 87-38, § 1, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 87-44, § 1, 11-17-87; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 1-19-93)  
Sec. 2-254. - Miscellaneous and administrative fees. 
(a)  Miscellaneous fees. The following miscellaneous fees are established by the city commission by ordinance and are specified in appendix A to this Code: 
(1)  Duplicating any voice tape of meetings of the city commission or any city board. 
(2)  Duplicating any videotape, and the person making the request shall provide a blank videotape for duplicating. 
(3)  Photocopy charges as follows: 
a.  Per side of page. 
b.  Per two-sided duplicated page. 
(4)  Reprinting microfilmed records as follows: 
a.  Per page for 8½-inch by 11-inch or 8½-inch by 14-inch pages. 
b.  Per page for larger pages, including maps. 
(5)  Copy of the city Charter and Code of Ordinances in looseleaf binder. 
(6)  Yearly subscription to looseleaf supplements for the Code of Ordinances, per year, paid in advance. 
(b)  Administrative fees. The following administrative fees are established by the city commission by ordinance and are specified in appendix A to this Code: 
(1)  Notarization of documents, no charge. 
(2)  Preparation of declaration and notarization of domicile, per preparation. 
(3)  Identification cards and fingerprint services: 
a.  Identification card or fingerprint card only. 
b.  Identification card or fingerprint card with state department of law enforcement (FDLE) record check for the applicant, when required by the city, plus the costs charged by the FDLE for processing of fingerprint cards. 
(4)  Recording of legal documents. Fees shall be charged as set or established by the office of the clerk of the circuit court. 
(5)  Erection and removal of temporary street graphic, permitted by the city sign ordinance, by the city employees—$184.00 
(6)  Certification of city records by the city clerk's office, per document (F.S. § 119.07.1(a)). 
(7)  Disaster re-entry pass, per each—$1.00 
(8)  Fee for off-duty police officer special detail work, per hour—$49.00, plus an administrative fee of $15.00 per contract, $10.00 per vehicle if a police vehicle is required, and $25.00 per vessel per hour when a police vessel is required. 
(9)  Fees for off-duty fire department personnel special detail work—$45.00, plus a fee of $25.00 per vehicle is a fire utility vehicle is required. 
(Code 1960, § 2-01; Ord. No. 80-11, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 80-36, § 3; Ord. No. 80-47, § 1; Ord. No. 81-43, § 1; Ord. No. 82-35, § 1; Code 1983, § 2-5(a)—(f), (i); Ord. No. 83-20, § 1; Ord. No. 83-58, § 1, 1-3-84; Ord. No. 84-11, § 1, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 84-70, §§ 1, 2, 1-8-85; Ord. No. 85-9, §§ 1, 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1, 5-7-85; Ord. No. 86-48, § 1, 10-21-86; Ord. No. 87-38, § 1, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 87-44, § 1, 11-17-87; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 1-19-93; Ord. No. 98-24, § 1, 5-19-98; Ord. No. 05-04, § 1, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 05-05, § 1, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1, 2-22-05; Ord. No. 07-22, § 1, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 07-24, § 1, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 4-13-10) 
State Law reference— Inspection and examination of records, F.S. § 119.07.  
Secs. 2-255—2-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS 
 
Sec. 2-281. - Purchasing and contracting officer; rules for purchasing procedures. 
(a)  The city manager shall be purchasing and contracting officer for the city, and he shall supervise the purchase of all materials, goods, supplies, services and equipment for which funds are appropriated in the budget. 
(b)  The city manager may issue such rules governing purchasing procedures within the administrative organization, not inconsistent with the Charter and this Code and other ordinances. 
(Code 1960, §§ 2-7, 2-59; Ord. No. 8, § 6; Ord. No. 308, § 9; Ord. No. 352, § 1; Ord. No. 81-1, § 1; Ord. No. 82-24, § 1; Code 1983, § 2-86(a), (f); Ord. No. 84-15, § 1, 3-20-84; Ord. No. 86-29, § 1, 8-5-86; Ord. No. 94-19, § 1, 6-7-94)  
Sec. 2-282. - City manager's duties; bidding procedures. 
(a)  The city manager shall approve purchases and let contracts necessary for the operation and maintenance of city services, including the execution of change orders for city projects for amounts up to and including $25,000.00, without bids, and shall receive sealed bids for purchases or contracts in excess of $25,000.00 and present the bids to the city commission with his recommendation. If the city manager recommends the acceptance of a bid other than the bid with the lowest total price, the reason for the recommendation shall be given. Purchases and contracts which by their nature are impractical to award by competitive bid are exempt from the bidding requirement. Examples of this type of purchase or contract include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Salaries and wages. 
(2)  Professional services, including but not limited to legal, medical services, accounting services, consultants, and insurance policies. This subsection is subject to F.S. ch. 287 and any other applicable law. 
(3)  Any item or service which is available from only one source. 
(4)  Purchases of supplies, such as gasoline and vehicle repair parts, which are purchased as needed in quantities costing $25,000.00 or less at a given time. 
(5)  Emergency purchases or contracts, the delay of which would delay the delivery of city services, stop work, or threaten life or property. The city manager shall notify the city commission of such purchases or contracts at its next meeting. 
(6)  Purchases made through the utilization of state contracts or contracts negotiated by other governmental entities or associations affiliated with government. 
(b)  Where the city commission determines that it is in the best interest of the city, it may authorize the city manager to purchase insurance by negotiation, but this shall be done only under conditions most favorable to the public interest and upon a showing that the purchase shall result in the lowest ultimate cost of the coverage obtained. 
(c)  Individual items costing $25,000.00 or less will not be subject to the bid limit, even if several items purchased together total more than $25,000.00. 
(d)  It is the intent that bidding procedures in this section shall not be circumvented by issuing several purchase orders or checks to cover the purchase of a single item or service. 
(Code 1960, §§ 2-7, 2-59; Ord. No. 8, § 6; Ord. No. 308, § 9; Ord. No. 352, § 1; Ord. No. 81-1, § 1; Ord. No. 82-24, § 1; Code 1983, § 2-86(b), (g); Ord. No. 84-15, § 1, 3-20-84; Ord. No. 86-29, § 1, 8-5-86; Ord. No. 94-19, § 1, 6-7-94; Ord. No. 00-21, § 1, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 11-05, § 2, 6-14-11)  
Sec. 2-283. - Waiver of bid requirements. 
Upon request of the city manager, the city commission may, by majority vote, waive the bid requirements of this division and authorize the city manager to purchase items or services by negotiation rather than bidding. 
(Code 1960, §§ 2-7, 2-59; Ord. No. 8, § 6; Ord. No. 308, § 9; Ord. No. 352, § 1; Ord. No. 81-1, § 1; Ord. No. 82-24, § 1; Code 1983, § 2-86(d); Ord. No. 84-15, § 1, 3-20-84; Ord. No. 86-29, § 1, 8-5-86; Ord. No. 94-19, § 1, 6-7-94)  
Sec. 2-284. - Budgetary limitations. 
No purchase shall be made, contract let or obligation or liability incurred for any item or service which exceeds the current budget appropriation. 
(Code 1960, §§ 2-7, 2-59; Ord. No. 8, § 6; Ord. No. 308, § 9; Ord. No. 352, § 1; Ord. No. 81-1, § 1; Ord. No. 82-24, § 1; Code 1983, § 2-86(e); Ord. No. 84-15, § 1, 3-20-84; Ord. No. 86-29, § 1, 8-5-86; Ord. No. 94-19, § 1, 6-7-94)  
Sec. 2-285. - Emergency purchases. 
If an accident, a disaster or another circumstance creating a public emergency occurs, the city manager may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting such emergency, but he shall file promptly with the city commission a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(Code 1960, §§ 2-7, 2-59; Ord. No. 8, § 6; Ord. No. 308, § 9; Ord. No. 352, § 1; Ord. No. 81-1, § 1; Ord. No. 82-24, § 1; Code 1983, § 2-86(c); Ord. No. 84-15, § 1, 3-20-84; Ord. No. 86-29, § 1, 8-5-86; Ord. No. 94-19, § 1, 6-7-94)  
Sec. 2-286. - Bulk purchases. 
The city commission recognizes that the city does not have central purchasing and warehousing facilities. It is the intent, however, that bulk purchases be made whenever feasible. 
(Code 1960, §§ 2-7, 2-59; Ord. No. 8, § 6; Ord. No. 308, § 9; Ord. No. 352, § 1; Ord. No. 81-1, § 1; Ord. No. 82-24, § 1; Code 1983, § 2-86(h); Ord. No. 84-15, § 1, 3-20-84; Ord. No. 86-29, § 1, 8-5-86; Ord. No. 94-19, § 1, 6-7-94)  
Secs. 2-287—2-319. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TELEVISION ORIGINATION AND TRANSMISSION FACILITIES OPERATED BY THE CITY 
 
Sec. 2-320. - Statement of purpose. 
The city operates television origination and transmission facilities that include a cable television channel and a commercial broadcast channel for the primary purpose of providing information related to the functioning of the city government. Through these facilities the city presents unedited coverage of city commission meetings and other meetings where activities and issues are discussed and decided that effect the lives of the citizens of St. Pete Beach. The city also presents information related to city projects, programs and activities that may be of interest to the public. These television facilities are operated by the city as an information service for the citizens of St. Pete Beach and the surrounding communities. 
The city commission hereby finds and declares that these television facilities are not public forums. The goal of the city in operating these television facilities is to televise only that programming which is in the public interest. The city reserves to itself consistent with federal law and Federal Communications Commission Regulations, the editorial discretion to decide what is in the public interest and therefore what programs should be televised using these facilities. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 2-321. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the programming for the city's cable casting and broadcasting facilities shall be as follows: 
(1)  To provide unedited live coverage of city commission meetings, to include repeated (taped) coverage. 
(2)  To provide live and/or delayed (taped) coverage of other public meetings related to the operation of the city government. 
(3)  To provide information about city programs, projects, and activities. 
(4)  To provide information regarding the operations and services provided by city departments. 
(5)  To cooperate with other governments and government agencies to share information about other government activities that may be of interest to the residents served by the cable and broadcast channels. 
(6)  To announce time and place of homeowner and condominium association meetings. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 2-322. - Access to information facilities. 
Access to the city's cable and broadcast facilities shall be limited to city employees, city functions and operations, except where specifically authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 2-323. - Program content approval. 
All material and programming aired on the city's cable and broadcast facilities are subject to review and approval in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 2-324. - Editing of programming content. 
No city public meeting cablecast or broadcast shall be edited or subjected to editorial comments. Such meeting coverage shall be from gavel to gavel. Other public meetings provided to the city for cablecast or broadcast may be edited to fit time slots by prior agreement. All non-city public meetings, that have been edited, must include an announcement indicating that the meeting has been edited. Departmental programs may be edited under the operational control of the city manager. Messages shown on the alphanumeric bulletin board may be edited for clarity. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 2-325. - Promotional announcements/privately sponsored events/other government use. 
(a)  Promotional announcements for city events and city co-sponsored events are acceptable for cablecast and broadcast at the discretion of the city manager. 
(b)  Promotional announcements for privately sponsored events, charities, or outside organizations for which the city has no official sponsorship shall not be allowed; provided announcements of the time and place of homeowner and condominium association meetings shall be allowed and approved by the city manager. Any questions regarding the appropriateness of any promotional message shall be resolved by the city manager. 
(c)  At the direction of the city commission the use of the city's television facility by other governments or government agencies for the purpose of broadcasting or cablecasting information or educational services of interest or benefit to the citizens of St. Pete Beach and surrounding communities may be allowed provided: 
(1)  The jurisdiction presents its request in writing, including the material to be broadcast, for review and approval by the city manager. 
(2)  The requesting jurisdiction agrees to compensate the city for use of the broadcast facility. The amount of such compensation shall be determined by the city manager. All funds received shall accrue to the general fund. 
(3)  The inclusion of the programming does not significantly interfere with the broadcasting of city generated programs. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 2-326. - Maintaining daily log. 
The city manager shall keep a daily log to record all programming cablecast and broadcast each day by the city's television facility. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 1-21-03)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, F.S. chs. 561—568. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight. 
Club means any group of persons associated together as a duly chartered or incorporated organization, including a social club incorporated by order of the circuit court, which holds a license issued by the state for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages means any business or establishment licensed by the state for the sale of alcoholic beverages; any area or part of any property, building or structure in which alcoholic beverages are kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, served or dispensed under license by the state; any other area, property, building or structure or part thereof having an entrance, door or other passageway that could in any manner be used or utilized as a means of access, ingress or egress into the area in which alcoholic beverages are kept, offered for sale, sold or dispensed; or which is in any other manner capable of access, ingress or egress at any time to the area in which alcoholic beverages are kept, offered for sale, sold, served or dispensed. However, the term "establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages," when applied to a hotel or club, as defined in this section, means that area (indoor or outdoor) or part of such hotel or club in which alcoholic beverages are kept, sold, served or dispensed when such area is capable of being closed or in some other manner set apart and forbidden to access, including sand beach areas as defined herein and as depicted in the vendor's state alcoholic beverage license. 
Sale or sell includes any transfer of liquor, wine or beer or other alcoholic beverages for a consideration, and any gift of liquor, beer or wine in connection with or as a part of a transfer of property other than liquor, beer or wine or other alcoholic beverages for a consideration. 
Sand beach areas means the zone of unconsolidated material that extends landward from the mean high water line to the place where there is marked change in material or physiographic form. 
Sovereignty submerged land include, but are not limited to, tidal lands, sandbars, shallow banks and lands waterward of the ordinary or mean high water line, beneath navigable fresh water or beneath tidally-influenced waters. 
Vendor means any person who keeps for sale, sells or dispenses any alcoholic beverages in any quantity in any place or business licensed by the state for the sale of alcoholic beverages, or any person who holds a license from the state for the sale of alcoholic beverages, including the owner, manufacturer, operator, proprietor or licensee or the servant, agent or employee of any one of such. 
(Code 1960, § 3-1; Ord. No. 1, § 1; Ord. No. 412, § 12; Code 1983, § 3-1; Ord. No. 15-10, § 1, 6-25-15) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-2. - Hours of sale and operation. 
(a)  The prohibited hours for establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages shall be as follows: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages in sealed containers for consumption off the premises shall not be sold from 3:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. any day of the week. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not be sold or served from 3:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. any day of the week. 
(Ord. No. 82-34, § 1; Code 1983, § 3-2; Ord. No. 03-19, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 10-20, § 1, 7-27-10; Ord. No. 2017-06, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Editor's note— Laws of Fla., ch. 63-1790, § 3, as amended, Laws of Fla., ch. 71-808, § 1, provides as follows: 
(1) 
All business establishments in Pinellas County, licensed or unlicensed, dealing in alcoholic beverages, public or private, either directly or indirectly, shall remain closed from the hour of 2:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on each day of the week except Sunday. 
(2) 
All such business establishments shall remain closed on each Sunday from the hour of 2:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. 
Laws of Fla., ch. 63-1790, § 4, as amended, Laws of Fla., ch. 76-474, § 1, provides as follows: 
(1) 
Drugstores or prescription shops dealing only in medicines and drugs dispensed for medical purposes shall not be within the prohibitions of this chapter. 
(2) 
Vendors licensed under F.S. §§ 563.02(1)(a), 564.02(1)(a) and 565.02(1)(a) are specifically included in the provisions of this act [article] with the exception that said vendors shall not dispense: 
(a) 
Beer or wine between the hours of 12:00 p.m. midnight and 8:00 a.m. each weekday, and between the hours of 12:00 p.m. midnight Saturday and 1:00 p.m. Sunday; or 
(b) 
Liquor between the hours of 12:00 p.m. midnight and 8:00 a.m. each weekday, and between the hours of 12:00 p.m. midnight Saturday and 8:00 a.m. Monday. 
(3) 
All business establishments coming under this act [article] which are engaged in a business primarily outside the purview of this act [article] but which maintain a separate department or section within such establishment for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall close only that department or section in conformance with this chapter. 
(4) 
Vendors licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not dispense liquor between the hours of 1:00 p.m. Sundays and 2:00 a.m. Mondays for consumption off the premises. However, such vendors may dispense packaged beer or wine during such hours for consumption off the premises. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage sales, § 134-1198. 
State Law reference— Hours of sale generally. F.S. § 562.14.  
Sec. 6-3. - Sale to certain persons prohibited. 
No person who is a vendor of alcoholic beverages shall sell, furnish or deliver or permit any person in his employ to sell, furnish or deliver any alcoholic beverages in any quantity to any person who is intoxicated or below the legal age as established by state law. 
(Code 1960, § 3-4; Ord. No. 1, §§ 3, 6; Code 1983, § 3-3; Ord. No. 15-10, § 2, 6-25-15) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage sales, § 134-1198. 
State Law reference— Sale prohibited to persons addicted to alcoholic beverages, notice, F.S. § 562.50.  
Sec. 6-4. - Certain persons excluded from premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any vendor of alcoholic beverages to allow, suffer or permit any intoxicated person or habitual drunkard to enter or remain in any establishment for which such vendor holds a license. 
(Code 1960, § 3-5; Ord. No. 1, §§ 4, 6; Code 1983, § 3-4) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage sales, § 134-1198.  
Sec. 6-5. - Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, it shall be unlawful to drink or consume alcoholic beverages on or upon: 
(1)  All public streets. 
(2)  All public beach lands. 
(3)  Any public sidewalk. 
(4)  Any city park. 
(5)  All private sand beach areas upland of the Gulf of Mexico and adjacent to private property. 
(6)  All sovereignty submerged land. 
(b)  Notices . For public beach lands, notice of this section shall be posted in a prominent beach access location by the city. For upland property is used for some commercial use, including but not limited to hotels and resorts on the beach, notice shall be posted by the owner and shall contain language determined to be acceptable by the city attorney. For upland property used as multifamily residential use, the owner or condominium association shall be responsible for posting the notice. For upland property is less than three residential living units, the city shall post the notice at the closest public access to the beach. 
(c)  Containers . It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or about his person any container of alcoholic beverages, whether or not the container is a bottle, can, carton or other form of container, in those areas described in subsection (a) of this section unless a permit has been issued pursuant to subsection (e) of this section otherwise allowing said activity to occur under any certain terms and conditions stated in the permit. This subsection shall not be applicable in those areas described in subsections (a)(1) and (3) of this section if the alcoholic beverage is contained in a sealed container or if the bottle, can, carton or other container has never been opened since the time the beverage was originally bottled at the manufacturer's or bottler's plant. Possession of any container of alcoholic beverages wherein the seal has been broken, the bottle cap or pop-top has been opened or removed or where the container may seem to be open or to have been opened shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(d)  Permits . Permits allowing for the consumption of alcohol for special events, outdoor dining or outdoor drinking areas, or special occasions may be issued as follows: 
(1)  Special event permit on public lands . The city commission may authorize the consumption of alcoholic beverages in the areas described in subsections (a)(1), (2), (3), and (4) in connection with the approval of a special event permit issued pursuant to Article II of Chapter 26 of this Code. 
(2)  Special event permit on private lands . Owners of private sand beach areas may obtain a special event permits for the consumption of alcoholic beverages for special occasions. The permits shall be issued by the city manager or designee and shall include conditions necessary to protect the safety, health and welfare of the public. The upland owner shall be entitled to no more than three permits per month. The area of the beach subject to the permit shall be marked with approved temporary markers, and the consumption of alcohol shall be confined to the marked area. Permits shall not authorize consumption before 8:00 a.m. and shall terminate no later than 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Conditional use permit on public land . The city commission may authorize the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in connection with the approval of a conditional use permit for an outdoor dining area or outdoor drinking area in the area described in subsection (a)(1) and (a)(3) as provided by the City of St. Pete Beach Land Development Code. 
(4)  Administrative approval on private lands. Upon receipt of an accepted site plan application, the technical review committee may approve the sale of alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the rental of beach cabanas on private transient lodging property if all of the following requirements are met through the site plan review and approval process, as outlined in division five of the land development code. 
a.  Each transient lodging facility that desires an alcohol cabana service area permit must complete the permitting process and have an active BTR (business tax receipt) for cabana rental associated with the lodging facility. 
b.  The cabana service area must be delineated by sketch on COP liquor license, as well as a component of the site plan review. The sketch shall be available for viewing at the transient lodging facility at all times. 
c.  The cabana service area can be no closer than 75 feet to a property line abutting an existing residential use located outside of the CRD (community redevelopment district). 
d.  All occupants of the cabana service area must wear an identifiable and unique wrist band that is exclusive to the upland transient lodging facility. The wrist band shall indicate that alcohol must remain in the cabana service area at all times. 
e.  The cabana service area shall be no closer than 50 feet to the wet sand. 
f.  The cabana service area's hours of operation shall be 10:00 am to 10:00 pm. 
g.  The cabana service area's patron(s) shall only be served by identifiable transient lodging facility employees, in person and all service-ware shall have clearly identifiable transient lodging facility markings. 
h.  Glass and plastic straws are prohibited at all times on the sand beach. 
i.  Only patrons or registered members of the transient lodging facility that have current room rental as well as a cabana rental in the cabana service area may be served alcohol. Invited guests of the facility patron that desire to be served alcohol shall register with the hotel to secure a wrist band. Patrons and/or guests are prohibited from bringing alcohol into the cabana service area. 
j.  Service of alcohol shall only be provided within a beach cabana service area, as delineated by boundary markers consistent with the on-site COP map. 
k.  Penalty. Violation of the above criteria will result in: 
1.  First violation - written warning to the transient lodging facility. 
2.  Second violation - written warning to the transient lodging with the stipulation that the permit will be revoked if additional violation occurs within six months. 
3.  Third violation - revocation of the cabana service area permit. The transient lodging facility will not be able to re-apply for a cabana service area permit for one year. For every continual violation an additional six months will be added to this requirement. 
l.  Cabana service area permits shall be issued on an annual basis, and subject to all ordinance amendments at the time of renewal. 
(Code 1960, § 16-1; P.G. Ord. No. 57, § 1; Ord. No. 123, § 1; Ord. No. 334, § 1; Ord. No. 367, § 1; Code 1983, § 3-5; Ord. No. 84-50, § 1, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 89-24, § 1, 11-7-89; Ord. No. 90-5, § 1, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 94-13, § 1, 5-17-94; Ord. No. 15-10, § 3, 6-25-15; Ord. No. 16-09 , § 3, 8-22-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-10, § 3, adopted June 25, 2015, amended § 6-5 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Public consumption or possession" to "Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages," as set out herein. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; library, ch. 50; parks and recreation areas, ch. 58; streets and sidewalks, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; waterways, ch. 94; general commercial zoning district, § 134-981 et seq.; supplemental district regulations, § 134-1076 et seq.; alcoholic beverage sales, § 134-1198; tourist commercial zoning district, § 135-926 et seq.  
Sec. 6-6. - Prohibited on premises of adult uses. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "premises" means the area in which an adult use is permitted as well as the exterior perimeter of a multiuse structure or building in which the adult use is located. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to serve, to drink, to purchase, to carry, or to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of any adult use, as the term is defined in section 10-26. 
(Code 1983, § 3-6; Ord. No. 96-23, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Secs. 6-7—6-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONDUCT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 6-36—6-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NUDITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Adult entertainment establishments, § 10-26 et seq.; nudity prohibited in certain commercial establishments, § 26-136; alcoholic beverage sales, § 134-1198. 
 
Sec. 6-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business includes every kind of commercial establishment, occupation, calling or operation of institutions where members of the public are served alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1960, § 16-5.5; Ord. No. 326, § 7; Code 1983, § 12-3(c)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-67. - Findings. 
The city commission finds there is a concern among city law enforcement officials about an increasing trend toward nudity by owners and employees of businesses serving alcoholic beverages to the public, and that such activities and such competitive commercial exploitation of nudity is adverse to the public health, peace, morals and good order, and that it is in the best interest of the public health, safety and convenience to restrict such nudity, and the commercial promotion and exploitation thereof. 
(Code 1960, § 16-5.5; Ord. No. 326, § 7; Code 1983, § 12-3(a))  
Sec. 6-68. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to proscribe conduct and activities which encourage competitive commercial exploitation of nudity, where such conduct and activity is not related to any live act, demonstration, exhibition, performance, or entertainment which may be protected by the United States Constitution and state constitutional provisions guaranteeing freedom of expression. 
(Code 1960, § 16-5.5; Ord. No. 326, § 7; Code 1983, § 12-3(b))  
Sec. 6-69. - Unlawful conduct; penalties. 
(a)  Under this division, it shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a business to suffer, permit, require or otherwise direct any person, while serving alcoholic beverages to any customer or while seating or directing customers to seats within any business, to expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic hair region, or cleavage of the buttocks, or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, where the areola and nipple are not covered by a less than fully opaque covering. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while serving alcoholic beverages or while seating or directing customers to seats within any business, to expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic hair region, or cleavage of the buttocks, or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, where the areola and nipple are not covered by a less than opaque covering. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a business to suffer, permit, require or otherwise direct any other person, while such person is mingling, coming in contact with, or likely to come in contact with or in close proximity to customers of the business within areas where alcoholic beverages are served, to expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic hair region, or cleavage of the buttocks, or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, where the areola and nipple are not covered by a less than fully opaque covering. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person while mingling, coming in contact with, or likely to come in contact with or in close proximity to customers of the business within areas where alcoholic beverages are served to expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic hair region, or cleavage of the buttocks or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, where the areola and nipple are not covered by a less than fully opaque covering. 
(e)  Upon conviction of any person of a violation of subsection (a) of this section, the privilege of doing business for the business where the violation took place shall be automatically suspended, provided that, within 30 days of a conviction ofany person of a violation of subsection (a) of this section, the city commission shall hold a hearing wherein the person shall have an opportunity to appear before the city commission to show cause why the privilege of doing business shall not be suspended for a definite time period or revoked. Upon completion of the hearing, the city commission shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Reinstate the privilege of doing business, subject to such conditions as shall be deemed reasonably necessary by the city commission to ensure compliance with this division. 
(2)  Suspend the privilege of doing business for a period of time to be determined by the city commission, not to exceed one year. 
(3)  Revoke the privilege of doing business of the business. 
(f)  In addition to the penalties for violation of this division, the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief against any person violating this division. If the city is successful in obtaining injunctive relief against a violation of this division, the party so enjoined shall be required to pay a reasonable attorney's fee to the city to compensate the city for the expense incurred in enjoining the violation. 
(Code 1960, § 16-5.5; Ord. No. 326, § 7; Code 1983, § 12-3(d)—(g), (i), (j))  
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Special events permit requirements, § 26-31 et seq.; distribution of handbills restricted, § 46-1; noise regulations, § 46-131 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Nudity in alcoholic beverage establishments prohibited, § 6-66 et seq.; businesses, ch. 26; nudity prohibited in certain commercial establishments, § 26-136; aiding or abetting another to engage in specific conduct which constitutes a crime, § 54-2; occupational license tax, § 78-91 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means a place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images, including motion pictures, films, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore means: 
(1)  An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade books, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale, rental or display of such material. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of operating an adult bookstore without a permit, as provided in this article, if the adult material is accessible only by employees and either the gross income from the sale and rental of adult material comprises less than ten percent of the gross income from the sale and rental of goods and services at the establishment or the individual items of adult material offered for sale and rental comprise less than ten percent of the individual items publicly displayed at the establishment as stock in trade in any of the following categories: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter; photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual representations; or recordings or other audio matter. Any adult use activity other than the sale or rental of adult material shall preclude the establishment's qualifying solely as an adult bookstore and shall mandate its classification as other than an adult bookstore. 
Adult booth means a separate enclosure inside an adult use establishment, accessible to any person, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access. The term "adult booth" includes but is not limited to a peep show booth, adult arcade booth, or other booth used to view "adult material." The term "adult booth" does not include a foyer through which any person can enter or exit the establishment or a restroom. 
Adult bottle club means a bottle club in which any adult use, as defined in this section, is permitted or occurs or is allowed to occur by the person holding the license or permit for the bottle club or any employee thereof. 
Adult dancing establishment means a commercial establishment that permits, suffers or allows dancers to display or expose specified anatomical areas. Additionally, any establishment on whose premises an employee, who need not be the same employee, displays or exposes specified anatomical areas on more than one day in any 30-day period shall be deemed an adult dancing establishment and shall be required to obtain a license under this Code. 
Adult entertainment establishment means adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult booth, adult bottle club, adult dancing establishment, adult massage establishment, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, special cabaret, physical cultural establishment, or adult photographic studio, as defined in this article, including any business establishment whose primary business stock in trade is dependent upon the activities relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section, or an adult dancing establishment or any other establishment exhibiting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Any commercial establishment that displays a sign or engages in any other form of advertising capable of leading a reasonable person to believe that the establishment offers, presents, permits or engages in any form of adult entertainment shall be deemed an adult entertainment establishment under the appropriate classification. For the purposes of this Code, the term "adult use" is synonymous with the term "adult entertainment establishment." 
Adult massage establishment means a site or premises or portion thereof upon which any person, who is an employee, manipulates or massages the superficial tissues of the body of another person, but does not include the following: licensed health care facilities; licensed physicians or nurses engaged in the practice of their professions; educational or athletic facilities if the massage is a normal and usual practice in such facilities; or establishments exempted under F.S. § 480.034. 
Adult material means any one or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter paintings, drawings, other publications or graphic media, photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or disks, slides or other visual representations, recordings or other audio matter, which have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult motel means any motel or hotel, boardinghouse, roominghouse or other lodging used predominantly for transient customers which includes the term "adult" in any name it uses or otherwise advertises and actually permits the presentation of film material, video or other visual representations, which has as its preliminary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observations of patrons thereof. 
Adult photographic or modeling studio includes any business establishment which offers or advertises as its primary business stock and trade the use of its premises for the purpose of photographing or exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or the modeling of apparel that exhibits specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means an enclosed building or an enclosed space within a building or an open air area used for presenting either filmed or live plays, dances, or other performances, either by individuals or groups, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. An establishment which has adult booths or an adult arcade is considered to be an adult theater. 
Adult use includes the terms as described under the definition of adult entertainment establishment. Additionally, adult includes any business entity in which there is operated or permitted an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult booth, adult bottle club, adult dancing establishment, adult massage establishment, adult material, adult motel, adult photographic or modeling studio, adult theater or special cabaret. 
Applicant means any person who has applied for an adult use permit. 
Bottle club means a commercial establishment, operated for a profit, whether or not a profit is actually made, wherein patrons consume alcoholic beverages which are brought onto the premises and not sold or supplied to the patrons by the establishment, whether the patrons bring in and maintain custody of their own alcoholic beverages or surrender custody to the establishment for dispensing on the premises. This definition also applies to bona fide restaurants whose primary business is the service of meals, and hotel or motel restaurants. 
Business entity means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, corporation or association operating or proposing to operate for commercial or pecuniary gain. The term "operated for commercial or pecuniary gain" shall not depend upon actual profit or loss. Also, the term "operated for commercial or pecuniary gain" shall be presumed where the establishment has an occupational license. A business entity includes any enterprise or venture in which a person sells, buys, exchanges, barters, deals or represents the dealing in any thing or article of value or renders services for compensation. 
Certification of compliance/noncompliance means a notice issued by the department of planning and development indicating to an applicant for an occupational license that the location proposed for an adult use complies or does not comply with the locational requirements of this Code. 
Child care facility means any children's center, day nursery, nursery school, kindergarten, or family day care home as defined in Laws of Fla., ch. 61-2681. 
Church means a premises or site which is used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related activities. The term "church" also includes the terms "synagogue," "temple," "mosque," "cathedral," "church building" and any other facility or premises where individuals of a particular religion gather to worship and for any other related religious purposes. 
Cleavage, when reference is made to the female breast, means the midline or furrow between mature female breasts, but does not include any portion of the protuberance of the breast. When reference is made to the nates, such as in the term "cleavage of the nates," the word means the midline or depression between the nates. 
Conviction means a determination of guilt resulting from a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether imposition of sentence was suspended. 
Department means the department of planning and development and, where applicable, the city police department (SPBPD). 
Employee means a person who works or performs or provides services in connection with an adult entertainment establishment, irrespective or whether the person is paid a salary or wage or is an independent contractor, provided such person has a substantial or consistent relationship with the business of or entertainment/services provided by the adult entertainment establishment. The term "employee" includes but is not limited to performers, managers and assistant managers, stockpersons, tellers, and operators. Where applicable, the term "employee" means a person employed by the city, but shall not mean any elected official or the city clerk, deputy city clerk, or city attorney. 
Establishment or commencement of business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any adult use business as a new business. 
(2)  The conversion of any existing business, whether or not an adult use business. 
(3)  The relocation of any adult use business. 
For purposes of determining the date of commencement of business, evidence in the form of a certificate of occupancy and an occupational license will be required. Any decision regarding a given date of commencement may be appealed pursuant to section 10-157. 
Law enforcement officer means any person who is elected, appointed, or employed full time by the state or any political subdivision thereof; who is vested with authority to bear arms and make arrests; and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of the penal, criminal, traffic, or highway laws of the state. 
Licensee means any person whose application for an adult entertainment establishment has been granted and who owns, possesses, operates and controls the establishment. 
Mixed use zoning district means any parcel located in the city, the municipal or county designation of which allows residential use alone or in any combination with commercial or industrial uses. 
Nates means the buttocks; a prominence formed by the muscles running from the back of the hip to the back of the leg. 
Opaquely covered means to protect, conceal or cover specified anatomical areas with an article of clothing so that the appearance of the specified anatomical areas shall not be apparent to the viewer. 
Operator means any person who engages in or performs any activity which is necessary to or which facilitates the operation of an adult entertainment establishment, including but not limited to the licensee, manger, owner, doorman, bartender, disc jockey, sales clerk, ticket taker, movie projectionist, employee or supervisor. This term is not meant to include repairmen, janitorial personal or the like who are only indirectly involved in facilitating the operation of the adult use. 
Patron includes any natural person other than an employee, operator, or licensee or governmental officer while performing duties pursuant to this article or other law. 
Person includes individual natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, or corporations; and any officers, agents, employees, factors, or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. 
Physical culture establishment means any business establishment which offers or advertises massage, body rubs or physical contact with specified anatomical areas, whether or not licensed. Business establishments which routinely provide medical services by state-licensed medical practitioners and electrolysis treatment by licensed operators of electrolysis equipment shall be excluded from the definition of physical culture establishments. 
Premises means that area in which an adult use is permitted, as well as the outside perimeter of a multiuse structure or building in which the adult use is located. 
Private performance means the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by an employee of an adult entertainment establishment to a person other than another employee while the person is in an area not accessible during such display to all other persons in the establishment, or while the person is in an area in which the person is totally or partially screened or partitioned during such display from the view of all persons outside the area. 
Public recreation area means a tract of land within the city which is kept for ornament and recreation and which is maintained as public property. 
Residential zoned property means any parcel located within the limits of the city which allows for residential use. 
School includes a premises or site upon which there is a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, middle school, senior high school, or exceptional learning center. However, the term "school" does not include a premises or site upon which there is an institution devoted solely to vocational or professional education or training or an institution of higher education, including but not limited to a community college, junior college, four-year college or university. 
Special cabaret means any bar, dancehall, restaurant, or other place of business which features dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers or waiters or waitresses who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas or any such business establishment, the advertising for or a sign identifying which uses the terms "adult," "topless," "nude," "bottomless," or other words of similar import. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals or pubic region; 
b.  Cleavage of the nates of the human buttocks; or 
c.  That portion of the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; this definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal act means: 
(1)  An offense under F.S. ch. 794 (sexual battery); 
(2)  An offense under F.S. ch. 796 (prostitution); 
(3)  An offense under F.S. ch. 800 (lewdness; indecent exposure); 
(4)  An offense under F.S. ch. 826 (bigamy; incest); 
(5)  An offense under F.S. ch. 847 (obscene literature; profanity); or 
(6)  An offense under an analogous statute of a state other than this state or under an analogous ordinance of another county or city. 
Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal for tumescence; 
(2)  Acts of anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sapphism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, urolagnia or zooerasty and any other acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
Straddle dance, also known as a "lap dance" or "face dance," means the use by an employee, whether clothed or not, of any part of his or her body to massage, rub, stroke, knead, caress or fondle the genital or pubic area of a patron, while on the premises, or the placing of the genital or pubic area of an employee in contact with the face of a patron, while on the premises. 
Zoning authority means the department of planning and development for the city and, where appropriate, the appropriate board of authority of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 25-1; Ord. No. 94-51, § 1, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 2-21-95; Ord. No. 96-22, § 1, 5-21-96; Ord. No. 96-47, § 1, 11-19-96) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-27. - Authority. 
This article and this Code are both enacted pursuant to F.S. ch. 166 in the interest of the health, peace, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 25-16; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-28. - Legislative findings. 
(a)  The concerns raised in the whereas clauses listed in Ordinance No. 94-52 and Ordinance No. 93-18 are incorporated in this article by reference. 
(b)  The concerns raised in the findings incorporated by reference in subsection (a) of this section raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(c)  Adult use establishments have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(d)  A reasonable and simple licensure procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators of the adult use establishments. Further, such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the owner/operator to see that the adult use establishment is run in a manner that is consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual owner/operator of the adult use establishment, fully in possession and control of the premises and the activities occurring therein. 
(e)  Adult use establishments are a pervasively regulated industry making reasonable inspections and administrative searches necessary to enforce regulatory standards. In particular, the city commission finds: 
(1)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting in adult theaters advances the substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring at adult theaters. 
(2)  The prevention of sexual contact between patrons and employees at adult use establishments is unrelated to the suppression of free expression, but serves to address the concerns raised in the findings contained in this section. Although the dancer's erotic message may be slightly less effective from three feet away, the ability to engage in the protected expression is not significantly impaired. 
(3)  Separating dancers from patrons and prohibiting dancers and patrons from engaging in sexual fondling and caressing in adult cabarets would reduce the opportunity for prostitution transactions and thus should deter prostitution. 
(4)  The barring of nudity in public places furthers a substantial governmental interest in protecting order and morality. This does not deprive one of freedom of expression of whatever erotic message conveyed; it simply makes the message slightly less graphic. 
(5)  Requiring that the facilities of adult theaters be constructed of materials that are easily cleanable, that the facilities be cleaned on a regular basis, and that the employees cleaning the facilities take reasonable precautions to avoid contact with possible disease transmitting media is reasonably related to the protection of both employees and patrons from sexually transmitted diseases. 
(6)  Requiring licensees of adult use establishments to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(7)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the adult use establishment is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses in a manner as to prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and to reduce or eliminate the criminal activity associated with adult uses establishments. 
(8)  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases and in the investigation of criminal activity to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who either engage in the conduct which this article is designed to prevent or are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(9)  A substantial rational relationship between sexually oriented businesses and sexually related crimes establishes a compelling justification for barring those prone to such crimes from the management of such businesses. 
(10)  The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to a rational inference that the applicant is more likely to engage in conduct in contravention of this article. 
(11)  The barring of a person from participating in an adult use business shall cease when circumstances are indicated to the city that such persons are no longer criminally inclined. 
(12)  Barring of such individuals from management of adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents the conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases and to the promotion of that criminal activity associated with adult uses. 
(13)  Because the weight of evidence shows that while adult bookstores/video stores which only sell or rent adult material and have no adult booth/theater component have similar secondary effects as other adult uses, such bookstores do not promote the transmission of sexual diseases. An exemption of such limited adult establishments from the licensure requirements but not the locational requirements of this article is appropriate. 
(f)  The city commission desires to simplify the finding of all adult entertainment establishment regulations by combining them into one portion of the Code which is contained in this article. This will enable the city to provide a copy of all adult entertainment establishment related legislation by reference to one article of this Code. In order to ensure compliance with all requirements for enactment of ordinances relating to rezoning specific parcels of private real property or substantially changing permitted use categories in zoning districts, pursuant to F.S. § 166.041, the city commission has again reviewed all of the evidence previously presented to it with regard to enactment of Ordinance Nos. 93-18, 93-28 and 93-29 and fully and completely incorporates such ordinances fully in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 25-23; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-29. - Purpose. 
The intent of the city commission in adopting this article is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations that will protect the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city. The provisions of this article, acting alone or together with other applicable ordinances for the city, have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult material. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to adult materials or expression protected by the first amendment or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of adult uses to their intended market. In all matters involving any violation of this article, the burden of proof to establish that violation shall be with the city or applicable city department. 
(Code 1983, § 25-18; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-30. - Construction of article. 
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of licensing and regulating adult entertainment and related activities. Unless otherwise indicated, all sections of this article shall apply equally to all persons, regardless of sex. Masculine pronouns, such as "he," "his," and "him," as employed in this article, shall also be construed to apply to feminine pronouns and neutral pronouns, unless the context suggests otherwise. 
(Code 1983, § 25-17; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-31. - Regulation of obscenity subject to state law. 
For the purposes of this article, it is not the intent of the city commission to legislate with respect to matters of obscenity. These matters are regulated by state law, including F.S. ch. 847, as may be amended. 
(Code 1983, § 25-2; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-32. - Regulation of massage establishments subject to state law. 
For the purposes of this article, it is not the intent of the city commission to legislate with respect to matters of massage establishments. These matters are regulated by state agency, the department of business and professional regulation, board of massage, and by state law, F.S. ch. 480. 
(Code 1983, § 25-3; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-33. - Jurisdiction. 
All territory within the legal boundaries of the city shall be embraced by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, §§ 25-15, 25-110; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-34. - Applicability of other ordinances and sections of Code. 
Nothing contained in this article is in any way intended to relieve any applicant, employee, patron, person, individual, partnership, corporation or other business entity from complying with any other section of this Code and ordinance of the city with regard to the establishment of and operation of any business regulated under this article. 
(Code 1983, § 25-20; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-35. - Location of adult uses. 
(a)  No business entity in which there is any adult use, as provided in this article, shall be located within 300 feet of any residential zoned property or any portion of a mixed use zoning district developed and utilized as residential or within 300 feet of any church, school, child care facility or public recreation area which is validly located or which has received legal authority to be located. 
(b)  No business entity in which there is any adult use, as provided in this article, shall be located within 300 feet of any other adult use. 
(c)  The distance requirements under subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be measured along a straight line from the nearest residential zoning district or the nearest property line of the church, school, child care facility, public recreation area or adult use to the closest property line of the adult use. In a multitenant or multiuser building, such as a shopping center, the distance requirement shall be measured from the closest portion of the building or structure utilized by the adult use. 
(d)  An adult use shall not be located or permitted on the same premises as a use or business entity that is licensed to sell or serve alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the operation of any business or the performance of any activity prohibited under any other section of this Code. Additionally, nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize, allow or permit the establishment of any business, the performance of any activity, or the possession of any item which is obscene under the judicially established definition of obscenity. 
(Code 1983, § 25-5; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 96-22, § 2, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 10-36. - Public nudity. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any public place or in any commercial establishment, unless expressly permitted, within the corporate limits of the city to be found in a state of nudity or to expose or exhibit his sexual organs or expose specified anatomical areas. This section, however, shall not be construed to prohibit the exposure of sexual organs in restrooms or in any other place provided or set aside for that purpose. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the wearing of bathing attire on the city beaches. This section shall not be construed to prohibit a mother breastfeeding her baby. 
(Code 1983, § 25-19; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94) 
State Law reference— Exposure of sexual organs, F.S. § 800.03.  
Secs. 10-37—10-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 10-66. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  Ultimate responsibility for the administration and enforcement of this article is vested in the department of planning and development, the city manager, police department, and, where appropriate, the city commission. 
(b)  The department of planning and development is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and cancelling adult use licenses for proposed or existing adult use establishments and for ascertaining whether a suspected adult use establishment is licensed or whether a license establishment complies with or is complying with this section, sections 10-186, 10-187, 10-190, 10-191, 10-193—10-198, 10-226—10-232 and division 3 of this article. The police department is responsible for all enforcement actions brought under sections 10-226 and 10-228—10-232 and division 3 of this article. The department of planning and development shall assist the police department in its investigative responsibilities and shall initiate investigations and issue citations in their respective areas of responsibility. 
(c)  The chief of police is responsible for verifying information contained on an application pursuant to subsection 10-187(b), for inspecting any proposed, licensed or nonlicensed establishment in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable local ordinances and criminal statutes, including the provisions set forth in sections 10-226, 10-228—10-232 and 10-234—10-245 and division 3 of this article. 
(d)  The department of planning and development is responsible for the inspection of licensed premises and premises for which application for a license is made to ascertain compliance with: 
(1)  All fire prevention codes, statutes or ordinances in effect in the city; and 
(2)  City and county health codes and applicable state laws and regulations. 
(e)  The department of planning and development is responsible for ascertaining whether an existing adult use or a proposed establishment for which application for a license is being made complies with all locational requirements of section 10-35, of Ordinance No. 94-52 and all other zoning regulations and other applicable land use laws of the city and, if it complies, issuing an approval in the form of a valid adult use permit pursuant to sections 10-226, 10-228—10-232 and division 3 of this article. 
(f)  Any employee of the departments referenced in subsections (a) through (e) of this section who is authorized by the head of that department shall, at any reasonable hour, which term shall include all hours of operation of the adult entertainment establishment, have access to and shall have the right to inspect the premises of all licensees under this article for compliance with any or all of the applicable codes, statutes, ordinances, and regulations in effect in the city and within the responsibilities of their respective departments, as outlined in subsections (a) through (e) of this section. Such employee shall require strict compliance with this article. Reports of violations shall be reported to the department of planning and development. 
(Code 1983, § 25-41; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-67. - Suit for violations. 
In addition to any penalties for violation of this article, the city can bring suit. The city commission may authorize the filing of suit in the circuit court to restrain, enjoin or otherwise prevent the violation of this article. 
(Code 1983, §§ 25-14, 25-109; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-68. - Immunity from prosecution. 
The city or any department shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good-faith trespass upon an adult use establishment while acting within the scope of its authority under this article. Any applicant for or holder of a permit required in this article shall, by acceptance and receipt of the permit, agree to be bound by the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1983, §§ 25-13, 25-108; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-69. - Notice. 
Any notice required under this article shall be accomplished by sending a written notification by certified mail to the mailing address set forth on the application for the license or a permit or by personal service. This mailing address shall be considered the correct mailing address unless the department of planning and development has been otherwise notified in writing. 
(Code 1983, §§ 25-12, 25-107; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-70. - Review of decisions. 
Any decision of department of planning and development pursuant to division 3 of this article shall be reviewed as a matter of right by the circuit court upon the filing of an appropriate pleading by an aggrieved party, within 30 days of the action so taken by department of planning and development. 
(Code 1983, § 25-106; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-71. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Whomever violates any section of this article shall be prosecuted and punished as provided by section 1-14. In all matters involving any violation of this article, the burden of proof to establish that violation shall be with the city or applicable city department. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty provided for in section 1-14, adult bookstores, adult theaters, special cabarets, physical culture establishments or adult photographic or modeling studios not in conformity with the requirements shall be subject to the appropriate civil action, including injunctive relief, in the court of appropriate jurisdiction, for their abatement. Each day that any irreparable or irreversible violation is committed shall constitute a separate offense. Violations of general provisions is subsections 10-226(5)—(7) or the applicable special requirements of sections 10-229 through 10-232 shall constitute separate offenses after the time period under subsection 10-197(a) has lapsed. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of the licensee, owner, employee or operator of an adult use business establishment to ensure compliance with this article, notwithstanding the issuance of an occupational license, building permit, zoning clearance or any other governmental permit. 
(d)  If the event the city attorney is required to participate in the prosecution of any violation of this article or if the city attorney is required to engage in any civil action, including but not limited to proceedings for injunction or to recover damages, the holder of the adult use permit involved in such action by the city attorney shall be required to reimburse the city for all attorney's fees paid by the city. Further, any adult use permit holder, by applying for and accepting an adult use permit shall have agreed to and accepted this subsection 
(Code 1983, §§ 25-10, 25-11, 25-94; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-72. - Rebuttable presumptions; affirmative defenses. 
In prosecutions for violations of section 10-236, 10-241 or 10-242, it is a rebuttable presumption, where relevant, that the person with whom the charged individual is alleged to have performed the prohibited act is not an employee. It is an affirmative defense, where applicable, that individuals involved in the alleged violation are employees of the adult entertainment establishment or adult use with whom the otherwise prohibited act is allowed. 
(Code 1983, § 25-95; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Secs. 10-73—10-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEE OF ADULT USE BUSINESS PERMIT 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Required. 
Unless specifically excluded in this division, it shall be unlawful for any person to obtain employment in an establishment licensed or permitted to operate under this article, for any form of consideration, or to exhibit or display specified anatomical areas in an establishment licensed or permitted to operate under this article unless and until such person shall have first obtained an adult entertainment permit or temporary permit from the director of planning and development. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(a); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-102. - Violations. 
Any person who violates this division or otherwise fails to secure a permit as required by this division shall be prosecuted and punished in accordance with general law. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(g); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-103. - Application. 
(a)  All employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall file an application for an adult entertainment permit with the director of planning and development. 
(b)  There shall be submitted with each application for a permit proof of the applicant's age. Such proof shall be provided by production of the applicant's driver's license or passport or certified copy of his birth certificate. If the applicant is unable to furnish such documents, a certificate from the public school authorities as to the age of the applicant upon entering school, as required by F.S. § 232.03, or the school authorities of the state where applicant enrolled in school shall be submitted. Upon inability of the applicant to establish a birth date, the date shall be established in the order of preference as provided by F.S. § 232.03. However, uncertified copies of such documents shall not be accepted. 
(c)  Any applicant who does not possess a driver's license, passport or certified copy of his birth certificate may obtain a temporary permit upon completion of all other requirements for an applicant and submission of a written request to the appropriate authority in his state of birth that certified evidence of his date of birth be provided to the department of planning and development. 
(d)  Any adult entertainment establishment holding a valid adult entertainment license issued pursuant to this article shall be permitted to provide its employees with current permit applicant forms approved by the director of planning and development and to take the photograph of the applicant in a manner and with equipment approved by the city manager on the condition that the establishment: 
(1)  Require the employee to complete the application form and be photographed within one working day of the time the employee begins to work or perform in the establishment; 
(2)  Mail a notice in writing to the director of planning and development within one working day that the employee has begun to work or perform at the establishment; 
(3)  Make the employee available for fingerprinting at a time and location to be determined by an agent appointed by the director of planning and development, at which time and place the employee shall present to the agent the employee's completed applicant form and photograph; 
(4)  On the first Monday of every month provide the department of planning and development with a current listing of all employees and their positions; 
(5)  In exchange for acceptance of the benefits provided by this subsection, waive any and all rights to challenge the permit requirements of this article; 
(6)  Reimburse the city for reasonable additional expenses incurred pursuant to this subsection; and 
(7)  Be liable for damages to the city of $250.00 per day per violation if any employee who performs in the establishment is not entitled to a permit. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(c)(2), (6), (8); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-104. - Age. 
Employees of a licensee on a premises licensed under this article shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(b); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-105. - Fee. 
Every application for a permit required under this division shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee established by resolution of the city commission and which is in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(c)(3); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-106. - Health. 
The director of planning and development shall submit the name of every applicant for an adult entertainment permit who intends to work in an adult establishment to the county health department. If, in the 30 days immediately preceding submission of an application, such applicant was a known carrier of any notifiable communicable disease, as defined in chapter 10D-3, Florida Administrative Code, the county health department shall notify the director of planning and development, and no permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant presents a statement from a licensed physician certifying that the applicant is free of all notifiable communicable diseases. Any person applying for an adult entertainment permit shall be deemed to have consented to having the county health department notify the director of planning and development if the applicant is a known carrier of a notifiable communicable disease and shall be deemed to and shall have waived any right he may have to maintain the privacy or confidentiality of such information. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(c)(4); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-107. - Temporary permit issuance. 
At the time an applicant applies for a permit required under this division and completes all requirements for the issuance of a permit, he shall be issued a temporary permit valid for seven days. No later than seven days from the filing of an application and, if applicable, upon presentation of the statement of a licensed physician as required in section 10-106, the department of planning and development shall issue a permit. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(c)(5); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-108. - Issuance. 
(a)  Under this division, it shall be the duty of the director of planning and development to issue the applicant a written permit, which shall be signed by the director and shall bear the name, all aliases, address, sex, age, signature, and photograph of the applicant. The director of planning and development shall request an applicant to provide such additional information as is necessary to effect the purposes of this article. Upon delivery of the permit to the applicant, the applicant shall be entitled to begin working on the licensed premises as a permanent employee. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued when its issuance would violate a statute, ordinance, law or when an order from a court of law prohibits the applicant from obtaining an adult entertainment permit in the city. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(c)(6), (7); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-109. - Possession required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an employee, as defined in this article, to work, perform or to exhibit or display specified anatomical areas in an adult entertainment establishment without an adult entertainment permit in immediate possession at all times. 
(b)  No person charged with violating this division shall be convicted if the person produces to the director of planning and development, within 72 hours of detention or in court, a permit theretofore issued. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a properly authenticated notification from the director of planning and development verifying issuance of a valid permit, the clerk of the court is authorized to dismiss such case at any time prior to the defendant's appearance in court. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(f); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-110. - Expiration and renewal. 
A permit issued under this division shall expire two years from the date of issuance. A permittee under this division shall be entitled to a renewal of the permit as a matter of course, except when the permit has been suspended or revoked, upon presentation of the previous permit or presentation of an affidavit as to its loss or destruction to the director of planning and development and payment of a fee made payable to the city. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(e); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-111. - Revocation. 
If a permit required under this division shall be issued as a result of false information, misrepresentations of fact or mistake of fact, it shall be revoked. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(d); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-112. - Suspension. 
(a)  Procedure. Upon receiving notice that a jury or other trier of fact in a court of law has found that a person who has been issued a permit under this division violated any section of this article, whether or not an adjudication of guilt has been entered, the department of planning and development shall suspend the permit, and notice of the suspension shall be sent to the address on the permit application, which shall be considered the correct address. 
(b)  Periods of suspension. A single violation of this article shall result in the suspension of the adult entertainment permit for 30 days. Upon a second violation of this article within a period of two years from the date of a prior violation of this article, but not including any time during which the permit was suspended, the permit shall be suspended for 90 days. Upon a third violation of this article within a period of two years from the first of three violations, but not including any time during which the permit was suspended, the permit shall be suspended for 180 days. All periods of suspension shall begin on the 15th day from the date the department of planning and development mails a notice of suspension to the permittee or on the date the permittee delivers the permit to the department of planning and development, whichever comes first. 
(c)  Surrender of permit required. If a permittee, after having been mailed notice of the suspension of the permit in the manner provided in this section, fails to surrender the permit to the department of planning and development within 15 days, the period of suspension of the permit shall be extended and shall not expire until a period has elapsed after the date of surrender of the permit or after the date of expiration of the permit, whichever comes first, which is identical in length with the original period of suspension. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(h); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-113. - Appeal. 
Under this division, if an application for a permit is denied or if a permit is suspended or revoked, the procedures specified in section 10-199 shall be available to the applicant or permittee, in the manner therein specified. If the applicant or permittee does not appeal the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee shall be deemed to have failed to have exhausted the administrative remedies. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(i); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-114. - Change of address, name or place of employment. 
Whenever any person, after applying for or receiving an adult entertainment permit required under this division, shall move from the residential address named in such application or in the permit issued to such person or when the name of the permittee is changed by marriage or otherwise or when the permittee takes on employment or begins to perform at an adult entertainment establishment not indicated in the person's application, such person shall, within ten days thereafter, notify the department of planning and development in writing of such person's old and new address or of such former and new names. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(k); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-115. - Replacement of lost permits. 
Under this division, replacement of a lost permit shall be obtained by completing an application as required in sections 10-103 and 10-105—10-107. Every application for a replacement permit shall be accompanied by a fee, which shall be established by resolution of the city commission and which is listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 25-72(j); Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Secs. 10-116—10-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ADULT USE BUSINESS PERMIT 
 
Sec. 10-146. - Required. 
No adult use business shall be allowed to commence or continue to operate without first obtaining a valid adult use permit. Any person desiring to locate, operate or continue operation of any adult use shall be required to obtain an adult use permit from the director of planning and development before the establishment or commencement of business as an adult use. 
(Code 1983, § 25-6(a); Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-147. - Application. 
The applicant for an adult use business permit shall complete an application on forms supplied by the department of planning and development for a permit to operate an adult entertainment establishment, which provides the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant's legal name as well as any aliases. If the applicant is a partnership, the full name of all partners, whether general or limited, as well as any and all aliases of the partners. If the applicant is a corporation, the exact corporate name and state of incorporation and the names and aliases of all officers, directors and stockholders. 
(2)  The name under which the business is to be operated and a general description of the services or goods to be provided. 
(3)  The telephone number of the business. 
(4)  The street address of the proposed or existing adult use. 
(5)  Legal description of the property occupied by the proposed or existing adult use, including the property boundaries. 
(6)  A map showing the known locations of any churches, schools, child care facilities, public recreation facilities or other existing or proposed adult uses within approximately 300 feet of the proposed or existing adult use location for which the adult use permit is being sought. 
(7)  If the applicant is not the record owner of the subject parcel, inclusion of a letter, with the notarized signature of the record owner, purporting to be the record owner, and stating the applicant is authorized to seek an adult use permit for the premises. 
(8)  A plan or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area to be occupied by the adult use business in relation to the gross floor area. The plan or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale. Site and development plans shall comply with article IV of chapter 134. 
(9)  Disclosure of any criminal convictions within the previous five years of the owner, manager, clerk or operator, partner, officer, directors or stockholders, as defined in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 25-6(b)(2); Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-148. - Fee. 
(a)  In order to obtain an adult use business permit, the applicant shall remit to the city a fee for each adult entertainment establishment permit that is issued, which fee shall be separate and distinct from business licenses, occupational licenses or other building licenses or fees. The fee shall be set by the city commission and shall be reasonably calculated to cover the costs of administrating the permitting requirements of this division and shall not be refundable if the application is rejected. 
(b)  The annual application fee for an adult use business permit shall be as established by resolution of the city commission, which fee may be changed from time to time as deemed appropriate by the city commission and which is included in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1983, §§ 25-6(b)(1), 25-8; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-149. - Criteria for issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application for the permit required under this division, the director of planning and development or his designee or any person designated by the city manager shall inspect the proposed location of the adult use; shall check the distance between the lot lines of the adult entertainment establishment and any other adult entertainment establishment, church, school, residential zoned district, residential use within a multiuse zoning district or public recreation area; and shall check the total floor space occupied by the adult use aspect of the business in relation to the total floor area of the business. 
(b)  The director of planning and development may, but only with the written consent of the applicant, extend that period of time for purposes of clarification of issues raised by the review, but in no event shall the time be extended for a period of time in excess of 45 days. 
(c)  The city shall have a check made by the police department for any convictions within the previous five years of any owner, manager, clerk, operator, partner, officer, director or stockholder of the applicant for any of the following crimes: 
(1)  Sexual battery, F.S. § 794.011 et seq. 
(2)  Prostitution, F.S. ch. 796. 
(3)  Lewdness, F.S. § 800.02 et seq. 
(4)  Sexual abuse of child, F.S. § 415.513 et seq. 
(5)  Incest, F.S. § 826.04. 
(6)  Commercial exploitation of nudity, section 6-66 et seq. of this Code. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued if any owner, manager, clerk, operator, partner, officer, director or stockholder of the applicant has been convicted within the previous five years of any of the crimes outlined in this section. 
(Code 1983, § 25-6(c)—(e); Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-150. - Issuance of certificate of compliance or noncompliance. 
(a)  Generally. Inspection in the review of the application as stated in this division shall be completed and the city shall issue, within 45 days, a certificate of compliance or a certificate of noncompliance. 
(b)  Certification of noncompliance. 
(1)  When it is found that the location proposed in the application does not meet the distance requirements of subsection 10-35(a) or is one where a valid adult use exists or is one where a valid adult use permit or valid certification of compliance has been issued for another adult use, the location of which is within the distance requirements of subsection 10-35(b) from the proposed location, the applicant shall be notified of the certification of noncompliance of the proposed location with the locational requirements of this article. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the certification of noncompliance, the applicant shall have ten days to appeal the decision on noncompliance pursuant to section 10-157. 
(c)  Certification of compliance. 
(1)  When it is found that the applicant's proposed location meets the distance requirement of subsection 10-35(a) and where no valid adult use exists or where no valid adult use permit or valid certification of compliance has been issued for another adult use, the location of which is within the distance requirements of subsection 10-35(b) from the proposed location, the applicant shall be notified of the certification of compliance of the proposed location with the locational requirements of subsections 10-35(a) and (b). 
(2)  Upon notification, the applicant shall have 20 days to obtain the adult use permit, signed by the director of planning and development or his designee. Failure to obtain that permit within the 20-day time period invalidates the certification of compliance and the applicant must reapply. 
(Code 1983, § 25-6(f)(1), (2); Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-151. - Conflicting applications. 
(a)  The city commission recognizes the potential of creating nonconformities by granting adult use business permits that conflict because the applications are submitted at the same time and the applicants seek permits for the same location or for a location, which, if permitted under this division, would render the other location unusable. The director of planning and development shall develop a system for tracking potentially conflicting applications and for ranking them by date and time of application/date of establishment. 
(b)  Between two applications being processed at the same time, which individually qualify under subsections 10-35(a) and (b) but would violate subsection 10-35(b) if both were to receive permits, the application which was completed at the earliest date, as provided in sections 10-147 and 10-148, shall be notified that the applicant's proposed location has been certified in compliance pursuant to subsection 10-150(c). Applications shall be processed on a first come, first served basis if properly received and properly completed. 
(c)  The conflicting applicant shall be notified of the application's certification of noncompliance pursuant to subsection 10-150(b) with the notation that the noncompliance was due to the earlier submittal of a conflicting application. 
(d)  The first applicant who has received the certification of compliance shall have 20 days to secure the adult use permit, signed by the director of planning and development. If the period of validity of the certification of compliance expires, pursuant to subsection 10-150(c)(2), the applicant must reapply. 
(e)  Any applicant who has received a certification of noncompliance pursuant to subsection 10-150(b) may use the applicant's prior application date in a resubmission for the purposes of establishing the prior date if the original application was made no more than seven months previous. Otherwise the applicant shall submit a new application. 
(Code 1983, § 25-6(f)(3); Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-152. - Contents. 
All permits issued under this division shall contain a legend on the back or reverse which shall state as follows: 
The undersigned permit holder acknowledges that the secondary effects of the operation of an adult entertainment facility are so adverse that should the holder of this permit or any of his/her/their/its agents and employees violate any of the provisions of Section 10-155(a)(1), (2) or (3) or permit a violation to exist, knowingly or otherwise, on the premises of said adult use facility, then the City of St. Pete Beach shall be entitled to issue a cease and desist order as specified by Section 10-155(b) of this Code; and further, the City shall be entitled to revoke the permit issued herewith, and direct that said adult usage be terminated immediately upon issuance of any order of revocation by the City. 
	/s/   
      Permit Holder 
 	 
(Code 1983, § 25-6(f)(7); Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-153. - Validity. 
(a)  The adult use permit issued under this division, signed by the director of planning and development, shall be valid for a period of six months after issuance, during which time the applicant's adult use business must either operate as an adult use or the necessary building permits to establish the adult use business must have been obtained. The validity of such a permit shall be extended by the director of planning and development one time for 90 days for good cause shown. Any decision to deny such an extension may be appealed pursuant to the provisions of section 10-157. 
(b)  Once established, the adult use permit shall remain valid unless revoked by the director of planning and development or the adult use has been voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. 
(c)  Decisions by the director of planning and development to revoke an otherwise valid adult use permit may be appealed pursuant to section 10-157. 
(Code 1983, § 25-6(f)(4); Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-154. - Transferability. 
A permit required under this division shall be issued only in the name of the approved applicant and shall not be transferable to any person. 
(Code 1983, § 25-6(f)(5); Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-155. - Revocation and cease and desist order. 
(a)  The city shall be entitled to and shall, in fact, be obligated to issue a cease and desist order to any person holding a permit under this division, requiring the permit holder to immediately cease and desist operation of the adult entertainment establishment authorized in accordance with this article and, additionally and not as an alternative to the cease and desist order, the city shall revoke the permit of any permit holder for any one or more of the reasons set forth as follows: 
(1)  The owner or operator of the permitted business knowingly allowed a person under the age of 18 years of age to be an employee of the adult use business or should have known after reasonable inquiry that the employee was under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  The owner of the permitted business knowingly gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application for such a permit. 
(3)  The conviction of the owner, manager, clerk or operator, partner, officer, director, or stockholder of any criminal violation related to the operation of the adult use business. 
(b)  The cease and desist order shall be issued in order to protect the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the city from any of the secondary effects of the adult use. The order shall specify the reason for its issuance, and shall also set a time and place for a hearing before an administrative hearing officer, selected by the city manager, in order to determine whether or not the permit shall be revoked. The administrative hearing officer shall hold the hearing required under this subsection within ten business days from the date of the issuance of the cease and desist order. At the hearing, the city shall present such evidence as it deems appropriate to establish the nature of the offense and to establish the reasons for the cease and desist order. The permit holder shall present such evidence as he deems appropriate. Thereafter, the hearing officer shall determine whether to revoke the permit or to place such additional lawful restrictions on the permit holder as shall be necessary in order to ensure that no further violations of this article shall occur. A permit holder may continue to operate until the hearing officer has rendered a decision. A permit holder who continues to operate the adult entertainment facility after a revocation shall be subject to a fine of $500.00 for each day of the violation, which fine shall be determined by the hearing officer at a subsequent hearing. Any fine assessed by the hearing officer shall be recorded as a lien in the public records of the county and in any other county in which the permit holder may own real property or may operate an adult entertainment facility and shall be subject to enforcement and collection in the same manner as any mechanic's lien may be enforced in accordance with F.S. ch. 713, including the right to collect a reasonable attorney's fee. By applying for and accepting an adult use permit, the permit holder agrees to be bound by any and all decisions rendered by the hearing officer. The administrative hearing officer shall conduct a fair and impartial hearing, keeping in mind the requirement of providing due process of law to all parties. In any proceeding regarding revocation of a permit or regarding a cease and desist order, the burden of proof shall be with the city or the applicable city department. 
(Code 1983, § 25-6(f)(6); Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-156. - Variances. 
(a)  If an applicant receives a certification of noncompliance because the location of the proposed adult use is in violation of the locational requirements of this article, and if the applicant wishes to seek a variance from these locational requirements, the applicant shall, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the certification of noncompliance, file with department of planning and development a written request for a variance from the locational restrictions of section 10-35. 
(b)  If the written request is filed with the director of planning and development within the ten-day limit, the director shall schedule a hearing before the city's appropriate board of authority, which body shall consider the request for a variance. The department of planning and development shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is received. 
(c)  The appropriate board of authority shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person in a public hearing scheduled with public notice. Public notice shall be pursuant to the requirements of the Government-In-The-Sunshine Manual. The appropriate board of authority may, in its discretion, grant a variance, with reasonable conditions, from the locational restrictions of section 10-35 if it makes the following findings: 
(1)  A sufficient physical barrier separates the adult use establishment, for which a variance is being sought, from the land use which has caused the adult use not to be in compliance with the distance requirement of this article, so as to substantially fulfill the purpose of the distance requirement. Such physical barriers include but are not limited to limited access streets or highways, walls, natural or manmade waterways. 
(2)  The strict application of this article will work an undue hardship unique to the applicant for a particular location. 
(3)  All other applicable sections of this article will be observed. 
(d)  The appropriate board of authority shall only grant a variance to this article by the affirmative vote of four members. Failure to reach a four-member vote shall result in a denial of the variance. The decision of the appropriate board of authority shall be final. 
(e)  If appropriate board of authority denies the variance, the applicant shall not be entitled to reapply until at least six months have elapsed since the date of the board's action. 
(f)  The grant of a variance does not exempt the applicant from any other sections of this article, other than the locational restrictions of section 10-35. 
(Code 1983, § 25-7; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-157. - Appeals. 
Notwithstanding any other section of this Code or ordinance or section of this article, appeals shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The appropriate board of authority shall have the authority to hear appeals from decisions made by the department of planning and development pursuant to subsections 10-35(a) and (b) or section 10-156. 
(2)  Applications for appeals of the decisions shall be submitted to the department of planning and development. Applications need not be in any particular form but should reference the application reference number and, generally, the basis for appeal of the decision. 
(3)  The written notice of appeal shall be submitted within seven days of the official notification by the city of its finding. The appropriate board of authority shall consider the appeal and shall issue its finding within 60 days after receipt of the written notice of appeal. 
(Code 1983, § 25-9; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Secs. 10-158—10-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 10-186. - Required; classification. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be permitted to operate within the corporate limits without first having been granted an adult use license under this article, unless otherwise exempted. 
(2)  Provided it is not in violation of chapter 134 pertaining to zoning, an adult entertainment establishment shall be granted a conditional right to operate within ten days of filing an application for an adult entertainment license. The conditional right to operate shall be valid for so long a time as is necessary for the director of planning and development to issue or to deny issuance of the license. The applicant's conditional right to operate shall terminate five days after the mailing of a notice of denial or preliminary denial by the director of planning and development as provided in section 10-190. Further, issuance of a conditional permit shall not obligate the city or the department of planning and development to grant any other permit for an adult entertainment establishment. Prior to issuance of a conditional permit, the holder for such permit shall be required to sign a written statement to the effect that the permit holder understands the permit is conditional and shall not be reissued or given permanent status. 
(b)  Classifications. Any adult use shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  An adult bookstore or adult video store. 
(2)  Adult dancing establishment. 
(3)  Adult motel. 
(4)  Adult theater, which shall include adult arcades, places or buildings having adult motion picture booths, places or buildings having a hall or auditorium for the presentation of film material and places designed to permit viewing by patrons seated in automobiles. 
(5)  Adult photographic studio or modeling studio. 
(6)  Adult massage establishment. 
(7)  Physical culture establishment or special cabaret or any combination of these uses based on the information in the application subject to subsequent inspection for verification. 
(8)  Adult bottle club. 
(c)  Contents. Each application for a license shall state the classification and location for which it is to be issued. A license shall be issued for only one location and for only one classification of adult entertainment, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, at a single location. 
(Code 1983, § 25-42; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-187. - Application. 
(a)  Required. Any individual, partnership or corporation desiring to operate an adult use establishment shall file with the department of planning and development a sworn license application and a standard application form supplied by the department of planning and development. 
(b)  Contents. The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he is 18 years of age; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and the names of all partners having either direct, managerial, supervisory or advisory responsibilities for day-to-day operations of the adult use and whether the partnership is general or limited; or 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the names and capacity of all officers, directors, and stockholders having either direct, managerial, supervisory or advisory responsibilities for day-to-day operations of the adult use and, if applicable, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
(2)  If the applicant intends to conduct the establishment under a name other than that of the applicant, the establishment's fictitious name and a certified copy of the applicant's registration with the division of corporations of the department of state under F.S. § 865.09. 
(3)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section have, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a specified criminal act and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction, and the place of conviction. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section have had a previous license or permit, under this article or any other ordinance regulating adult uses, suspended or revoked or has been, by any federal or state court order, required to cease operation, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose license, under this article or any other ordinance regulating adult uses, has previously been suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation. 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section hold any other license under this article and, if so, the name and location of such other licensed establishment. 
(6)  The general nature of the type of adult use for which the applicant is seeking a license, including a statement concerning the degree to which the anticipated activities at the adult use meet the definitions of the enumerated adult use classifications listed in subsection 10-186(b). Such a characterization shall serve as an initial basis for the permitted activities allowed under the license issued as well a basis for the fee charged. 
(7)  The location of the proposed establishment, including a legal description of the property site and a legal street address. 
(8)  The names of the employees for the proposed established, if known, or, if presently unknown or there will be no employees, a statement to that effect. 
(9)  The applicant's current mailing address, current residential address, and current residential telephone number. 
(10)  A site plan of the proposed or existing establishment. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however each site plan should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The site plan shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  All property lines, rights-of-way, and the location of buildings, parking areas and spaces, curb cuts, and driveways. 
b.  All windows, doors, entrances and exits, fixed structural features, walls, stairs, partitions, projection booths, admission booths, adult booths, concession booths, stands, food service equipment, counters and similar structures. 
c.  All proposed improvements or enlargements to be made, which shall be indicated and calculated in terms of percentage of increase in floor size. 
d.  Designation of any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. 
e.  A statement as to whether a proposed establishment is constructed in a manner that varies from the site plan submitted. A supplemental site plan, showing the existing facility, shall be provided once the certificate of occupancy or final building permit inspection is completed. 
(11)  A recent photograph of the individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(12)  Either the driver's license number or the state or federally issued identification card number of the individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(13)  A valid adult use permit signed by the director of planning and development or his designee pursuant to this article. 
(14)  A sworn statement attesting to the accuracy of the information provided in the application and to the fact that the applicant, as licensee, will own, possess, operate and exercise control over the proposed or existing adult use establishment. 
(c)  Application fee. 
(1)  The applicant for any adult use establishment shall pay, to the department of planning and development and prior to the application for a license, a fee in an amount to cover the expenses of the zoning review necessary to obtain an adult use permit pursuant to sections 10-226 and 10-228—10-232 and division 3 of this article. The amount of the fee shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to this Code. Such fee shall be paid only one time for any proposed adult use location unless the proposal is to expand the dimensions of a permitted adult use. 
(2)  In addition to the zoning review fee required in subsection (c)(1) of this section, each application for an adult use license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code. The fee is required to offset the cost of processing the application. If the application for a license is approved and a license is granted, the fee shall be applied as a credit toward the annual license fee required for the first year pursuant to section 10-193. 
(d)  Incomplete application. If the department of planning and development determines at any time that the applicant has not properly completed the application for a proposed establishment, the department of planning and development shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and shall allow the applicant ten days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a license under section 10-190 shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. 
(Code 1983, § 25-43; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-188. - False statement or false information. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person applying for an adult use license to make a false statement which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license or to provide false information which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license. 
(Code 1983, § 25-93; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-189. - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon receipt of an application under this division properly filed with the department of planning and development and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the department of planning and development shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the chief of police. The police chief's representatives shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, and of the individuals listed in the application pursuant to subsection 10-187(b) to ascertain the validity of the information provided in the application. At the conclusion of its investigation, the police department shall indicate, on the photocopy of the application, the results of its investigation. A copy of the application shall also be forwarded to the director of planning and development, who shall determine whether the plan for the licensed premises complies with the requirements of this Code and other applicable laws and regulations relating to construction, safety, fire protection, zoning and public health. 
(Code 1983, § 25-44; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-190. - Issuance; denial. 
(a)  Time limits. Under this division, the department of planning and development shall grant or deny an application for a license within 45 days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the 45th day, the applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the establishment for which a license is sought, without benefit of a license, unless and until the department of planning and development notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reason for that denial. Failure to timely grant or deny an application for a license under this section allowing operation without benefit of a license shall not serve as a granting of a license, but shall serve to ripen an appropriate action to compel a decision on the application. All operations of the establishments authorized under this special provision shall conform to sections 10-33, 10-67—10-70 and 10-226—10-232 and division 3 of this article during the pendency of the application review. 
(b)  Issuance. If there is no basis for denial, pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the department of planning and development shall grant the application, notify the applicant of the granting, and issue the license to the applicant upon payment of the appropriate annual license fee provided in section 10-193, with credit as provided in section 10-187(c). 
(c)  Denial. The department of planning and development shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The application contains material false information or information material to the decision was omitted. Failure to list an individual required to be listed pursuant to subsection 10-187(b) and whose listing would result in a denial pursuant to subsections (c)(2) and (4) of this section is presumed to be a material false information for purposes of denial of the application. The certification that the licensee owns, possesses, operates and exercises control over the proposed or existing adult use establishment is a material representation for purposes of this section. 
(2)  The applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection 10-187(b)(1) holds or has held a license under this article or any other ordinance regulating adult uses in the city that has been suspended or revoked for reasons implicating the purposes and intent of this article. 
(3)  The granting of the application would violate a state or federal statute or city or applicable county ordinance or an order from a court of law. 
(4)  An applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection 10-187(b)(1) has been convicted of a specified criminal act: 
a.  For which: 
1.  Less that two years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less that five years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years has elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
b.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant, except that if a conviction is overturned this shall be treated as if there were no such conviction. 
c.  An applicant who has been convicted of a specified criminal act may seek to qualify for an adult use license only when the time period required by subsection (c)(4) of this section has elapsed. 
(5)  If the department of planning and development denies the application, the applicant shall be notified of the denial, and the reason for the denial shall be specified upon the application or in a separate writing. Notification shall be by certified mail and shall be sent to the address on the license application, which shall be considered the correct address for all notices. 
(6)  If a person applies for a license at a particular location within a period of six months from the date of denial of a previous application for a license at that location and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances material to the decision regarding the former reason for denial, the application shall not be accepted for consideration. The burden of showing an intervening change of circumstances shall be on the applicant. 
(7)  The granting of a license does not act as a certification that the proposed adult use establishment meets all sections of this article or of any health or zoning statute, code, ordinance, or regulation. The adult use establishment and any proposed adult use establishment, once established, must meet all Code provisions required of all regulated businesses, including the provisions for adult uses of sections 10-226 and 10-228—10-232 and division 3 of this article. 
(8)  Within 15 days after the mailing of a notice of denial of an application for a license or a notification of the revocation of a license, the applicant or licensee may take an appeal as provided in section 10-199. If the administrative hearing officer finds that the application should be approved, he shall so order and, upon payment of the appropriate license fee, the director of planning and development shall issue the license. If the administrative hearing officer finds that the license should not have been revoked, he shall notify the director of planning and development, who shall reissue the license. 
(Code 1983, § 25-45; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-191. - Contents; limitations; term; renewal, expiration; cancellation. 
(a)  Contents. An adult use license shall state on its face the name of the licensee, the name of the establishment, the street address of the establishment, the classification of the license, the date of issuance, and the date of expiration. 
(b)  Limitations. No more than one license shall be issued and in effect for any single location within the city. A licensed premises may be owned by the licensee or may be leased by the licensee from a person not a licensee under this article, provided that a licensee who is a tenant or lessee shall not surrender his tenancy or lease to the owner or lessor if by doing so the owner or lessor will take possession, control and operation of the licensed premises and the business licensed under this article, unless the license is transferred as provided in section 10-195. A licensee who is the owner of the licensed premises shall not lease or otherwise give up possession, control and operation of the licensed premises and the business licensed under this article to any other individual, partnership or corporation, unless the license is transferred as provided in section 10-195. 
(c)  Term. Every license issued under this division shall be an annual license, which shall commence running on October 1, on which date they shall have been paid for, and shall expire on September 30 of the following year. If a license is issued after October 1 but by March 31 of the following year, the applicant may obtain a new license upon application therefor and the payment of the appropriate license fee, and such license shall expire on the following September 30. If a license is issued after March 31 but by October 1 of the same year, the applicant shall pay one-half the appropriate license fee required for the annual license, and such license shall expire on September 30 of the same year. This subsection shall not affect section 10-195. 
(d)  Renewals. All licenses issued under this division shall be renewed annually. Subject to other sections of this Code, a licensee under this article shall be entitled to a renewal of his annual license from year to year, as a matter of course, by October 1 by presenting the license for the previous year or satisfactory evidence of its loss or destruction to the director of planning and development and by paying the appropriate license fee and updating the information supplied with the latest application or certifying that the information supplied remains unchanged. 
(e)  Expiration. A license that is not renewed under this article on or before October 1 of each year shall expire. 
(f)  Cancellation. All expired licenses not renewed on or before October 1 shall be cancelled summarily by the department of planning and development, unless such license is involved in litigation and the city is legally prevented from cancelling it by order or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1983, § 25-46; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-192. - Alteration. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to alter or otherwise change the contents of an adult use license without the written permission of the department of planning and development. 
(Code 1983, § 25-92; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-193. - Annual regulatory fees. 
(a)  Levied. In order to cover the administrative and enforcement costs associated with this article, there are levied annual licensing regulatory fees under this article for an adult entertainment establishment in amounts set by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code. Such fees shall be charged for each establishment proposing to operate or operating only as: 
(1)  An adult theater, which shall pay licensing regulatory fees for the following: 
a.  Having only adult booths, a fee for each booth; 
b.  Having only a hall or auditorium, for each seat; 
c.  Having only an area outdoors designed to permit viewing by customers seated in vehicles, for each parking space; or 
d.  Having a combination of two or more of the items listed in subsections (a)(1)a—(1)c of this section, the cumulative license fee applicable to each under subsections (a)(1)a—(1)c of this section. 
(2)  A special adult cabaret. 
(3)  An adult photographic studio. 
(4)  A physical culture establishment. 
(5)  An adult bookstore/video store. 
(6)  An adult use which cannot be categorized according to the categories in subsections (a)(1) through (5) of this section shall be assessed at the rate applicable to the adult use most closely resembling the proposed or existing use. 
(b)  Purpose. The annual license fees collected under this section are declared to be regulatory fees which are collected for the purpose of examination and inspection of adult uses under this article and the administration thereof. These regulatory fees are in addition to and not in lieu of the occupational license taxes, building permit, zoning, food establishment fees, or other fees imposed by other sections of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 25-47; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-194. - Records and reports; consent by licensee. 
(a)  Records and reports. Each licensee under this division shall keep such records and make such reports as are required under this article. Whenever the information required by or provided under subsection 10-187(b)(1) has changed, the licensee shall promptly provide the department of planning and development with the changed information. 
(b)  Consent. By holding a license under this article, the licensee shall be deemed to have consented to the requirements of this article and to the exercise by the department of planning and development and other departments of their respective responsibilities under this article. 
(Code 1983, § 25-48; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-195. - Transferability. 
(a)  Requirements. A licensee under this division shall not transfer his license to another business entity or person and thereby surrender ownership, possession, control, and operation of the licensed establishment to such other business entity or person, unless and until such other business entity or person satisfies the following requirements: 
(1)  The business entity or person obtains an amendment to the license from the department of planning and development which indicates the name of the new licensee, which amendment may be obtained only upon completion and proper filing of an application with the department of planning and development setting forth the information called for under subsection 10-187(b)(1) through (14), with respect to the new applicant, and that application has been granted by the department of planning and development pursuant to section 10-190; and 
(2)  The business entity or person pays the application fee and a transfer fee of ten percent of the appropriate annual license fee. 
Licenses issued under this division shall not be transferable in any way other than provided in this subsection. 
(b)  Effect of suspension or revocation procedures. No license may be transferred pursuant to subsection (a) of this section when the department of planning and development has notified the licensee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the licensee. 
(c)  Transfer to different location. A licensee shall not transfer his license to another location. 
(d)  Attempting improper transfer. Any attempted transfer of a license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is declared void, and the license shall be deemed abandoned and shall automatically terminate. The department of planning and development shall give notice of the cancellation of the license. 
(Code 1983, § 25-49; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-196. - Changing name of establishment. 
Under this division, no licensee shall change the name of an adult use establishment unless and until the licensee satisfies each of the following requirements: 
(1)  Gives the department of planning and development 30 days' notice in writing of the proposed name change; 
(2)  Pays the department of planning and development a change of name fee, which fee shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to this Code; and 
(3)  Complies with F.S. § 865.09, and has so notified the department of planning and development of such compliance. 
(Code 1983, § 25-50; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-197. - Suspension. 
(a)  Violation of general requirements. An adult use establishment license may be suspended as follows: 
(1)  If the department of planning and development learns or, finds upon sufficient cause, that a licensed adult use establishment is operating contrary to the respective general requirements of section 10-226 or the applicable special requirements of sections 10-228 through 10-232, it shall promptly notify the licensee of the violation and shall allow the licensee a ten-day period in which to correct the violation. Filing of an application to the appropriate board of authority for a variance under section 10-156 shall toll the running of the time period. The appropriate board of authority shall, in its conditions for any variance, provide for a specified period of time for correction of any violation, consistent with the variance. 
(2)  If the licensee fails to so correct the violation before the expiration of the time period provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section, the department of planning and development shall forthwith suspend the license and shall notify the licensee of the suspension. Notification shall be by certified mail and shall be sent to the address on the license application, which shall be considered the correct address. 
(3)  The suspension shall remain in effect until the department of planning and development is notified in writing that the violation of the section in question has been corrected. The department of planning and development or another department of the city shall, at their request, respond to a request for inspection within 24 hours of receipt of such a request and shall, within 12 hours of inspection, notify the licensee that the violation has or has not been corrected. The time periods in this subsection shall be exclusive of weekends and holidays. 
(4)  Within 24 hours of receipt of notice that the violation has been corrected, the department of planning and development shall notify the licensee that the suspension is lifted. 
(5)  During the suspension of the license, an adult use establishment shall not operate as an adult use or, pursuant to other applicable codes, ordinances, statute or court orders, where applicable, shall not be open for business. 
(b)  Illegal transfer. If the department of planning and development learns or finds, upon sufficient cause, that a licensee is engaged in a license transfer contrary to section 10-195, the department of planning and development shall forthwith suspend the license and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the department of planning and development is satisfied that the requirements of section 10-195 have been met. 
(c)  Convictions for violations of certain sections. 
(1)  If three or more violations of a specified criminal act or violation of sections 10-226 or 10-228—10-232 or division 3 of this article occur at an adult use establishment within a two-year period and convictions result from at least three of the violations of either the licensee, the licensee's operator or an employee or of any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection 10-187(b)(1), the department of planning and development shall, upon the date of the third conviction, suspend the license and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of 30 days. 
(2)  If one or more violations of a specified criminal act or violation of sections 10-226 or 10-228—10-232 or division 3 of this article occur at the adult use establishment within a period of two years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 30 days under subsection (c)(1) of this section, but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 30 days, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations of either the licensee, the licensee's operator or employee or of any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection 10-187(b)(1), the department of planning and development shall, upon the date of the first conviction, suspend the license again and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of 90 days. 
(3)  If one or more violations of a specified criminal act or violation of sections 10-226 or 10-228—10-232 or division 3 of this article occur within a period of two years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 90 days under subsection (c)(2) of this section, but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 90 days, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations of either the licensee, the licensee's operator or employee or of or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection 10-187(b)(1), the department of planning and development shall, upon the date of the first conviction, suspend the license again and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for period of 180 days. 
(4)  The transfer or renewal of a license pursuant to this article shall not defeat the terms of subsections (c)(1) through (3) of this section. 
(d)  Effective date of suspension. All periods of suspension shall begin five days after the date the department of planning and development mails the notice of suspension to the licensee or on the date the licensee delivers his license to the department of planning and development, whichever happens first. 
(Code 1983, § 25-51; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-198. - Cancellation or revocation. 
(a)  False information. If the department of planning and development learns or finds upon sufficient cause that a license was granted under this division based upon material false information, misrepresentation of material fact or mistake of fact or law, it shall forthwith cancel the license and notify the licensee of the cancellation. Failure to list an individual required to be listed pursuant to subsection 10-187(b)(1) and whose listing would result in a denial pursuant to subsection 10-190(c)(1), (c)(2) or (c)(3) is presumed to be a material false information for purposes of cancellation of the permit; the certification that the licensee owns, possesses, operates, and exercises control over the proposed or existing adult use establishment is a material representation for purposes of this section. Notification shall be by certified mail and shall be sent to the address on the license application, which shall be considered the correct address. 
(b)  Convictions for violation of certain sections. 
(1)  If one or more convictions for a specified criminal act or a conviction for violation of sections 10-226 or 10-228—10-232 or division 3 of this article of either the licensee, the licensee's operator or employee or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection 10-187(b)(1) occur at an adult use establishment which has had a license suspended for a period of 180 days pursuant to subsection 10-197(c)(3), and the conviction occurs within a period of two years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 180 days, but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 180 days, the department of planning and development shall forthwith revoke the license and notify the licensee of the revocation. 
(2)  The transfer or renewal of a license pursuant to this article shall not defeat the terms of subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(c)  Effect of revocation. If a license is revoked, the licensee shall not be allowed to obtain another adult use license for a period of ten years. 
(d)  Effective date of revocation. The revocation shall take effect five days after the date the department of planning and development mails the notice of revocation to the licensee or on the date the licensee delivers his license to the department of planning and development, whichever happens first. 
(Code 1983, § 25-52; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-199. - Appeal. 
(a)  Appeals alleging error in the denial, suspension or revocation of a license or permit under this article shall be by petition for a hearing before an administrative hearing officer selected by the city manager or his designate. 
(b)  A notice of intent to appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 15 days of the mailing of a notice of denial, suspension or revocation of a license or permit. Thereafter, and upon payment of a fee to cover administrative costs, plus a deposit to cover the costs of the administrative hearing officer, a hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days, unless otherwise agreed to by the party filing the appeal. The fee and deposit shall be established by resolution of the city commission and are listed in appendix A to this Code. The administrative hearing officer shall provide both the petitioning party and the city no less than a ten-day written notice of the time for the hearing. The hearing shall be held at city hall. The city clerk shall give the petitioning party at least ten days' written notice of the time and place for the hearing, which hearing shall be set by the city commission. 
(Code 1983, § 25-53; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Secs. 10-200—10-225. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 10-226. - General requirements. 
Each operator of an adult use establishment shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following general requirements: 
(1)  Conform the establishment to all applicable building statutes, codes, ordinances and regulations, whether federal, state or local; 
(2)  Conform the establishment to all applicable fire statutes, codes, ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, state or local; 
(3)  Conform the establishment to all applicable health statutes, codes, ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, state or local; 
(4)  Conform the establishment to all applicable zoning regulations and land use laws, whether state or local, specifically including chapter 134 of this Code pertaining to zoning; 
(5)  Keep the adult use license posted in a conspicuous place at the adult use establishment at all times, which license shall be available for inspection upon request at all times by the public; 
(6)  Opaquely cover each nonopaque area through which a person outside the establishment may otherwise see inside the establishment, provided that this subsection shall not apply if the uncovered glass area exposes to public view only a lobby or anteroom containing no material or activity other than a reception counter or desk and chairs or couches for customers to use while waiting; 
(7)  Maintain a continuously updated compilation of the records required in section 10-227; and 
(8)  Conform the establishment to the requirements of F.S. ch. 381 and the rules and regulations of the state department of health made pursuant thereto. Each licensed premises shall be deemed to be a "place serving the public" for the purpose of sanitary facilities. 
(Code 1983, § 25-66; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-227. - Records for employees. 
(a)  The licensee of an adult use establishment is responsible for keeping a record of all employees who are employed by the establishment and of all former employees who were employed by the establishment during the preceding one-year period. The record shall contain the current or former employee's full legal name, including any aliases, the employee's date of birth, residential address, residential telephone number if any, driver's license number or state or federally issued identification card number, and a recent photograph of the current or former employee. 
(b)  The original records required by subsection (a) of this section or true and exact photocopies thereof shall be kept at the adult use establishment at all times. 
(c)  Any operator of the adult use establishment shall be responsible for knowing the location of the original records or the true and exact photocopies thereof. 
(d)  Any operator of the adult use establishment shall, upon request by a law enforcement officer, health department official, or a representative of the department of planning and development, make available for inspection the original records or the true and exact photocopies thereof while the establishment is open for business. 
(Code 1983, § 25-61; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-228. - Sanitation. 
(a)  All areas of each adult use accessible to patrons shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. The surfaces of all floors, furniture, countertops, shades, blinds, vertical blinds, doors and walls of areas accessible to patrons shall be cleaned and sanitized a minimum of one time each 24 hours with an industrial strength cleaner. 
(b)  All floors, furniture, countertops, shades, blinds, vertical blinds, doors and walls of areas accessible to patrons of an adult entertainment establishment subject to this article shall be renovated or be replaced as needed. All furniture must be kept free from holes and rips. 
(c)  All toilet facilities must be of readily cleanable design and must be kept clean, in good repair, and free from objectionable odors. Restrooms must be vented to the outside of any building, must be equipped with mechanical exhaust systems and must be well lighted. Floors shall be of impervious, easily cleanable materials. Walls shall be smooth, nonabsorbent and easily cleanable. 
(d)  An appropriate and effective adaptation of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control's universal precautions for the prevention of transmission of the HIV virus and other diseases shall be utilized for any individual cleaning or sanitizing of the areas accessible to patrons. Such procedure shall be reviewed and approved by the department of planning and development. A copy of the approved procedure shall be kept on file at the adult entertainment establishment, and a copy shall be provided to each person cleaning or sanitizing the areas accessible to the patrons. Each such individual shall certify that he has read and understood the procedures by signing a copy of the procedure. The signed copy shall be kept as a part of the records of the adult entertainment establishment and open for inspection by the county health department, police department and department of planning and development. 
(e)  The water supply must be adequate, of safe, sanitary quality and from an approved source in accordance with chapter 17-22 of the Florida Administrative Code. 
(Code 1983, § 25-67; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-229. - Adult bookstore/video store. 
In addition to the general requirements for an adult use establishment contained in section 10-226, an adult bookstore/video store shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  All materials, devices and novelties and posters depicting books, movies, devices and novelties for sale or rental within the store or by the store shall be so displayed that they cannot be seen by anyone other than customers who have entered the licensed premises. Signage and posters visible from the outside of the store or in display windows shall not contain photographs or illustrations depicting sexual conduct, sexual battery, sexual bestiality, masochism, sadism, sadomasochistic abuse, sexually oriented material, obscene material, or material harmful to minors as defined in F.S. § 847.001. 
(2)  If recordings are offered for sale and customers may listen to them while in the licensed premises, soundproof booths or rooms shall be available for use by customers who have a desire to listen, and the requirements of subsection 10-231(2) shall be followed. 
(3)  Adult bookstores/video stores that only sell or rent adult material and have no adult booth/theater component are exempt from sections 10-101, 10-103, 10-105—10-110, 10-114 and 10-115. 
(Code 1983, § 25-68; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 08-27, § 1, 7-8-08)  
Sec. 10-230. - Adult massage establishment. 
In addition to the general requirements for an adult use establishment contained in section 10-226, an adult massage establishment shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  Any person making application for an adult massage establishment license shall present to the department of planning and development a state license issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 480, after the department of planning and development has approved the application and at the time a license is to be issued. No license shall be issued if the applicant fails to present the state license. 
(2)  Dressing rooms shall be proportioned to the maximum number of persons who are expected to be in them at one time, excluding attendants and assistants, and separate dressing rooms shall be provided for men and women. Floors shall be of a smooth, impervious material with a nonslip surface and shall be covered at the wall junction for a thorough cleaning. Partition walls shall terminate at least six inches above the floor or be placed on continuous raised masonry or concrete bases at least four inches high. 
(3)  One shower shall be provided for each 40 men or women or fraction thereof, based upon the maximum number of persons who are expected to be using shower facilities at one time, and separate shower facilities shall be provided for men and women. Floors and partition walls shall be constructed as required in subsection (2) of this section for dressing rooms, and duck boards or wooden gratings may be used on shower floors if duplicate sets are provided and rotated in use. 
(4)  One locker shall be provided for each patron who is to be expected on the licensed premises at one time, which locker shall be of sufficient size to hold clothing and other articles of wearing apparel. Each locker shall be capable of being locked by the patron, with no one else having the key, so long as the patron is using the locker, or the locker shall be under the constant attention and supervision of an attendant. 
(5)  Massage of a person by another person who displays or exhibits specified anatomical areas is prohibited. 
(6)  No person shall massage the genitals of another person. 
(7)  No employee, as defined in this article, shall engage in specified sexual activities on the licensed premises in the presence of patrons or spectators or for any form of consideration. 
(Code 1983, § 25-69; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-231. - Adult theater. 
In addition to the general requirements for an adult use establishment contained in section 10-226 and the special requirements of section 10-232, an adult theater shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  Hall or auditorium. If the adult theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall comply with each of the following: 
a.  The theater shall have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the area. 
b.  The theater shall have a continuous main aisle alongside of the seating areas in order that each person seated in the areas shall be visible from the aisle at all times. 
c.  The theater shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entranceway to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area. 
d.  The theater shall have one or more manager's stations. No one manager's station can exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Adult material shall not be available or allowed in restrooms. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
e.  It shall be the duty of the licensee, the owner, and the operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (1)d of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area on the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to section 10-187. 
f.  It is the duty of the licensee, the owner, and the operator of the premises to ensure at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times any patron is present inside the premises and the employee is continually monitoring the activities in the adult theater for violations of this article and of state law. 
g.  The licensee of an adult theater may seek a variance from subsections (1)d, (1)e and (1)f of this section if, upon presentation at a public hearing, the appropriate board of authority is satisfied that the licensee has proposed operational procedures sufficient to guarantee, to a degree similar to the provisions of those subsections, that the areas of the establishment to which patrons have access are monitored for violations of this article and of state law. The appropriate board of authority may condition the variance to satisfy itself that the operational procedures attendant to the variance will be followed, including but not limited to recordkeeping requirements. Failure to follow the conditions of the variance shall result in a review by the appropriate board of authority at a public hearing, with full notice and opportunity for the applicant to be heard. Revocation of the variance shall be justified if, based on the presentation at the hearing, the assurances serving as the basis for issuance of the variance are not being satisfied. In proceedings under this subsection, the burden of proof shall be upon the city or the applicable city department. 
h.  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
i.  It shall be the duty of the licensee, the owner and the operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (1)h is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(2)  Adult booths. If the adult theater contains adult booths, each adult booth shall comply with each of the following: 
a.  The theater shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entranceway which states the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth, which number shall correlate with the number of seats in the booth. 
b.  The theater shall have a permanently open entranceway not less than two feet wide or less than six feet high, which entranceway shall not have any curtain rods, hinges, rails or the like which would allow the entranceway to be closed or partially closed by any curtain, door, or other partition. 
c.  The theater shall have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches or the like, which correlate with the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth. 
d.  The theater shall have a continuous main aisle alongside the booth in order that each person situated in the booth shall be visible from the aisle at all times. 
e.  The theater shall have, except for the entranceway, walls or partitions of solid construction without any holes or openings in such walls or partitions. 
f.  In addition to the sanitary facilities required by section 10-228, there shall be provided within or adjacent to the common corridor, passageway or area in adult motion picture theaters having adult motion picture booths, adequate lavatories equipped with running water, hand-cleansing soap or detergent and sanitary towels or hand-drying devices; common towels are prohibited. 
g.  If the adult theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by persons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture screen so situated or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced that the material to be seen by those persons shall not be seen from any public right-of-way, residential zoned property, mixed use zoning district, church, school, child care facility or public recreation area. 
(3)  Refurbishing of adult theaters. 
a.  Each adult theater shall cover the floors of areas accessible to patrons with smooth and nonpermeable flooring material which can withstand frequent effective cleaning with industrial strength cleaning agents. Carpeting of any type is prohibited. 
b.  Each adult theater shall use smooth and nonpermeable upholstery material which can withstand frequent cleaning with industrial strength cleaning agents. 
c.  Each adult theater shall have, in areas accessible to patrons, interior wall surfaces which can withstand frequent cleaning with industrial strength cleaning agents. 
d.  Each adult theater shall use only those shades, blinds and vertical blinds which can withstand frequent cleaning with industrial strength cleaning agents. Draperies are prohibited. 
(4)  Simulating sexual activity. Persons engaged in displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas are prohibited from simulating sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee or other person on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment as described in section 10-232. 
(Code 1983, § 25-70; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-232. - Special cabarets and adult theaters. 
In addition to the general requirements for an adult use establishment contained in section 10-226, any person participating in any live act, demonstration, exhibition or performance, including but not limited to a special cabaret, an adult dancing establishment, an adult photographic or modeling studio, and an adult theater, regardless of whether it is licensed, shall observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  A stage shall be provided for the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by an employee to a person other than another employee consisting of a permanent platform or other similar permanent structure raised a minimum of 18 inches above the surrounding floor and encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet. 
(2)  The stage shall be at least three feet from the nearest patron, spectator, table, chair or other accommodation where food or drink is served or consumed, except that any establishment regulated by section 10-233 shall require the person to be positioned in an entertainment area consisting of a platform or other structure raised 18 inches above the immediately surrounding area and encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet or while the person is positioned at least three feet from a patron, spectator, table or other accommodations. 
(3)  No person, spectator or patron shall be present in the entertainment area, defined in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, during the course of any performance involving the display or exhibition of specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Any area in which a private performance occurs shall have a: 
a.  Permanently open entranceway not less that two feet wide and not less than six feet high, which entranceway shall not have any curtain rods, hinges, rails, or the like which would allow the entranceway to be closed or partially closed by any curtain, door, or other partition; and 
b.  Wall-to-wall, floor-to-ceiling partition of solid construction without any holes or openings, which partition shall be completely or partially transparent and which partition separates the employee from the person viewing the display. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this section pertaining to adult entertainment establishments as described in this section shall be construed to permit or authorize any acts or activities that are prohibited by state law. 
(Code 1983, § 25-71; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-233. - Exhibit or display of certain anatomical areas by employees or patrons. 
It shall be unlawful for any employee of a commercial establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, where the employee knows or should have known that alcoholic beverages are on the premises, to exhibit or display any area as described as a specified anatomical area as defined in section 10-26. 
(Code 1983, § 25-120; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-234. - Operation of adult use without valid adult use license prohibited. 
(a)  This section shall not apply to employees engaged exclusively in performing janitorial or maintenance services. This section shall be independent of and in addition to any permit or license requirements that may be imposed on employees pursuant to any federal, state or local statute, law or regulation. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any business entity or licensee to operate or for any person to be an operator or employee of an adult use establishment where the business entity, licensee or person knows or should know: 
(1)  The establishment does not have an adult use permit or adult use license for any applicable classification; 
(2)  The adult use establishment has a license which is under suspension; 
(3)  The adult use establishment has a license which has been revoked; or 
(4)  The adult establishment has a license which has expired or been cancelled. 
(Code 1983, § 25-80; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-235. - Prohibited adult use operations. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any business entity or licensee to operate or for any individual to be an operator or employee of an adult entertainment establishment, unless such business shall have a currently valid license therefor under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. The unlawful operation of an adult entertainment establishment shall constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any business entity or licensee to operate or for any person to be an operator or employee of an adult theater which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of sections 10-231 and 10-232 of this article. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article for any business entity or licensee to operate or for any person to be an operator of or employee of an adult cabaret or adult theater which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 10-232. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this article for any business entity or licensee to operate or for any person to be an operator or employee of an adult use establishment and to knowingly or with reason to know, permit, suffer, or allow the entrance or exit of the adult use establishment to be locked when a person other than an employee is inside the establishment. 
(Code 1983, § 25-81; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-236. - Allowing employees to engage in prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any business entity, licensee or any operator of an adult use establishment, regardless of whether licensed under this article, knowingly or with reason to know, to: permit, suffer, or allow: 
(1)  Any employee or any other person to engage in any specified sexual activity at any business establishment including an adult entertainment establishment; 
(2)  Any employee to display or expose any specified anatomical area at an adult entertainment establishment, unless such employee is continuously positioned in an area as described in subsections 10-232(1) and (2) and, where applicable, 10-232(4); 
(3)  Any employee or any other person to display or expose any specified anatomical area while simulating any specified sexual activity with any other person at the adult entertainment establishment, including with another employee; 
(4)  Any employee to engage in a private performance unless such employee is in an area which complies with the special requirements of subsections 10-232(4)a and (4)b; 
(5)  Any employee to, while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area, intentionally touch any person, except another employee at the adult entertainment establishment, excluding, for purposes of passing a gratuity, that part of the person's arm distal to the wrist, commonly referred to as the hand, provided the employee remains at a distance of at least two feet from the person; 
(6)  Any employee or any other person to touch, intentionally, the clothed or unclothed specified anatomical areas of any person at the entertainment establishment, excluding another employee, whether said person be a male or a female; 
(7)  Any employee, intentionally to straddle dance on, under or over any part of the body of a person other than another employee at the adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether there is a touch or touching, by the employee, of the person for whom the employee is engaged in a straddle dance. 
(8)  Any employee to, while the employee is engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical areas, voluntarily be within three feet of any person other than an employee, except for purposes of passing a gratuity in the manner as specified in paragraph 10-236(5), set forth above. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in this Chapter 10, it shall not be unlawful for any person or employee of a commercial establishment or an adult entertainment establishment to expose specified anatomical areas in connection with the use of approved sanitary facilities commonly known as restrooms. However, specified anatomical areas shall be exposed or displayed only in connection with excretory functions. 
(Code 1983, § 25-82; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 98-17, § 1, 4-21-98)  
Sec. 10-237. - Prohibited advertising activity. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for an operator of an adult use establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to: 
(1)  Advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable state statute, local ordinance, or code; 
(2)  Display a sign capable of leading a reasonable person to believe that the establishment engages in an activity prohibited by any applicable state statute, local ordinance, or code; 
(3)  Erect, install, maintain, alter or operate any sign in violation of any applicable state statute or local ordinance or code; or 
(4)  Engage in, encourage or permit any form of personal advertising for the commercial benefit of the establishment or for the commercial benefit of any individual who displays or exhibits anatomical areas within the establishment. 
(b)  Any commercial establishment that displays a sign or engages in any other form of advertising capable of leading a reasonable person to believe that the establishment offers, presents, permits or engages in an activity required by this article to be licensed shall obtain an adult entertainment license in the appropriate classification. 
(Code 1983, § 25-83; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-238. - Minors prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of this article for an operator of an adult use establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to knowingly or with reason to know permit, suffer, or allow: 
(1)  Admittance to the adult use establishment of a person under 18 years of age; 
(2)  A person under 18 years of age to remain at the adult use establishment; 
(3)  A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services at the adult use establishment; or 
(4)  A person to work at the adult use establishment as an employee who is under 18 years of age. 
(Code 1983, § 25-84; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-239. - Working at establishment not having valid adult entertainment license. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to act as an employee of an adult use establishment that he knows or should know is not licensed under this article or that has a license under suspension or that has been revoked or cancelled or has expired. 
(Code 1983, § 25-85; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-240. - Failure to maintain records for employees required. 
It shall be a violation of this article to be an operator of an adult use establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, at which the records for employees required by section 10-227 have not been compiled, are not maintained or are not available for inspection. 
(Code 1983, § 25-86; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-241. - Engaging in prohibited activity by employees. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any employee of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to: 
(1)  Engage in any specified sexual activity at any business establishment including an adult entertainment establishment; 
(2)  Display or expose any specified anatomical area at an adult entertainment establishment, unless such employee is continuously positioned in an area as described in subsection 10-232(1) and (2), and where applicable, 10-232(4); 
(3)  Display any specified anatomical area while simulating any specified sexual activity with any other person at the adult entertainment establishment, including another employee; 
(4)  Engage in a private performance unless such employee is in an area which complies with the special requirements of subsection 10-232(4)(a) and (b); 
(5)  While engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area, intentionally touch any person, except another employee at the adult entertainment establishment, excluding, for purposes of passing a gratuity, that part of the person's arm distal to the wrist, commonly referred to as the hand, provided the employee remains at a distance of at least two feet from the person; 
(6)  Touch intentionally the clothed or unclothed specified anatomical areas of any person at the adult entertainment establishment, excluding another employee, whether said person be a male or a female; 
(7)  Straddle dance intentionally on, under or over any part of the body of a person other than another employee at the adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether there is a touch or touching, by the employee, of the person for whom the employee is engaged in a straddle dance; 
(8)  While the employee is engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical areas, voluntarily be within three feet of any person other than an employee, except for purposes of passing a gratuity in the manner as specified in paragraph 10-241(5), set forth above. 
(Code 1983, § 25-87; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 98-18, § 1, 4-21-98)  
Sec. 10-242. - Touching of employee by person. 
(a)  Except for the touching allowed pursuant to subsection 10-241(5) involving the passing of a gratuity, it shall be a violation of this article for any person in an adult entertainment establishment, other than another employee, to intentionally touch, either directly or through a medium, an employee who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area or who is engaging is any specified sexual activities at the adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person in an adult entertainment establishment, other than another employee, to intentionally touch, the clothed or unclothed specified anatomical areas of an employee. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person, except another employee, to voluntarily be within three feet of any employee displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area or engaging in any specified sexual activities at the adult entertainment establishment,except for purposes of passing a gratuity as specified in subsection 10-241(5) of this article. 
(d)  Every adult entertainment establishment shall post a notice in conspicuous place, easily available to be seen by all patrons, stating substantially as follows: 
It shall be a violation of section 10-242(b) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida, for any person in an adult entertainment establishment, other than another employee, to intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed specified anatomical areas of an employee. Specified anatomical areas are: Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleavage of the nates (buttocks), or that portion of the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; this definition includes the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposes. 
Failure to post such a notice in a conspicuous place shall constitute a material violation of this article subjecting the licensee to proceedings to consider suspension of its adult use license by the department. 
(Code 1983, § 25-88; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94; Ord. No.  
Sec. 10-243. - Exceeding occupancy limit of adult booth. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to occupy an adult booth in which booth there are more people than that specified on the posted sign required by section 10-231(2)a. 
(Code 1983, § 25-89; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-244. - Use of restrooms or dressing rooms. 
Notwithstanding any section indicating to the contrary, it shall not be a violation of this article for any employee of an adult use establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to expose any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom or during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. 
(Code 1983, § 25-90; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-245. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any operator of an adult use establishment to allow such adult use establishment to remain open for business or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any employee of an adult use establishment to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
(Code 1983, § 25-91; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 10-246. - Straddle dancing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee, or customer or patron of any commercial establishment, whether or not the establishment is licensed under this article, to perform or participate in a straddle dance, as defined in section 10-26, while on the premises of the commercial establishment. It shall also be unlawful for any employee, while on the premises or within the scope of his employment, to contract or agree to perform, for any consideration, a straddle dance and to actually perform the straddle dance, regardless of where such performance takes place. 
(b)  Employers of commercial establishments within the city are responsible for the acts of their employees. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining or operating any commercial establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to knowingly or with reason to know permit, suffer or allow any employee on the premises to perform or participate in a straddle dance, as defined by section 10-26. 
(Code 1983, §§ 25-126, 25-127; Ord. No. 94-51, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Noise regulations, § 46-131 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; damage by dogs, F.S. ch. 767; cruelty to animals, F.S. ch. 828. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Keeping or running at large of certain animals prohibited. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "household pet" means a dog, house cat, small bird, which may be kept in a cage, or such other animal as may generally be considered a domesticated pet. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal within the city limits, with the exception of household pets. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a household pet to run at large at any time. 
(Code 1960, § 4-1; Code 1983, §§ 4-1, 4-2)  
Sec. 14-2. - Feeding wild birds in public areas. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Domesticated bird means a tame bird that lives with a human being and is under such human being's control. 
Wild birds means all birds that are not domesticated, as defined in this subsection. 
(b)  Prohibited. The feeding of wild birds on public streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, parks or beaches is prohibited. 
(c)  Exemption. Persons feeding domesticated birds on private property are exempt from this section. 
(Code 1983, § 12-9; Ord. No. 96-19, § 1, 5-7-96)  
Sec. 14-3. - Kennels. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "kennel" means any land and improvements thereto used for raising, breeding, boarding or grooming of more than five domestic animals, such as dogs and cats. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a kennel in the city, unless it is a specified permitted use in the applicable zoning district. 
(Code 1983, § 4-22; Ord. No. 87-20, § 1, 7-21-87) 
Cross reference— Zoning district regulations, § 134-206 et seq.  
Secs. 14-4—14-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Excessive, long, and continuing noise of any animal or bird declared a nuisance, § 46-140. 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Restraint by leash required. 
(a)  All dogs that are kept in or enter the city shall be kept and held on a leash of any substantial material and of a maximum length of eight feet at all times while the dog is off the property or premises where it is normally kept. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or keeps a dog to allow the dog, under any circumstances, to go outside the limits of the property or premises where it is normally kept, unless the dog is attached to a leash as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any dog found in the city running at large without a county license and a tag shall be impounded temporarily by the police and thereafter shall be transferred to the county dog control agency for disposition. If the owner is located before the dog has been transferred to the county dog control agency, the owner shall be given notice of the impoundment. A dog with a license and a tag found running at large shall be returned to the owner, and the owner shall be given notice of the impoundment. If the dog has been found running at large more than once, the owner shall be issued a city ordinance citation for "dog running at large." 
(Code 1960, §§ 4-8, 4-9; P.G. Ord. No. 74, § 2; Ord. No. 3, § 3; Ord. No. 328, § 1; Ord. No. 412, § 17; Code 1983, § 4-16)  
Sec. 14-32. - Removal of excrement. 
Any person who, while walking with or escorting a dog on a leash, allows such dog to deposit excrement on public or private property, other than the property of the dog's owner or the property of the person walking or escorting the dog on a leash, shall immediately remove such excrement. 
(Code 1960, § 4-8-1; Ord. No. 327, § 1; Ord. No. 412, § 16; Code 1983, § 4-17)  
Sec. 14-33. - Biting dogs; rabies suspects. 
Whenever any dog shall bite any person or other animal or if there is any reason to believe that any dog has rabies, such dog and all other animals bitten by it may be taken in custody temporarily by the police and then transferred to the county dog control agency where they will be watched for such time as is required by law to determine whether rabies is present in such dog. The county health department and county dog control agency have final disposition of such dog. The police shall contact the owner of the dog suspected of rabies and advise the owner of the status of such animal. 
(Code 1960, § 4-10; P.G. Ord. No. 74, § 8; Ord. No. 412, § 18; Code 1983, § 4-18)  
Sec. 14-34. - Barking dogs deemed nuisances. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Excessively means that the dog has been: 
(1)  Barking for ten minutes or more; or 
(2)  Documented as barking so as to unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of others on three or more occasions within a 14-day period without regard to duration. The term "documented," as used in this subsection, means the incident has been witnessed and documented by an employee of the city. 
Nuisance means that no person shall allow a dog to bark excessively so as to bother others in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog that is a nuisance to the community. 
(Code 1960, § 4-15; P.G. Ord. No. 54, § 1; P.G. Ord. No. 74, § 9; Ord. No. 412, § 20; Ord. No. 82-6, § 1; Code 1983, § 4-19; Ord. No. 84-6, § 1, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 93-17, § 1, 8-3-93)  
Sec. 14-35. - Prohibited on sand beaches. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person keeping a dog to take such dog upon any sand beach or beach access or to knowingly allow any such dog to be upon any sand beach or beach access except as prescribed below. 
(b)  Designated dog beach area shall be those sand beach lands that lie from the easterly extension of the southernmost ROW line of 1st Avenue north to the easterly extension of the southernmost ROW line of 3rd Avenue and eastward of the Pass-a-Grille Way ROW line. Any dog accessing this designated dog beach area shall be kept and held on a leash of any substantial material and of a maximum length of eight feet at all times, regardless of location. 
(1)  For designated dog beach areas, the following rules and regulations apply: 
a.  Owners are legally responsible for their dogs and injuries caused by them. 
b.  Dogs must be properly licensed, have required immunizations and wear appropriate ID tags at all times. 
c.  Dogs must remain out of any dune vegetation or other protected areas. 
d.  Owners must clean up after their dogs. 
e.  Owners shall maintain clear sidewalks at all times. 
f.  Dogs showing aggression towards people or dogs shall be immediately removed from the premises. 
g.  Dogs that bark persistently or are otherwise a nuisance shall be removed from the premises. 
h.  Dogs using the dog beach area must be at least four months old. 
i.  Dogs must never be left unattended. 
j.  Dogs "in heat" will not be allowed inside the dog beach area. 
k.  Rawhide, food or any other consumable is not allowed inside the dog beach area. 
l.  Dogs are the only type of animal permitted inside the dog beach area. 
m.  Violators will be subject to removal from the area and suspension of area privileges. 
(2)  Hours of operation shall be determined by the city manager or his/her designee and posted on-site. Hours may be adjusted without notice. 
(3)  The city shall have no obligation or responsibility to replace any existing sand on a dog beach that is removed as a result of alluvial shift, tides, currents, storms or other natural occurrences. 
(Code 1960, § 4-16; Ord. No. 75, §§ 1, 3; Ord. No. 412, § 21; Code 1983, § 4-20; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 15-12, § 2, 7-28-15; Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 2-9-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-12, § 2, adopted July 28, 2015, amended § 14-35, and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Prohibited on public beaches abutting the Gulf of Mexico" to "Prohibited on sand beaches," as set out herein. 
Cross reference— Beaches, § 94-66 et seq.  
Sec. 14-36. - Regulations for dogs in approved outdoor seating areas. 
In accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 509.233, the following procedures for allowing patrons' dogs within certain designated outdoor portions of food service seating areas are established: 
(1)  In order to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the City of St. Pete Beach shall require participating public food service establishments to apply for and receive a permit before allowing patrons' dogs on their premises. The city may require from the applicant all such information as it deems reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this section, but shall require, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  The name, location and mailing address of the public food service establishment. 
b.  The name, mailing address and telephone contact information for the permit applicant. 
c.  A diagram and description of the outdoor area to be designated as available to patrons' dogs, including dimensions of the designated area; a depiction of the number and placement of tables, chairs, and restaurant equipment, if any; the entry ways and exits to the designated outdoor area; the boundaries of the designated area and of other areas of outdoor dining not available for patrons' dogs; any fences or other barriers; surrounding property lines and public rights-of-way, including sidewalks and common pathways; the location of all signage herein required; and such other information as may be reasonably required by the city. The diagram or plan shall be accurate and to scale but need not be prepared by a licensed design professional. 
d.  A description of the days of the week and hours of operation that patrons' dogs will be permitted in the designated outdoor area. 
(2)  Permit applications under this section shall be reviewed and approved by the city manager in accordance with the following: 
a.  Permit applications shall be submitted al least 30 days prior to the anticipated date of the inception of the service. 
b.  The applicant shall be required to prominently display notice within the premises that a permit has been applied for. Such notice shall indicate the portion of the outdoor seating area for which permitting is requested and the anticipated start date of the service. 
c.  Any approved permit may be suspended or rescinded by the city manager at any time it is the city manager's judgment that all requirements of this section are not being met or that other threats to the health, safety or welfare of the public exist. 
d.  No permit shall be issued for any outdoor seating area which has not been properly authorized by the city or which does not meet all applicable criteria of the city's land development regulations or the Florida Food and Drug Administration Food Code. 
(3)  Requirements for operation of public food service establishments under the provisions of this section shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  All public food service establishment employees shall wash their hands promptly after touching, petting, or otherwise handling dogs. Employees shall be prohibited from touching, petting, or otherwise handling dogs while serving food or beverages or handling tableware or before entering other parts of the public food service establishment. 
b.  Patrons in a designated outdoor area shall be advised that they should wash their hands before eating. Waterless hand sanitizer shall be provided at all tables in the designated outdoor area. 
c.  Employees and patrons shall be instructed that they shall not allow dogs to come into contact with serving dishes, utensils, tableware, linens, paper products, or any other items involved in food service operations. 
d.  Patrons shall keep their dogs on a leash at all times and shall keep their dogs under reasonable control. 
e.  Dogs shall not be allowed on chairs, tables, or other furnishings. 
f.  All table and chair surfaces shall be cleaned and sanitized with an approved product between seating of patrons. Spilled food and drink shall be removed from the floor or ground between seating of patrons. 
g.  Accidents involving dog waste shall be cleaned immediately and the area sanitized with an approved product. A kit with the appropriate materials for this purpose shall be kept near the designated outdoor area. 
h.  A sign or signs reminding employees of the applicable rules shall be posted on the premises. 
i.  A sign or signs shall be posted that places the public on notice that the designated outdoor area is available for the use of patrons and patrons' dogs. 
j.  Dogs shall not be permitted to travel through indoor or nondesignated outdoor portions of the public food service establishment. 
(4)  A permit issued pursuant to this section shall not be transferred to a subsequent owner upon the sale of a public food service establishment but shall expire automatically upon the sale of the establishment. The subsequent owner shall be required to reapply for a permit pursuant to this section if the subsequent owner wishes to continue to accommodate patrons' dogs. 
(Ord. No. 06-21, § 1 (Att. A), 8-8-06)  
Chapter 18 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Aviation, F.S. ch. 329 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AIRCRAFT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Special events permit requirements, § 26-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Aircraft, F.S. ch. 330. 
 
Sec. 18-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aircraft means any motor vehicle or contrivance known, invented, used or designed for navigation of or flight in the air. This definition includes motorized and nonmotorized vehicles or contrivances. 
Airman means any individual who engages, as the person in command or as pilot, student pilot, mechanic or member of the crew, in the navigation of aircraft while under way. 
Airport means any area of land or water which is used or intended for use for the landing and takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities located thereon. 
Emergency means a sudden, unexpected happening or unforeseen occurrence or condition or hazard which necessitates the landing of an aircraft by an airman within the city limits. It shall be prima facie evidence that an emergency did not exist if the aircraft involved did not land. 
Operation of aircraft or operate aircraft means the use, navigation or piloting of aircraft in the airspace over the city limits or within the city upon any area of land or water which is used or intended for use for the landing and takeoff of aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 82-28, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-29; Ord. No. 83-22; Code 1983, §§ 2.5-1(a), 2.5-2(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-27. - Use of land as airport; operation of aircraft in city limits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any area of land or water within the city limits as an airport. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or airman to operate an aircraft or to engage in the operation of aircraft within the city limits, provided that operation of aircraft 1,000 feet above congested areas within the city limits and 500 feet above all other areas within the city limits shall be lawful. 
(Ord. No. 82-28, §§ 1—3; Code 1983, § 2.5-1(b), (c)) 
Cross reference— Zoning district regulations, § 134-206 et seq.  
Sec. 18-28. - Minimum altitude. 
Except when an emergency exists, no airman shall operate an aircraft below the following altitudes: 
(1)  Generally. An altitude allowing an emergency landing without undue hazard to persons or property on the surface within the city limits. 
(2)  Congested areas. Over any congested area of the city, an altitude of 1,000 feet above the highest obstacle within a horizontal radius of 2,000 feet of the aircraft. 
(3)  Noncongested areas. An altitude of 500 feet above the surface, except over open water, or sparsely populated areas. In that case, the aircraft shall not be operated closer than 500 feet to any person, vessel, vehicle or structure. 
(Ord. No. 82-29; Ord. No. 83-22; Code 1983, § 2.5-2(b)(1)—(3))  
Sec. 18-29. - Helicopters and hot air balloons. 
(a)  By special authorization of the city manager or his delegate, which authorization must be granted in advance, helicopters and hot air balloons may be operated at less than the minimum altitudes prescribed in this article if the operation is conducted without hazard to person or property on the surface and, further, if the operation is conducted strictly in accord with any requirement imposed by the city. 
(b)  In order to obtain such special authorization, the person seeking it must make written application to the city manager. Thereafter, the city manager shall issue a permit which shall set forth any restrictions imposed by the city manager. Notwithstanding other sections of this article or any other ordinance involving operation of aircraft within the city limits, the city manager may also consent to allow helicopters and hot air balloons to land and take off within the city limits. However, the granting or denying of consent as set forth in this section shall be within the sole discretion of the city manager, and the granting of such authority on one occasion shall not be a precedent for the granting of such authority at a different time even if the facts and circumstances shall be the same or similar. 
(Ord. No. 82-29; Ord. No. 83-22; Code 1983, § 2.5-2(b)(4)) 
Cross reference— City manager, § 2-131 et seq.  
Chapter 22 - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— In addition to the boards and committees contained in this chapter, the following additional boards, committees and commissions exist: 
The general employees pension board. See Ord. No. 81-51, § 66-66 of this Code. 
The board of trustees of the municipal firefighter's pension trust fund (F.S. § 175.061 et seq.), § 66-291 of this Code. 
The board of trustees of the municipal police officer's retirement fund (F.S. § 185.05), § 66-181 of this Code. 
The personnel grievance board, personnel manual (Res. No. 81-18, § XVIX). 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; general employees pension board, § 66-66; board of trustees of the municipal police officers retirement trust fund, § 66-181; board of trustees of the municipal firefighters pension trust fund, § 66-291. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-44, § 1, adopted October 17, 2000, amended the Code by renaming art. II. Formerly, art. II was entitled "Planning and Zoning Board." Subsequently, Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, adopted Feb. 22, 2005, amended Art. II, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 22-31—22-37, 22-39, 22-40. Prior to inclusion of said Ord. No. 2005-08, Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Planning and development, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 134. 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Created. 
There is hereby created a permanent board to be known as the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 2-22-05)  
Sec. 22-32. - Number of members; compensation. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall consist of five regular members. 
(b)  Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 2-22-05)  
Sec. 22-33. - Appointment of members. 
(a)  Each city commissioner and the mayor-commissioner shall appoint one regular member to serve on the board of adjustment. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election. Provided, however, that if the city commission is unable to appoint members prior to a duly scheduled meeting of the board, then those members previously appointed shall continue to serve until such time as they are replaced or reappointed. 
(c)  Appointments made other than at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election shall nevertheless be effective from the date of the first meeting following the general election for the purpose of determining the length of term. 
(d)  Appointments by commission members shall not be restricted by commissioner district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 2-22-05)  
Sec. 22-34. - Term of office of members. 
The terms of office of the members of the board of adjustment shall run concurrently with the term of the commissioner or the mayor appointing that member. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 2-22-05)  
Sec. 22-35. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  All members shall reside permanently within the city at all times during their terms of office, and abandonment of residency within the city limits shall automatically constitute a forfeiture of office. 
(b)  No member shall hold any other public position in the city. 
(c)  The city commission shall appoint only those persons whose personal and private interests are not likely to conflict with that of the general public. 
(d)  The members shall not be elected city officials, appointed city officers or city employees, nor shall they be employers of, or related to, any city official or city employee. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 2-22-05)  
Sec. 22-36. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Members of the board of adjustment shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing commission member. 
(b)  Any member who fails to attend three successive regular meetings shall forfeit membership on the board. 
(c)  If any member of the board resigns, or for any other reason ceases to be a member of the board, the commission member who appointed such member shall appoint a replacement to serve the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 2-22-05)  
Sec. 22-37. - Powers and duties generally. 
The board of adjustment shall have the power to adopt rules of procedure, and shall conduct public meetings and hearings on any matter on which it is authorized to act in accordance with the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances. 
The board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Review all subdivision plats submitted to the city and report its findings, comments and recommendations to the city commission. The city commission shall thereupon review the subdivision plat for final approval, approval with conditions or denial. The standards for review of subdivision plats shall be as provided in the Land Development Code. 
(2)  To authorize variances from the terms of the Land Development Code in accordance with those limitations specified in the Land Development Code. 
(3)  To hear and decide other matters as are specifically assigned by ordinance to the board for determination. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 2-22-05)  
Sec. 22-38. - Reserved.  
Sec. 22-39. - Election of officers; conduct of meetings. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall annually, at the first meeting held following the appointment of members, organize by electing a chairman and vice-chairman and such other officers as may be necessary from among its members. 
(b)  The board shall hold at least one regular meeting per month, with the time and place to be established by majority vote of the regular members. All meetings shall be open to the public. If a regular meeting must be canceled, notice of the cancellation shall be posted. 
(c)  Special meetings may be called and held upon the request of the chairman, city commission, city manager or by any three members during a properly noticed public meeting. 
(d)  A quorum for the conduct of business shall not be less than three members. 
(e)  A majority of board membership shall be required to make any determination required by the board. 
(f)  The city shall appoint a secretary to keep and accurately maintain the minutes of all board meetings. 
(g)  The chairman or acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses in the same manner prescribed in the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 2-22-05)  
Sec. 22-40. - Public notice. 
Public notice shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 2-22-05)  
Secs. 22-41—22-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FINANCE AND BUDGET REVIEW COMMITTEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, adopted March 22, 2005, amended Art. III, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. III pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 22-66. - Created. 
There is hereby created a permanent committee to be known as the finance and budget review committee. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-67. - Number of members; compensation. 
(a)  The finance and budget review committee shall consist of five regular members. 
(b)  Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-68. - Appointment of members. 
(a)  The mayor and each city commissioner shall appoint one regular member to serve on the finance and budget review committee. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election. Provided, however, that if the city commission is unable to appoint members prior to a duly scheduled meeting of the committee, then those members previously appointed shall continue to serve until such time as they are replaced or reappointed. 
(c)  Appointments made other than at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election shall nevertheless be effective from the date of the first meeting following the general election for the purpose of determining the length of term. 
(d)  Appointments by commission members shall not be restricted by commissioner district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-69. - Term of office of members. 
The terms of office of the members of the finance and budget review committee shall run concurrently with the term of the mayor or commissioner appointing that member. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-70. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  All members shall reside permanently within the city at all times during their terms of office, and abandonment of residency within the city limits shall automatically constitute a forfeiture of office. 
(b)  No member shall hold any other public position in the city. 
(c)  The city commission shall appoint only those persons whose personal and private interests are not likely to conflict with that of the general public. 
(d)  The members shall not be elected city officials, appointed city officers or city employees, nor shall they be employers of, or related to, any city official or city employee. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-71. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Members of the finance and budget review committee shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing commission member. 
(b)  Any member who fails to attend three successive regular meetings shall forfeit membership on the committee. 
(c)  If any member of the committee resigns, or for any other reason ceases to be a member of the committee, the commission member who appointed such member shall appoint a replacement to serve the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-72. - Powers and duties generally. 
(a)  The finance and budget review committee shall have the power to adopt rules and procedures and to conduct regular and special meetings, provided the procedures do not conflict with any requirements of the Charter or this Code. 
(b)  Powers of the committee shall include the ability to review requests for budget appropriations and requests for supplemental appropriations, review annual audit reports and monthly financial reports, and in general the committee shall monitor and review the financial position of the city. Thereafter, the committee shall make comments and such recommendations to the city commission as are deemed appropriate and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to it by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-73. - Election of officers; conduct of meetings. 
(a)  The finance and budget review committee shall annually, at the first meeting held following the appointment of members, organize by electing a chairman and vice-chairman and such other officers as may be necessary from among its members. 
(b)  The committee shall meet at its discretion, with the time and place to be established by majority vote of the regular members. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(c)  Special meetings may be called and held upon the request of the chairman, city commission, city manager or by any three members during a properly noticed public meeting. 
(d)  A quorum for the conduct of business shall not be less than three members. 
(e)  A majority of committee members present shall be required to make any determination required by the board. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 22-74. - Staff participation and responsibilities. 
The city shall make available staff to assist the finance and budget review committee in the performance of its duties. Responsibilities will include the recording and transcribing of the minutes of all meetings of the committee. All meetings of the committee shall be open to the public. A public record of the committee's minutes and resolutions shall be maintained and made available for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 1, 8-12-08)  
Secs. 22-75—22-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, adopted March 22, 2005, amended Art. IV, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. IV pertained to the parks and recreation committee. Subsequently, Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, adopted August 12, 2008, amended Art. IV, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. IV pertained to the leisure services committee. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 22-101. - Created. 
There is hereby created a permanent committee to be known as the recreation advisory committee. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 22-102. - Number of members; compensation. 
(a)  The mayor and each city commissioner shall appoint one regular member to serve on the recreation advisory committee. 
(b)  Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 22-103. - Appointment of members. 
(a)  The mayor and each city commissioner shall appoint one regular member to serve on the recreation advisory committee. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election. Provided, however, that if the city commission is unable to appoint members prior to a duly scheduled meeting of the committee, then those members previously appointed shall continue to serve until such time as they are replaced or reappointed. 
(c)  Appointments made other than at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election shall nevertheless be effective from the date of the first meeting following the general election for the purpose of determining the length of term. 
(d)  Appointments by city commission members shall not be restricted by commissioner district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 22-104. - Term of office of members. 
The terms of office of the members of the recreation advisory committee shall run concurrently with the term of the mayor or commissioner appointing that member. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 22-105. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  All members shall reside permanently within the city at all times during their terms of office, and abandonment of residency within the city limits shall automatically constitute a forfeiture of office. 
(b)  No member shall hold any other public position in the city. 
(c)  The city commission shall appoint only those persons whose personal and private interests are not likely to conflict with that of the general public. 
(d)  The members shall not be elected city officials, appointed city officers or city employees, nor shall they be employers of, or related to, any city official or city employee. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 22-106. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Members of the recreation advisory committee shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing commission member. 
(b)  Any member who fails to attend three successive regular meetings shall forfeit membership on the recreation advisory committee. 
(c)  If any member of the recreation advisory committee resigns, or for any other reason ceases to be a member of the committee, the city commission member who appointed such member shall appoint a replacement to serve the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 22-107. - Powers and duties generally. 
(a)  The recreation advisory committee shall have the power to adopt rules and procedures and to conduct regular and special meetings, provided the procedures do not conflict with any requirements of the Charter or this Code. 
(b)  The recreation advisory committee shall advise on programs, evaluate existing programs, propose new programs and make recommendations to the city staff and/or city commission regarding the following: 
(1)  Protection, enhancement and beautification of the city owned property and rights-of-way through all available means, including appropriate landscaping, maintenance, and Best Management Practices. 
(2)  All city recreational activities, including marketing strategies, revenue generation, expenditures, and establishing partnerships with public and private entities to ensure the city's recreational needs are met in the most cost effective and efficient manner. 
(3)  Various programs offered by the department of public services and methods of improving these programs. Additionally, the recreation advisory committee shall make recommendations for development of new recreational programs and activities to be offered to the people of the community. 
(4)  Protection and maintenance of the system of parks and recreation facilities throughout the city including the community center complex, Don Vista, Warren Webster, parks, public rights-of-way, beaches and waterways to meet the needs of current and future residents, businesses, visitors and tourists. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 22-108. - Election of officers; conduct of meetings. 
(a)  The recreation advisory committee shall annually, at the first meeting held following the appointment of members, organize by electing a chairman and vice-chairman and such other officers as may be necessary from among its members. 
(b)  The recreation advisory committee shall meet quarterly, with the time and place to be established by majority vote of the regular members. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(c)  Special meetings may be called and held upon the request of the chairman, city commission, city manager or his/her designee or by any three members during a properly noticed public meeting. 
(d)  A quorum for the conduct of business shall not be less than three members. 
(e)  A majority of committee members present shall be required to make any determination required by the recreation advisory committee. 
(Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 22-109. - Staff participation and responsibilities. 
The city shall make available staff to assist the recreation advisory committee in the performance of its duties. Responsibilities will include the recording and transcribing of the minutes of all meetings of the committee. All meetings of the committee shall be open to the public. A public record of the committee's minutes and resolutions shall be maintained and made available for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, 8-12-08)  
Secs. 22-110—22-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LIBRARY ADVISORY COMMITTEE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, adopted March 22, 2005, amended Art. V, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. V pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 22-136. - Created. 
There is hereby created a permanent board to be known as the library advisory committee. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-137. - Number of members; compensation. 
(a)  The library advisory committee shall consist of five regular members. 
(b)  Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-138. - Appointment of members. 
(a)  The mayor and each city commissioner shall appoint one regular member to serve on the library advisory committee. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election. Provided, however, that if the city commission is unable to appoint members prior to a duly scheduled meeting of the committee, then those members previously appointed shall continue to serve until such time as they are replaced or reappointed. 
(c)  Appointments made other than at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election shall nevertheless be effective from the date of the first meeting following the general election for the purpose of determining the length of term. 
(d)  Appointments by commission members shall not be restricted by commissioner district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-139. - Term of office of members. 
The terms of office of the members of the library advisory committee shall run concurrently with the term of the mayor or commissioner appointing that member. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-140. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  All members shall reside permanently within the city at all times during their terms of office, and abandonment of residency within the city limits shall automatically constitute a forfeiture of office. 
(b)  No member shall hold any other public position in the city. 
(c)  The city commission shall appoint only those persons whose personal and private interests are not likely to conflict with that of the general public. 
(d)  The members shall not be elected city officials, appointed city officers or city employees, nor shall they be employers of, or related to, any city official or city employee. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-141. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Members of the library advisory committee shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing commission member. 
(b)  Any member who fails to attend three successive regular meetings shall forfeit membership on the committee. 
(c)  If any member of the committee resigns, or for any other reason ceases to be a member of the committee, the commission member who appointed such member shall appoint a replacement to serve the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-142. - Powers and duties generally. 
(a)  The library advisory committee shall have the power to adopt rules and procedures and to conduct regular and special meetings, provided the procedures do not conflict with any requirements of the Charter or this Code. 
(b)  The committee shall review the various cultural, informational and educational programs offered by the city's public library and shall make recommendations to the city commission and the city manager concerning methods for improving the programs. Additionally, this committee shall advise the city commission and the city manager's office in developing additional library programs to be offered to the citizens of the city. The committee shall perform such other duties in connection with library programs offered by the city as may be assigned to it by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-143. - Election of officers; conduct of meetings. 
(a)  The library advisory committee shall annually, at the first meeting held following the appointment of members, organize by electing a chairman and vice-chairman and such other officers as may be necessary from among its members. 
(b)  The committee shall meet at its discretion, with the time and place to be established by majority vote of the regular members. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(c)  Special meetings may be called and held upon the request of the chairman, city commission, city manager or by any three members during a properly noticed public meeting. 
(d)  A quorum for the conduct of business shall not be less than three members. 
(e)  A majority of committee members present shall be required to make any determination required by the committee. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 08-28, § 2, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 22-144. - Staff participation and responsibilities. 
The city shall make available staff to assist the library advisory committee in the performance of its duties. Responsibilities will include the recording and transcribing of the minutes of all meetings of the committee. All meetings of the committee shall be open to the public. A public record of the committee's minutes and resolutions shall be maintained and made available for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 2, 8-12-08)  
ARTICLE VI. - TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE (TRC) 
 
Sec. 22-145. - Created. 
There is hereby created an administrative committee to be known as the technical review committee (TRC) for the purpose of providing for the professional and technical review of capital projects and permit applications as specified under section 22-147 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 1, 1-27-15)  
Sec. 22-146. - Membership 
(a)  The membership shall include the director or his or her designee from the following city agencies: 
(1)  Planning and zoning; 
(2)  Building; 
(3)  Public safety/code enforcement; 
(4)  Fire; 
(5)  Public services; and 
(6)  Recreation. 
Provided, however, the city manager may appoint additional city staff representatives to serve on the TRC as he or she may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 1, 1-27-15)  
Sec. 22-147. - Powers and duties generally. 
(a)  On an annual basis to coincide with the routine preparation of the city's budget, the TRC shall prepare and recommend to the city manager a prioritized list of capital improvement projects to be incorporated into a financially feasible five year schedule for meeting the City's adopted level of service standards for public facilities and services as stated in the city's comprehensive plan. The TRC is to serve as, and meet the obligations of, the capital improvements advisory committee as called for in the capital improvements element of the City of St. Pete Beach Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  The TRC shall identify projects in the five year schedule that are significant in terms of their potential impact on the city's physical, environmental, or historic character. The project manager assigned by the responsible department of a significant capital project shall provide the TRC with a status update at each regular meeting throughout the planning, design, and permitting process at which time the TRC shall provide any comments or recommendations on the project relative to their field of expertise. 
(c)  The TRC shall review the following applications for compliance with the provisions of the St. Pete Beach Land Development Code, and all applicable building codes: 
(1)  Site plans. 
(2)  Subdivisions. 
(3)  Conditional uses. 
(4)  Amendments to the zoning map. 
(5)  Amendments to the future land use map. 
(6)  Variances on property being used for other than single-family detached residential purpose. 
(7)  Vacations of streets, plats or other property. 
(8)  Temporary uses. 
(9)  All other applications assigned by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 1, 1-27-15)  
Sec. 22-148. - Conduct of meetings; public notice. 
(a)  The TRC staff shall hold regular monthly meetings at an established time and place unless cancelled due to lack of items to be discussed or acted upon. 
(b)  The TRC agenda shall be distributed to the members at least seven (7) working days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting. 
(c)  The meetings shall be open to the public and reasonable notice of the time, place and agenda shall be given. Attendance of the applicant is not required. 
(d)  On development applications, the community development director, or other person designated by the city manager, shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  Agenda preparation and distribution. 
(2)  Chairing the meeting. 
(3)  Recording minutes. 
(4)  Notification to applicants of the regularly scheduled date, time and place for consideration of the applications. 
(5)  Written notification to applicants of the outcome of the TRC review. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, § 1, 1-27-15)  
Secs. 2-149—2-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-08, § 2, adopted Feb. 22, 2005, amended Art. VII, in its entirety to read as herein set out in §§ 22-206—22-213. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2006-08, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2006, amended Art. VII, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Historic preservation, ch. 110. 
 
Sec. 22-206. - Created. 
There is created a board to be known as historic preservation board for the city, under the jurisdiction and control of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, § 1, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 22-207. - Members; qualifications; appointment. 
(a)  The historic preservation board shall consist of five members appointed by the city commission. Each member of the board may hold office only so long as he is a resident of the city. Appointments shall be made on the basis of a potential member's civic pride, involvement in community issues, integrity, experience and interest in the field of historic preservation. Each city commissioner and the mayor-commissioner shall appoint one member to serve on the board. 
(b)  Any vacancies occurring on the board between the regular appointments described above shall be filled by the appropriate city commissioner within 60 days of said vacancy, provided, however, that if the city commission is unable to appoint members prior to a duly scheduled meeting of the board, then those members previously appointed shall continue to serve until such time as they are replaced or reappointed. 
(c)  To the extent available, the city commission is encouraged to appoint nominees to the board from the following categories: 
(1)  Architecture; 
(2)  Engineering, building construction or landscape architecture; 
(3)  History and archaeology; 
(4)  Law or urban planning; 
(5)  Real estate and finance; and 
(6)  Business community interest within the affected area. 
(d)  Elected officials, administrative department heads and their immediate families shall be prohibited from serving as members of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, § 1, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 22-208. - Terms of office. 
Members of the historic preservation board shall serve overlapping terms of two years. A board member shall be eligible for reappointment. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing commission member. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, § 1, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 22-209. - Officers. 
The members of the historic preservation board shall elect a chair and a vice-chair for a one-year term each. The chair shall preside at all meetings and shall have the right to vote. The vice-chair shall preside in the absence of the chair. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, § 1, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 22-210. - Rules and regulations. 
The historic preservation board shall adopt such rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary and appropriate for the proper administration and enforcement of this article. Such rules and regulations shall conform to this article and shall govern and control the procedures, hearings and actions of the board. No such rules and regulations shall become effective until the proposed rules and regulations, and any amendments and modifications thereto, have been approved by the city commission. Said rules shall be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, § 1, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 22-211. - Purpose; powers and duties. 
(a)  The historic preservation board will recommend historic district boundaries essential to the maintenance of the unique character of the city. 
(b)  The board will develop and recommend guidelines, standards and associated land development regulations for new construction and alterations to existing structures specific to the districts. 
(c)  The board shall develop design guidelines for new construction or alterations to existing structures within the Pass-a-Grille Overlay. 
(d)  The board shall also have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Maintain and update the findings of the historical and archaeological resource surveys and validate those findings. 
(2)  Evaluate the significance and eligibility of historic resources for designation pursuant to the Land Development Code. 
(3)  Designate eligible historic resources pursuant to the Land Development Code. 
(4)  Nominate historic resources to the local and state list of historic places and to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(5)  Approve, deny, or approve with conditions applications for certificates of appropriateness applicable to historic resources or structures within historic districts pursuant to the Land Development Code. 
(6)  Approve or deny applications for a certificate of appropriateness for new construction or alterations to existing structures within the Pass-a-Grille Overlay, based on the adopted guidelines. 
(7)  Make recommendations to the board of adjustments with respect to variance requests applicable to historic resources designated pursuant to the Land Development Code. 
(8)  Place historical markers and administer other programs aimed at the proper recognition of designated historic resources. 
(9)  Advise the city commission on all matters related to historic preservation policy, including use, administration and maintenance of city-owned historic resources. 
(10)  Recommend zoning and building code amendments to the appropriate board of authority to assist in the preservation of designated historic resources. 
(11)  Review and make recommendations to the appropriate board of authority on proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan or land development regulations that may affect designated historic resources. 
(12)  Propose and recommend to the city commission financial and technical incentive programs to further the objectives of historic preservation. 
(13)  Increase public awareness of historic preservation and its community benefits by promoting public education programs. 
(14)  Record and maintain records of the board actions and decisions. 
(15)  Review any nominations of local properties to the National Register of Historic Places following the regulations of the state historic preservation office, as follows: 
a.  The responsibilities of the board in this regard shall be supplementary to the state historic preservation officer. 
b.  Inclusion on either the local, state or federal list is voluntary, and when a property owner objects to the nomination, he shall submit a notarized written statement to the board before the nomination is considered. 
c.  Owners of nominated properties shall be notified of the board meeting at which the nomination will be considered in accordance with the procedure set forth in the Land Development Code. When necessary, the board may seek outside expert advice before evaluating the nomination. 
d.  The board shall forward its recommendations and action on the nomination to the state historic preservation officer. 
(16)  Maintain the local and state site file of historic places for the city and conduct and maintain a comprehensive survey of materials that shall be kept available to the public, and duplicates of all inventory forms shall be supplied to the state historic preservation officer. 
(17)  Perform any other reasonable functions or duties relating to historic preservation assigned to it by the city commission. 
(18)  Attend pertinent informational or educational meetings, workshops and conferences. 
(e)  Upon the approval of the city commission, the board may apply for a grant assistance in the name of the city from any federal, state, county or private source for the purpose of furthering the objectives of this article. Upon recommendation of the board, the city commission may establish a historic preservation trust fund with the purpose of administering such funds. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, § 1, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 10-03, § 3(Att. C), 4-27-10; Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-25-11)  
Sec. 22-212. - Staff participation and responsibilities. 
The city shall make available staff to assist the historic preservation board in the performance of its duties. Responsibilities will include the recording and transcribing of the minutes of all meetings of the board. When necessary, a representative of the city attorney's office will review cases. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. A public record of the board's minutes and resolutions shall be maintained and made available for inspection by the public. Meetings will be called, as needed, by the city and upon the request of any board member. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, § 1, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 22-213. - Public notice. 
Meetings and the agenda for the meetings of the board shall be publicly announced at least ten days prior to the scheduled public meeting. If the notice relates to the listing of a property in the National Register, the notice for those cases shall be published 45 days in advance of the hearing of the case. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, § 1, 2-14-06)  
Secs. 22-214—22-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PLANNING BOARD[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, adopted March 22, 2005, amended Art. VIII to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. VIII pertained to the future of the city planning committee. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 22-241. - Created. 
There is hereby created a permanent board to be known as the planning board. 
(Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-242. - Number of members; compensation. 
(a)  The planning board shall consist of five regular members. 
(b)  Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-243. - Appointment of members. 
(a)  The mayor and each city commissioner shall appoint one regular member to serve on the planning board. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election. Provided, however, that if the city commission is unable to appoint members prior to a duly scheduled meeting of the board, then those members previously appointed shall continue to serve until such time as they are replaced or reappointed. 
(c)  Appointments made other than at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election shall nevertheless be effective from the date of the first meeting following the general election for the purpose of determining the length of term. 
(d)  Appointments by commission members shall not be restricted by commissioner district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-244. - Term of office of members. 
The terms of office of the members of the planning board shall run concurrently with the term of the mayor or commissioner appointing that member. 
(Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-245. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  All members shall reside permanently within the city at all times during their terms of office, and abandonment of residency within the city limits shall automatically constitute a forfeiture of office. 
(b)  No member shall hold any other public position in the city. 
(c)  The city commission shall appoint only those persons whose personal and private interests are not likely to conflict with that of the general public. 
(d)  The members shall not be elected city officials, appointed city officers or city employees, nor shall they be employers of, or related to, any city official or city employee. 
(Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-246. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Members of the planning board shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing commission member. 
(b)  Any member who fails to attend three successive regular meetings shall forfeit membership on the board. 
(c)  If any member of the board resigns, or for any other reason ceases to be a member of the board, the commission member who appointed such member shall appoint a replacement to serve the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-247. - Powers and duties generally. 
(a)  The planning board shall have the power to adopt rules and procedures and to conduct regular and special meetings, provided the procedures do not conflict with any requirements of the Charter or this Code. 
(b)  The board shall have the review and advisory responsibility for the conduct of comprehensive planning within the city and shall include the authority to: 
(1)  Prepare or assist in the preparation of the city's comprehensive plan and to make recommendations to the city commission for the adoption or implementation of the plan as a whole, or parts thereof. After the preparation of such a plan, it will be the duty of the planning board to continue to review the plan and perfect it as necessitated by changing conditions. 
(2)  Maintain liaison with all public and private agencies in the city and environs for the purpose of effecting coordinated development of those public and private projects, which will influence the city's development according to the comprehensive plan. Such coordination of projects shall include public and private utility systems; schools; major streets and thoroughfares, and other transportation systems; parks and recreation areas and facilities and open spaces; and public buildings. It shall be the duty of the board to seek the cooperation of all public and private groups to develop projects in conformance with the official map and principles of the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  Prepare or assist in the preparation, as an element of the comprehensive plan, of a plan for major streets consisting of those thoroughfares to be designated for through routes and for the movement of large volumes of traffic. The major street plan will show existing streets, extensions of such streets and new routes, indicating future rights-of-way required, direction of traffic flow and setbacks to be established for future street widening. Those features of the major street plan adopted by the city commission shall be indicated on the official map. 
(4)  Undertake any special study or project plan assigned by the city commission, which bears on the refinement, extension or implementation of any phase of the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Hold public hearings preliminary to making recommendations to the city commission or any determination that the commission is authorized to make under the terms of any ordinance. 
(6)  Utilize current data, maps, graphic material and other available information to adequately depict and record past developments and existing conditions for the purpose of analyzing, interpreting and projecting trends with respect to population, economic base, property values, building construction, tourist and industrial development, transportation, housing, public facilities, utilities, recreation, natural environment, traffic and land uses of the city. 
(7)  Recommend to the city manager and to the city commission projects, plans, codes and ordinances designed to implement the comprehensive plan or promote the development of the city. 
(8)  Those powers and duties as expressed in F.S. § 163.3174(4). 
(9)  Review all applications for zoning map and text amendments and submit a report with comments, findings and recommendations. 
(10)  Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the city commission or required by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 22-248. - Election of officers; conduct of meetings. 
(a)  The planning board shall annually, at the first meeting held following the appointment of members, organize by electing a chairman and vice-chairman and such other officers as may be necessary from among its members. 
(b)  The board shall meet at its discretion, with the time and place to be established by majority vote of the regular members. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(c)  Special meetings may be called and held upon the request of the chairman, city commission, city manager or by any three members during a properly noticed public meeting. 
(d)  A quorum for the conduct of business shall not be less than three members. 
(e)  A majority of board members present shall be required to make any determination required by the committee. 
(Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 08-28, § 3, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 22-249. - Staff participation and responsibilities. 
The city shall make available staff to assist the planning board in the performance of its duties. Responsibilities will include the recording and transcribing of the minutes of all meetings of the board. When necessary, a representative of the city attorney's office will review cases. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. A public record of the board's minutes and resolutions shall be maintained and made available for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 3, 8-12-08)  
Secs. 22-250—22-269. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SPECIAL MAGISTRATE SUPPLEMENTAL CODE ENFORCEMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1(exh. A), adopted Jan. 24, 2012, deleted the former Art. IX, §§ 22-270—22-279, and enacted a new Art. IX as set out herein. The former Art. IX pertained to special master supplemental code enforcement and derived from Ord. No. 99-39, § 1, 7-20-99; Ord. No. 00-33, § 1, adopted 8-1-00. 
 
Sec. 22-270. - Intent of article. 
It is the intent of this article to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by authorizing the appointment of one or more special magistrates with authority to impose administrative fines and other noncriminal penalties to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective and inexpensive method of enforcing any codes and ordinances in force in St Pete Beach, where a pending or repeated violation continues to exist. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-271. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the following terms shall be defined as follows. Where necessary or reasonably implied the singular shall include the plural. 
Board shall mean the Board of City Commissioners of St Pete Beach. 
Code inspector shall mean those employees or other agents of the city duly authorized and appointed by the city manager whose duty it is to assure compliance with city codes. 
Codes shall mean St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances or Land Development Code and all codes and statutes adopted by reference within the Code of Ordinances, as now existing or as may be amended by ordinance from time to time. 
Continuing violations are those violations which remain uncorrected beyond the prescribed time period for correction contained in the civil violation notice. For each day of continued violation after the time period for correction has run, an additional penalty in the same amount as for the original violation shall be added. 
Enforcing department shall mean any administrative department or division of St. Pete Beach charged by St Pete Beach ordinance or administrative assignment to enforce any particular code or ordinance in force in St Pete Beach. 
Person shall mean any real person, trust, corporation, estate, or other legal entity recognized by the laws of the State of Florida. 
Repeat violation shall mean a violation of a provision of a code or ordinance by a person who has been previously found, through a code enforcement special magistrate or any other quasi-judicial or judicial process, to have violated or who has admitted violating the same provision within five years prior to the violation, notwithstanding the violations occur at different locations. For the purposes of this definition, a plea of "no contest" or "nolo contendre" shall be deemed an admission of a violation. 
Special magistrate administrative division shall mean the department or division designated by the city manager to handle the secretarial, filing, record retention, scheduling, noticing and other coordinating and support functions related to this article. 
Violator shall mean the person responsible for the code violation, which, in the appropriate circumstances, shall either be the perpetrator of the violation or the owner of the real property upon which the violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-272. - Jurisdiction of special magistrates. 
There is hereby created and established the office of special magistrate for the purpose of providing a supplemental code enforcement process for the city. The special magistrate is hereby vested with all the powers now granted under F.S. ch. 162, and as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-273. - Board clerk. 
The city manager shall appoint a city employee to be the code enforcement clerk, who shall perform the functions assigned to the clerk as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-274. - Civil offenses and penalties. 
(a)  The violation of any provision of any ordinances or codes shall constitute a civil offense punishable by civil penalty as follows: 
(1)  Not in excess of $250.00 per day for a first violation; 
(2)  Not in excess of $500.00 per day for a repeat violation; 
(3)  An assessment of the cost of repairs incurred by the city where the violation was in the nature of a violation described in F.S. § 162.06(4); and 
(4)  In the instance where the special magistrate finds that the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the special magistrate may impose a fine not to exceed $5,000.00 per violation. 
(b)  Civil penalties assessed pursuant to this article are due and payable to the city upon the order of the special magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-275. - Code enforcement special magistrates. 
(a)  Creation and appointment. Code enforcement hearings pursuant to this article shall be conducted by designated special magistrates. Application for special magistrate positions shall be directed to the city manager pursuant to a notice published in a newspaper of general circulation. The city manager shall select a pool of candidates from the applications on the basis of experience and qualifications. The board shall appoint special magistrates to conduct hearings from the pool of candidates selected by the city manager. 
(b)  Qualifications. Special magistrates shall have the following minimum qualifications: 
(1)  Graduation from a law school accredited by the America[n] Bar Association; 
(2)  Demonstrated knowledge of administrative laws, land use law, and local government regulation and procedures; 
(3)  Current membership, in good standing, of the Florida Bar Association; and 
(4)  Any other such qualification that may be established by resolution of the board. 
In the event the city manager does not receive a sufficient number of applications from qualified members of the Florida Bar, the board may select attorneys who are not members of the Florida Bar as candidates for special magistrate. Among those applicants, the board and city manager shall give preference to those attorneys who have prior experience in a judiciary capacity or as a hearing officer, mediator, or special magistrate. No attorney who has been disciplined by the Florida Bar Association or a bar association of any other jurisdiction shall be appointed as a special magistrate. 
(c)  Term. Special magistrates shall serve a term of one year from the date of appointment by the board. Special magistrates may be reappointed at the discretion of the board. There shall be no limit on the number of terms a person may serve as a special magistrate. 
(d)  Removal. At any time during a term, the board shall have the authority to remove a special magistrate, with or without cause. 
(e)  Vacancy. If any special magistrate resigns or is removed prior to expiration of his or her term or the board determines that the special magistrate should not be reappointed, the board shall appoint a special magistrate from the pool of candidates previously selected by the board to fill the vacancy within 30 days. 
(f)  Meetings and hearings. 
(1)  Scheduling. The special magistrate administrative division shall be responsible for scheduling meetings of special magistrates. In the case of an alleged violation as set forth in subsection 22-276(3) of this Code, a hearing may be called as soon as possible. 
(2)  Location. The location of the meetings shall be in St. Pete Beach, Florida. 
(3)  Operating procedures. All cases brought before special magistrates shall be presented by either a designated code enforcement officer, building official or an attorney representing the department responsible for enforcing the particular code for which the violation is alleged. 
(4)  Meetings open to the public. All meetings and public hearings shall be open to the public. 
(g)  Compensation. The compensation for special magistrate services may be authorized as specified by resolution adopted by the board. Travel reimbursement is limited to expenses incurred only for travel outside the county necessary to fulfill the responsibilities as a special magistrate. Travel reimbursement shall be made only when sufficient funds have been budgeted and are available, and upon prior approval by the board. No other expenses shall be reimbursable except documented long distance telephone calls to city staff to fulfill the responsibilities as a special magistrate. 
(h)  Conflict of interest provisions. The following conflict of interest provisions shall apply to the special magistrates; failure on the part of a special magistrate to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute grounds for removal by the board or the city manager: 
(1)  Upon appointment, each special magistrate shall comply with the disclosure requirements imposed by Florida law, including F.S. §§ 112.313 and 112.3145. 
(2)  Additionally, each special magistrate shall comply with the voting requirements imposed by Florida law, including F.S. §§ 286.012 and 112.3143. 
(3)  For a period of one year from the date of termination of office as a special magistrate, such person is hereby expressly prohibited from acting as agent or attorney in any proceedings, petition or other matter before a St. Pete Beach special magistrate. 
(4)  No person who is or may become a party to a hearing before a special magistrate shall communicate ex parte with any special magistrate concerning that violation. This restriction shall extend to any person appearing or interceding on behalf of a party, whether or not such person may have a direct personal or financial interest in the property subject of the alleged violation. 
(5)  A special magistrate shall not communicate ex parte on his own volition with any party, representative of a party, or interceding person concerning an alleged violation; however, the special magistrate may consider a request regarding the scheduling or continuance of hearings when such request is made in writing. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-276. - Special magistrate administrative division procedures. 
Alleged violations of any of those codes or ordinances of the City of St. Pete Beach as described herein may be filed with the special magistrate administrative division by those administrative officials, having the responsibility of enforcing the various codes or ordinances in force in St. Pete Beach. 
(1)  Except as set forth in subsections (3) and (4) below, if a violation of a code or ordinance is believed to exist, the enforcing department shall specify a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the special magistrate administrative division shall give notice to the alleged violator that a code enforcement hearing will be conducted concerning the alleged violation as noticed. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing, as well as the violation alleged to exist. If the violation is corrected and then repeated, or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code inspector, the case may be brought for hearing even if the violation has been corrected prior to hearing, and the notice of violation shall so state. 
(2)  Persons or entities who may be held responsible under this article for violation(s) of St Pete Beach Code(s) include: 
a.  The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, contractor, or any other person or legal entity using the land, building, or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist. 
b.  Any person or legal entity who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in such violation. 
c.  Any person or legal entity who maintains any land, building, or premises in which such violation shall exist. 
(3)  If a repeat violation is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator but is not required to give the violator reasonable time to correct the violation. The code inspector, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, may request a hearing. The special magistrate administrative division shall give notice to the alleged violator as set forth in subsection (1) above. The case may be brought for hearing, and a fine may be imposed by the special magistrate, even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(4)  If the code inspector has reason to believe a violation or the condition causing the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately request a code enforcement hearing. 
(5)  If the owner of property which is subject to a code enforcement proceeding transfers ownership of such property between the time the notice of violation was served and the time of the hearing, such owner shall: 
a.  Disclose, in writing, the existence and the nature of the proceeding to the prospective transferee. 
b.  Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the notices and other materials relating to the code enforcement proceeding received by the transferor. 
c.  Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee that the new owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and with orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding. 
d.  File a notice with the special magistrate administrative division of the transfer of the property, with the identity and address of the new owner and copies of the disclosures made to the new owner, within five days after the date of the transfer. 
A failure to make the disclosures described in subsections a., b. and c. before the transfer creates a rebuttable presumption of fraud. If the property is transferred before the hearing, the hearing shall not be dismissed, but the new owner shall be provided a reasonable period of time to correct the violation before the hearing is held. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-277. - Conduct of hearing by special magistrate. 
(a)  Upon request of the code inspector or at such other times as may be necessary, a hearing before the special magistrate may be convened. Minutes shall be kept of all code enforcement hearings, and all hearings shall be open to the public. The special magistrate administrative division shall provide all clerical and administrative support reasonably necessary to conduct these hearings. 
(b)  Where proper notice of the hearing has been provided to the alleged violator pursuant to section 22-282 of this article, a hearing may proceed even in the absence of the alleged violator. 
(c)  At such hearing, the burden of proof shall be upon the code enforcement division to show by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation exists, or in the case of a repeat violation, existed on the date that the code inspector gave notice to the violator of a repeat violation pursuant to subsection 22-276(3) of this article. 
(d)  All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. Upon determination of the special magistrate, irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded, but all other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible, whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a trial in the courts of Florida. Any part of the evidence may be received in written form. 
(e)  The special magistrate may inquire of or question any witness present at the hearing. The alleged violator (hereinafter also referred to as respondent), respondent's attorney, code enforcement officers, or an attorney representing the division shall be permitted to inquire of or question any witness present at the hearing. The special magistrate may consider testimony presented by code enforcement officers, the respondent or any other witnesses. 
(f)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the special magistrate shall render his or her decision (order) based on evidence entered into the record. The decision shall then be transmitted to the respondent in the form of a written order including findings of fact, and conclusions of law consistent with the record. The order shall be transmitted by mail to the respondent within ten days after the hearing. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine and costs may be imposed and, under the circumstances set forth in subsection 22-276(3) of this article, the cost of repairs or other corrective action may be included along with the fine if the order is not complied with by said date. A certified copy of such order may be recorded in the public records of the county and shall constitute notice to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns if the violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding upon the violator and, if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns. If an order is recorded in the public records pursuant to this paragraph and the order is complied with by the date specified in the order, the special magistrate shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required to issue such an order acknowledging compliance. 
(g)  If St. Pete Beach prevails in prosecuting a case before the special magistrate, it shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred. Whether and to what extent such costs are imposed shall be within the discretion of the special magistrate but shall not exceed the actual costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-278. - Special magistrate powers and duties. 
Special magistrates shall have the following powers and duties to: 
(1)  Hold hearings pursuant to section 22-277 of this article. 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may be served by a sheriff or other authorized persons consistent with Rule 1.410(d) Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, upon request, by the special magistrate. 
(3)  Subpoena records, surveys, plats and other documentary materials. 
(4)  Take testimony under oath. 
(5)  Make findings of fact and conclusions of law as are necessary to enforce the provisions of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances and Land Development Code and issue orders having the full force and effect of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance. 
(6)  Assess fines pursuant to section 22-279 of this article, including costs relating to the prosecution of cases before the special magistrate in those cases where the governing body prevails. 
(7)  Lien property pursuant to section 22-279 of this article. 
(8)  Assess costs pursuant to section 22-279 of this article. 
(9)  Assess costs pursuant to subsection 22-279(1) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-279. - Administrative fines; costs; liens. 
(a)  The special magistrate, upon notification by a code inspector that a code enforcement order has not been complied with within the set time, may order the violator to pay a fine in an amount specified in this section for each day the violation continues past the date for compliance set forth in the order or upon notification by a code inspector that a repeat violation has occurred in the case of a repeat violation, for each day the repeat violation continues, beginning with the date the repeat violation is found to have occurred by the code inspector. In addition, if the violation is a violation described in subsection 22-276(4) of this article, the special magistrate shall notify the city manager, which may make all reasonable repairs or other corrective actions which are required to bring the property into compliance, or otherwise secure the property, and charge the violator with the reasonable costs of the repairs or other corrective actions along with the fine imposed pursuant to this section. Making such repairs does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the local governing body to make further repairs or to maintain the property and does not create any liability against the local governing body for damages to the property if such repairs were completed in good faith. If a finding of a violation or a repeat violation has been made as provided in this part, a hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order imposing the fine. An order imposing a fine shall be sent to the property owner with a notice that the owner may request a hearing to challenge the fine amount within 20 days of the order. Orders imposing fines shall not be filed as liens until the latter of the expiration of such 20-day notice period, or the completion of such timely requested challenge. A challenge to an order imposing a fine shall be limited to a consideration of only such new findings necessary to impose an appropriate fine and create a lien. 
(b)  A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $250.00 per day for a first violation and shall not exceed $500.00 per day for a repeat violation and, in addition, may include all costs of repairs or other corrective action pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. If, after due notice and hearing, the special magistrate finds a violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, the special magistrate may impose a fine not to exceed $5,000.00 per violation or as otherwise authorized by Florida State Statute. In determining the amount of fine, if any, the special magistrate shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation; 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(c)  The special magistrate may, in its discretion, adopt a consent order proposed by the enforcing department setting forth agreed terms for payment of any fine in lieu of execution or foreclosure as set forth in subsection (d), below. 
(d)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine, or a fine plus repair costs, may be recorded in the public records in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court in and for Pinellas County, Florida. Once recorded the certified copy of an order shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation(s) exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator; and it shall be enforceable in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including execution and levy against the personal property of the violator, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien, filed pursuant to this section, whichever comes first. Once recorded the lien shall be superior to any mortgages, liens, or other instruments recorded subsequent to the filing of the code enforcement lien. 
(e)  After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the city may foreclose the lien in the same manner as mortgage liens are foreclosed. Such lien shall bear interest at the rate allowable by law from the date of compliance set forth in the recorded order acknowledging compliance. The local governing body shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this article may be foreclosed on real property that is a homestead under Article X, Section 4, of the Florida Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-280. - Other legal remedies. 
In addition to the administrative penalties and enforcement procedures provided in this article, the board may institute any lawful civil action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, or abate violations of codes or ordinances or through its agents issue cease and desist orders. An enforcing department shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the form of written official notices given to the owner of the subject building, property, or premises, or to his agent, lessee, tenant, contractor, or to any person using the land, building or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist. Any failure to comply with a cease and desist order issued by an enforcing department shall be regarded, during any penalty setting phase, as an exaggerating circumstance by the special magistrate should any process relative to section 22-279 of this article result from the violation that is the subject of the cease and desist order. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-281. - Appeals. 
Any aggrieved party, including the City of St. Pete Beach, may appeal an order of the special magistrate to a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days of the execution of the order to be appealed. The city may assess a reasonable charge for the preparation of the record to be paid by the petitioner in accordance with F.S. § 119.07. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-282. - Notices. 
(a)  All notices required by this article shall be provided to the alleged violator by: 
(1)  Certified mail, return receipt requested, provided if such notice is sent under this paragraph to the owner of the property in question at the address listed in the tax collector's office for tax notices, and at any other address provided to the city government by such owner and is returned as unclaimed or refused, notice may be provided by posting as described in subsections [(b)(1)] and [(b)(2)] of this section and by first class mail directed to the addresses furnished to the local government with a properly executed proof of mailing or affidavit confirming the first class mailing; 
(2)  Hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer, code inspector, or other person designated by the board; 
(3)  Leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above 15 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice; or 
(4)  In the case of commercial premises, leaving the notice with the manager or other person in charge. 
(b)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (a), at the option of the special magistrate administrative division, notice may also be served by publication or posting, as follows: 
(1)  Such notice shall be published once during each week for four consecutive weeks (four publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in Pinellas County. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under F.S. ch. 50, for legal and official advertisements. 
(2)  Proof of publication shall be made as provided in F.S. §§ 50.041 and 50.051. 
(c)  In lieu of publication as described in subsection a., such notice may be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing, or prior to the expiration of any deadline contained in the notice, in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be at the bulletin board of the City of St Pete Beach City Hall Building. Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. 
(d)  Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (a) of this section. 
Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (a) of this section, together with proof of publication or posting as provided in subsection (b) of this section, shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this part have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-283. - Procedure to request that a fine or lien imposed pursuant to section 22-279 be reduced; conditions and criteria therefor. 
(a)  The owner of real property against which a fine or lien has been imposed pursuant to section 22-279 of this article may apply to the special magistrate, through the city manager or his designee, for a satisfaction of such fine or lien with less than full payment thereof. No such application shall be considered by the special magistrate until the applicant has first shown that: 
(1)  All ad valorem property taxes, special assessments, county and city utility charges and other government and city-imposed liens against the subject real property have been paid; 
(2)  The applicant is not personally indebted to the city for any reason; and 
(3)  All city code violations have been corrected under necessary permits issued therefor. 
(b)  In considering an application to reduce a fine or lien imposed pursuant to section 22-279 of this article, no satisfaction thereof shall be approved by the special magistrate with less than full payment thereof, unless the special magistrate shall make a specific finding that no violation of any city ordinance exists on the subject real property. 
(c)  The balance of any fine or lien imposed pursuant to section 22-279 of this article that is reduced by the special magistrate shall be paid on terms as approved by the special magistrate. 
(d)  If the property for which the application for a fine reduction is being considered is owned by a government or quasi-government entity, the special magistrate may reduce such fine even if the violation has not been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Sec. 22-284. - Other procedures or implementing provisions. 
The board may adopt any additional necessary, desirable, or advisable procedures or implementing provisions for this article by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(exh. A), 1-24-12)  
Secs. 22-285—22-289. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-19, § 1, adopted April 26, 2005, amended Art. X, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. X pertained to similar subject matter. Subsequently, Ord. No. 08-37, § 1, adopted September 10, 2008, repealed Art. X, §§ 22-290—22-298, which pertained to the sister city committee. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 22-290—22-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - BEACH STEWARDSHIP COMMITTEE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-17, § 1, adopted July 13, 2004, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as a new Art. XI, §§ 22-290—22-297. Inasmuch as there already exist provisions so numbered, the provisions of Ord. No. 04-17 have been included herein as Art. XI, §§ 22-301—22-308 at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 22-301. - Created. 
There is hereby created an advisory committee to be known as the beach stewardship committee. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, § 1, 7-13-04)  
Sec. 22-302. - Number of members; compensation. 
The beach stewardship committee shall consist of five members who shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, § 1, 7-13-04)  
Sec. 22-303. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  Members of the beach stewardship committee shall be duly qualified voters of the city. 
(b)  All members shall reside permanently within the city at all times during their terms of office, and abandonment of residency within the city limits shall automatically constitute a forfeiture of office. 
(c)  No member shall hold any other public position in the city. 
(d)  The city commission shall appoint only those persons whose personal and private interests are not likely to conflict with that of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, § 1, 7-13-04)  
Sec. 22-304. - Appointments. 
(a)  Each city commissioner and the mayor-commissioner shall appoint one member to serve on the beach stewardship committee. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election, or at the first regularly scheduled meeting after the city commission meeting where newly elected commissioners are sworn in to office, whichever is later. Provided, however, that if the city commission fails for any reason to appoint members prior to a duly scheduled meeting of the committee, then those members previously appointed shall continue to act for a period of time not to exceed 60 days following the general election. 
(c)  Appointments by commission members shall not be restricted by municipal district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, § 1, 7-13-04)  
Sec. 22-305. - Terms of office. 
The terms of office of members of the beach stewardship committee shall run concurrently with the terms of the commission and of the mayor appointing that member whether the appointment is made at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election or at any time thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, § 1, 7-13-04)  
Sec. 22-306. - Election of officers; conduct of meetings. 
(a)  The beach stewardship committee shall, annually, at the first meeting held following the appointment of members, organize by electing a chairman and vice-chairman and such other officers as may be deemed necessary from among its members. 
(b)  The committee shall meet quarterly, with the time and place to be established by majority vote of the regular members. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(c)  Special meetings may be called and held upon the request of the chairman, city commission, city manager or by any three of the five regular members subject to 24 hours notice. 
(d)  A quorum for the conduct of business shall not be less than three-fifths of the membership. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 08-28, § 5, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 22-307. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Members of the beach stewardship committee shall be subject to removal from office by the city commission for nonfeasance, malfeasance, misfeasance or other good cause shown to the city commission. 
(b)  Any member who fails to attend three successive regular meetings shall forfeit membership on the committee, and a replacement shall be named by the mayor or city commissioner as required. The chairman may excuse any member from attending meetings upon request. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, § 1, 7-13-04)  
Sec. 22-308. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The committee shall adopt such other rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary and appropriate for the proper administration and enforcement of this article. Such rules and regulations shall conform to this article, shall govern and control the procedures, hearings and actions of the board, and shall be consistent with the Charter, Code and laws of the State of Florida. 
(b)  The committee shall review information related to the ongoing beach nourishment efforts throughout the city. 
(c)  The committee shall evaluate information relating to the preservation and maintenance of the public beaches in St. Pete Beach and make recommendations to the city commission regarding these matters. 
(Ord. No. 04-17, § 1, 7-13-04)  
Sec. 22-309. - Staff participation and responsibilities. 
The city shall make available staff to assist the beach stewardship committee in the performance of its duties. Responsibilities will include the recording and transcribing of the minutes of all meetings of the committee. All meetings of the committee shall be open to the public. A public record of the committee's minutes and resolutions shall be maintained and made available for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. No. 08-28, § 5, 8-12-08)  
Chapter 26 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages in public places prohibited, § 6-5; adult entertainment establishments, § 10-26 et seq.; cable communications, ch. 30; alarm systems, § 42-26 et seq.; distribution of handbills restricted, § 46-1; noise regulations, § 46-131 et seq.; sale or possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited, § 54-8; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 62; contracts required for private collectors of solid waste, § 70-126; placement of newspaper racks in right-of-way, § 74-61; insurance premium taxes, § 78-26 et seq.; tax on casualty insurance, § 78-27; occupational license tax, § 78-91 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; signs, ch. 122; zoning district regulations, § 134-206 et seq.; home occupations, § 134-1196 et seq.; automobile service station zoning restrictions, § 134-1197; alcoholic beverage sales zoning restriction, § 134-1198; tourist lodging facilities, § 134-1199; off-street parking and loading facilities, § 134-1331 et seq.; landscaping requirements, § 134-1376 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Registration of unlicensed businesses. 
(a)  Every business, occupation or profession not licensed under section 78-96 that desires to do business within the city shall register the business, occupation or profession provided that no business, occupation or profession shall be required to register under this section if it has been exempted from regulation by any state law or county Charter provision. Such registration is a privilege of doing business in the city subject to revocation or suspension as provided in section 78-106. Businesses operating in association with city sponsored special events may be exempted from this requirement upon approval of the city manager. 
(b)  A regulatory fee, commensurate with the cost of this regulatory activity, is levied on each business, occupation or profession registering with the department of planning and development. The fee shall be set by resolution of the city commission and is listed in Appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 13-01; Ord. No. 81-40, §§ 1, 2; Code 1983, §§ 11-4, 11-41(b); Ord. No. 85-31, § 1, 6-18-85; Ord. No. 87-36, § 1, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 95-20, § 1, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 95-50, § 1, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 08-20, § 1, 5-13-08) 
Cross reference— Occupational license tax, § 78-91 et seq. 
State Law reference— Regulatory fees authorized, F.S. § 166.221.  
Sec. 26-2. - Identification of commercial vehicles. 
(a)  As used in this section the term "commercial vehicle" shall mean any vehicle which is used in connection with or which is used for any business or commercial purpose whatsoever. A commercial vehicle may be motorized or nonmotorized. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street, highway, road or right-of-way located within the city any commercial vehicle, unless the vehicle is identified in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section, except vehicles for hire, as defined in section 90-1, for which a business permit has been obtained from the city and which has appropriate identification as designated by the department of planning and development affixed to each vehicle. 
(c)  Commercial vehicles shall be identified on both the right and left sides of the vehicle. The name of the company or firm operating the vehicle shall be neatly and permanently painted on the vehicle or on an attached plate, in contrasting color from the vehicle or plate, in letters not less than three inches in height and displayed in such a manner that either the painting or nameplate shall be legible at all times. 
(d)  This section shall apply to any commercial vehicle operated within the city, when the purpose for the commercial vehicle being within the city limits relates to any business or commercial purpose, except vehicles for hire as identified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1960, § 24-6; Ord. No. 274, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 303, §§ 1—5; Code 1983, § 11-5; Ord. No. 84-29, § 1, 6-5-84) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Identification of commercial vehicle, F.S. § 316.3027.  
Secs. 26-3—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-27, § 1, adopted July 7, 1998, repealed Art. II, §§ 26-31—26-33, which pertained to special event permits. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted provisions codified herein as a new Art. II, §§ 26-31—26-35. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainment, ch. 10; aircraft regulations, § 18-26 et seq.; permits required for outdoor loudspeakers and sound amplifiers, § 46-146; parks and recreation, ch. 58; streets and sidewalks, ch. 74; sidewalk sale permits, § 74-33; watercraft, § 94-31 et seq.; beaches, § 94-66 et seq.; zoning district regulations, § 134-206 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this article, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
Co-sponsorship shall mean any request to the city commission for a contribution of in-kind services from any department of the city, the use of city equipment or facilities, cash in support of a special event. 
Special event, in general, shall mean: 
(1)  Any temporary activity conducted on private property or on a public area for a commercial, public or charitable purpose which is not authorized by any ordinance of the city; or 
(2)  Any temporary activity conducted on private property which is not customarily conducted where the temporary activity is planned nor authorized by the occupational license issued for any business which may be operating on the property where the activity is planned; or 
(3)  Any other temporary activity which may require the approval of the city manager or the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 2, 7-7-98)  
Sec. 26-32. - Special event permit required. 
No special event shall be permitted within the city limits of St. Pete Beach unless and until a special event permit has been issued in accordance with the requirements of this article. It shall be the authority of the city manager, or his/her designee, to determine whether or not a proposed activity constitutes a special event under the intent of this article and whether an application for the activity will be accepted. This requirement shall not apply to events which are sponsored or co-sponsored by the city. Approval of such sponsorship shall be at the discretion of the city manager or city commission, provided, however, that if an event is open to the entire community, the city commission shall grant such approval, as applicable. City sponsored or co-sponsored events may take place on public property, or private property with the consent of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 2, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 08-20, § 2, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 26-33. - Special event application and requirements. 
(a)  A special event permit shall be issued only to an applicant: 
(1)  Who is either the owner of the property upon which the event is planned to take place; or 
(2)  Who is the lessee thereof and is authorized to apply from the property owner, or 
(3)  Who can verify that she/he is in charge of the special event and shall be responsible for compliance with the terms of the special event permit. 
(b)  A special event permit shall not be issued unless the city finds that the activity which is the subject of the application for the special event permit shall not violate any other laws or ordinances of the city nor result in any condition that may be a threat to the public safety or welfare; provided the city commission or city manager may waive the application of specific ordinances as a condition of the permit if the following findings are made: 
(1)  That the public safety, health and welfare are not adversely affected by the waiver; 
(2)  That there is a public benefit resulting from the waiver. 
(c)  If a planned special event requires approval by any county, state or federal agency or department or is seeking approval of a co-sponsorship from the city commission, those approvals shall be the responsibility of the applicant and no special event permit shall be issued until all approvals have [been] documented. 
(d)  If any city commission actions are required in connection with a planned special event, the application for the permit shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the date of the planned event. Applications for issuance of a special permit that do not require commission approval shall be filed no later than 14 days prior to the scheduled event. 
(e)  No special event shall receive a permit to exceed 14 days in duration. 
(f)  Appeal from city manager' decision. The applicant may appeal the city manager's special event permit decision to the city commission. The appeal shall be filed with the city commission no later than 30 days from written notice of the decision, and upon timely filing of the appeal, the city commission shall review the city manager's decision and take action to affirm, reverse or modify that decision. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 2, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 99-30, § 1, 5-18-99)  
Sec. 26-34. - Permit fees. 
The special event permit fees shall be as set forth in Schedule A that is attached to this ordinance. [See Appendix A.] Special event permit fees may be waived for a not for profit corporation or association which is engaged in charitable, educational or community service purposes; but only upon written request submitted at the time of the application for the special event permit. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 2, 7-7-98)  
Sec. 26-35. - Revocation or suspension of special event permit. 
Revocation or suspension of a special event permit shall be governed by the procedure set forth in section 78-106 and 78-17 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 98-27, § 2, 7-7-98)  
Secs. 26-36—26-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE AND GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Peddlers and solicitors, ch. 62; supplementary district regulations for businesses and similar activity, § 134-1196 et seq. 
State Law reference— Fire and going out of business sales, F.S. § 559.20 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water, or other means. 
Going out of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that, upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: adjusters, adjustment, alteration, assignees, bankrupt, benefit of administrators, benefit of creditors, benefit of trustees, building coming down, closing, creditor's committee, creditors, end, executors, final days, forced out of business, insolvents, last days, lease expires, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustees, quitting business, removal. Any sale using any of the words or words of similar import in this definition, at the conclusion of which sale the business will not cease and be discontinued, and not publishing that fact or the qualified nature of the sale with equal prominence with each advertisement of such sale shall be deemed to be a going out of business sale. 
Goods includes any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this article. 
Publish, publishing, advertising and advertisement include any and all means of conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of intention to conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, by newspaper advertisement, by magazine advertisement, by handbill, by written notice, by printed display, by billboard display, by poster, by radio announcement, and any and all means including oral, written, or printed. 
(Code 1983, § 11-126) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 559.20.  
Sec. 26-67. - Business permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to conduct a fire and other altered goods sale or going out of business sale, as defined in section 26-66, without first obtaining a business permit from the city. Section 78-101 shall apply to such permit, except where inconsistent with this article. The fees for such permit shall be established by resolution of the city commission and are listed in appendix A to this Code. Fees shall be established for the following: 
(1)  First 60 days. 
(2)  Additional 15 days. 
(Code 1960, § 13-28; Ord. No. 220, § 1; Code 1983, §§ 11-128, 11-74(32))  
Sec. 26-68. - Application. 
(a)  A person may not publish or conduct any sale of the type defined in this article without a permit as required in section 26-67. Such permit shall be issued by the city licensing official, upon written application and verified by the person who or by an officer of the corporation which intends to conduct such sale. Such application shall contain a description of the place where such sale is to be held, the nature of the occupancy and whether by lease or sublease and the effective date of termination of such occupancy, and the means to be employed in publishing such sale. Such application shall further contain, as part thereof, an itemized list of the goods, wares, and merchandise to be offered for sale as provided in section 26-70. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such application and payment of the tax provided in section 78-110, the city licensing official shall examine the application and may make such investigation as may be deemed proper. If after such investigation he is satisfied as to the truth of the statements contained in such application, the city licensing official may issue a permit permitting the publication and conduct of such sale on the following terms: 
(1)  The permit shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than 60 consecutive days, counting Sundays and legal holidays following the issuance thereof. 
(2)  The permit shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(3)  The permit shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(4)  Upon being issued a permit for a going out of business sale, the permittee shall surrender to the city licensing official all other business licenses he may hold at that time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a permit. 
(5)  The permit shall not be assignable or transferable. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 559.21.  
Sec. 26-69. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officers, such as sheriffs and marshals, and similar public officers. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction. 
(Code 1960, § 13-36; Ord. No. 220, § 9; Code 1983, § 11-127) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 559.25.  
Sec. 26-70. - Inventory to be filed. 
(a)  At the time of applying for a business permit under this article, such person shall file with the city licensing official an inventory containing a complete and accurate list of all goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for sale at such sale. Such inventory shall be signed by the person seeking the permit if it is sought by an individual or by a member of the firm seeking the permit where the permit is sought by a corporation. 
(b)  The person signing such inventory shall execute an affidavit to the effect that the inventory submitted contains a full, true and accurate list of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for sale. 
(Code 1960, §§ 13-30, 13-31; Ord. No. 220, §§ 3, 4; Code 1983, § 11-129)  
Sec. 26-71. - Term of business permit. 
Notwithstanding other sections of this Code, no business permit shall be issued to any person to conduct a fire and other altered goods sale or going out of business sale for a period of more than 60 days. The city manager may, upon proper showing of the amount of stock sold during such sale and the amount remaining, reissue a permit for an additional 15 days. At the expiration of the period covered by the permit, the regular permit previously held shall become void. 
(Code 1960, § 13-32; Ord. No. 220, § 5; Code 1983, § 11-130)  
Sec. 26-72. - Display of permit; advertising; records. 
(a)  Under this article, upon commencement of a sale, the permit issued shall be prominently displayed near the entrance to the premises. Duplicate originals of the application, the stock list pursuant to which the permit was issued and the permit shall be forwarded to the city licensing official, who may examine all merchandise in the premises for comparison with the stock list. 
(b)  All advertisements or advertising and the language contained therein must be in accordance with the purpose of the sale, as stated in the application pursuant to which a permit was issued and the wording as indicated in the application. Such advertising must contain a statement in these words and no others: 
Sale held pursuant to _____ sale no. _____ granted the ___ day of _______. (In such blank spaces shall be indicated the type of sale, the permit number and the requisite dates.) 
(c)  Suitable books and records as prescribed by the city shall be kept by the permittee and shall during business hours be available to the city. At the close of business each day, the stock list attached to the application shall be revised, and those items disposed of during such day shall be so marked thereon. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 559.24.  
Sec. 26-73. - Duties of permittee. 
A permittee under this article shall: 
(1)  Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of authorized sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for the permit. 
(2)  Specify the registration or permit number of the permit issued by the city within any advertising of the sale. 
(3)  Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising. 
(4)  Conduct the authorized sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 559.22.  
Sec. 26-74. - Sale of goods not in inventory prohibited. 
During the progress of any fire and other altered goods sale or going out of business sale, it shall be unlawful for the person conducting such sale to offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise other than those shown by the original inventory filed with the city licensing official at the time of making application for the permit required by this article. 
(Code 1960, § 13-33; Ord. No. 220, § 6; Code 1983, § 11-131)  
Sec. 26-75. - Replenishment of stock prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make replenishments or additions to the stock of goods, wares or merchandise during the continuance of any fire and other altered goods sale or going out of business sale. 
(Code 1960, § 13-34; Ord. No. 220, § 7; Code 1983, § 11-132) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 559.22(1).  
Sec. 26-76. - Record of articles sold. 
The person conducting any fire and other altered goods or going out of business sale shall keep an accurate record of all articles or things sold, which record shall be available at all reasonable hours for the inspection of the city licensing official. 
(Code 1960, § 13-35; Ord. No. 220, § 8; Code 1983, § 11-133)  
Secs. 26-77—26-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FOOD AND BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; food products, F.S. ch. 500; food and food service establishments, F.S. ch. 509. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 26-106—26-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NUDITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Nudity prohibited in alcoholic beverage establishments, § 6-66 et seq.; adult entertainment establishments, § 10-26 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-136. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business includes every kind of commercial establishment, occupation, calling or operation of institutions where members of the public are served food or beverages. 
(Code 1960, § 16-5.5; Ord. No. 326, § 7; Code 1983, § 12-3(c)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-137. - Findings. 
The city commission finds that there is a concern among city law enforcement officials that there is an increasing trend toward nudity by owners and employees of businesses serving food and beverages to the public and that such activities and such competitive commercial exploitation of nudity is adverse to the public health, peace, morals and good order and that it is in the best interest of the public health, safety and convenience to restrict such nudity and the commercial promotion and exploitation thereof, as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1960, § 16-5.5; Ord. No. 326, § 7; Code 1983, § 12-3(a))  
Sec. 26-138. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to proscribe conduct and activities which encourage competitive commercial exploitation of nudity, where such conduct and activity is not related to any live act, demonstration, exhibition, performance or entertainment which may be protected by the United States Constitution and state constitutional provisions guaranteeing freedom of expression. 
(Code 1960, § 16-5.5; Ord. No. 326, § 7; Code 1983, § 12-3(b))  
Sec. 26-139. - Unlawful conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a business, as defined in section 26-136, to suffer, permit, require or otherwise direct any person, while serving food or beverages to any customer or while seating or directing customers to seats within any business to expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic hair region or cleavage of the buttocks or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, where the areola and nipple are not covered by a less than fully opaque covering. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while serving food, drink or alcoholic beverages or while seating or directing customers to seats within any business, to expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic hair region or cleavage of the buttocks or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, where the areola and nipple are not covered by a less than opaque covering. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a business to suffer, permit, require or otherwise direct any other person, while the person is mingling, coming in contact with or likely to come in contact with or in close proximity to customers of the business, within areas where food or beverages are served, to expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic hair region or cleavage of the buttocks or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, where the areola and nipple are not covered by a less than fully opaque covering. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person while mingling, coming in contact with or likely to come in contact with or in close proximity to customers of the business, within areas where food or beverages are served, to expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic hair region or buttocks or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, where the areola and nipple are not covered by a less than fully opaque covering. 
(e)  Subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall not apply to persons participating in any live act, demonstration, exhibition or performance within a specifically defined area designated for such activity, which area shall be at least three feet from the nearest table, chair or other accommodation where food or beverages are served. This exception shall not be construed to permit or authorize any live act, demonstration, exhibition or performance which may be obscene or otherwise violative of the laws of the state or any political subdivision thereof, as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1960, § 16-5.5; Ord. No. 326, § 7; Code 1983, § 12-3(d)—(h)) 
Cross reference— Nudity prohibited in alcoholic beverage establishments, §§ 6-69, 10-233.  
Sec. 26-140. - Violations; revocation of business permit; injunctive relief. 
(a)  Upon conviction of any person of a violation of subsection 26-139(a), the privilege of doing business of the business where the violation took place shall be automatically suspended, provided that: 
(1)  Within 30 days of a conviction of any person of a violation of subsection 26-139(a), the city commission shall hold a hearing wherein the person shall have an opportunity to appear before the city commission to show cause why the privilege of doing business shall not be suspended for a definite time period or revoked. 
(2)  Upon completion of the hearing, the city commission shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Reinstate the privilege of doing business of the business, subject to such conditions as shall be deemed reasonably necessary by the city commission to ensure compliance with this division. 
b.  Suspend the privilege of doing business of the business for a period of time to be determined by the city commission, not to exceed one year. 
c.  Revoke the privilege of doing business of the business. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties for violation of this division, the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief against any person violating this division. If the city is successful in obtaining injunctive relief against a violation of this division, the party so enjoined shall be required to pay a reasonable attorney's fee to the city to compensate the city for the expense incurred in enjoining the violation. 
(Code 1960, § 16-5.5; Ord. No. 326, § 7; Code 1983, § 12-3(i), (j))  
Secs. 26-141—26-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SECONDHAND DEALERS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Restrictions on keeping junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 46-96 et seq.; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Home solicitation sales, F.S. § 501.021 et seq.; secondhand dealers, F.S. § 538.03 et seq.; pawnbrokers act, F.S. § 539.001. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in the business of lending money on personal property, which property is delivered to the pawnee as security for the loan. 
Secondhand dealer means any person who is engaged in the business of purchasing, consigning or pawning secondhand goods or entering into title loan transactions. The term means pawnbrokers, jewelers, precious metals dealers, secondhand stores, and consignment shops. 
(Code 1960, § 13-11(a); Ord. No. 9, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 81-52, §§ 1—3; Code 1983, § 11-111) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 26-172—26-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 26-201. - False identification. 
Under this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to give or display false identification to the person completing the registration certificate or for any person to sign fictitious or false names to the registration certificate. 
(Code 1960, § 13-11(b), (e), (f); Ord. No. 9, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 81-52, §§ 1—3; Code 1983, § 11-112(c)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 538.04.  
Sec. 26-202. - Recordkeeping requirements. 
(a)  Secondhand dealers shall maintain records of all transactions of secondhand goods on the premises. Within 24 hours of the acquisition of any secondhand goods by purchase or pledge as security for a loan, a secondhand dealer shall deliver to the police department a record of the transaction on a form approved by the state department of law enforcement. Such record shall contain the following: 
(1)  The time, date, and place of the transaction. 
(2)  A complete and accurate description of the goods acquired, including any serial numbers, manufacturer's numbers, or other identifying marks or characteristics. 
(3)  A description of the person from whom the goods were acquired, including: 
a.  Full name, address, workplace, and home and work phone numbers. 
b.  Height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair color, eye color, and any other identifying marks. 
(4)  Any other information required by the form approved by the state department of law enforcement. 
(b)  The secondhand dealer shall require verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued photographic identification card such as a driver's license or military identification card. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon. 
(c)  The seller shall sign a statement verifying that the seller is the rightful owner of the goods or is entitled to sell or pledge the goods. 
(Code 1960, § 13-11(b), (e), (f); Ord. No. 9, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 81-52, §§ 1—3; Code 1983, § 11-112)  
Sec. 26-203. - Arrangement of stock to facilitate inspection. 
All articles purchased or received by pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers shall be arranged in stock to enable the article to be inspected by the police department or any other person in authority. 
(Code 1960, § 13-11(c); Ord. No. 9, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 81-52, §§ 1—3; Code 1983, § 11-113)  
Sec. 26-204. - Inspection of records and premises. 
(a)  The premises and required records of each secondhand dealer are subject to inspection during regular business hours by the police department and by any state law enforcement officer who has jurisdiction over the dealer. 
(b)  The inspection authorized by subsection (a) of this section shall consist of an examination on the premises of the inventory and required records to determine whether the records and inventory are being maintained on the premises as required by section 26-202 and whether the holding period required by section 26-205 is being complied with. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 538.05.  
Sec. 26-205. - Holding period. 
(a)  A secondhand dealer shall not sell, barter, exchange, alter, adulterate or in any way dispose of any secondhand goods within 15 calendar days of the date of acquisition of the goods. Such holding periods are not applicable when the person known by the secondhand dealer to be the person from whom the goods were acquired desires to redeem, repurchase, or recover the goods, provided the dealer can produce the record of the original transaction with verification that the customer is the person from whom the goods were originally acquired. 
(b)  A secondhand dealer must maintain actual physical possession of all secondhand goods throughout a transaction. It is unlawful for a secondhand dealer to accept title or any other form of security in secondhand goods in lieu of actual physical possession. 
(c)  Upon probable cause that goods held by a secondhand dealer are stolen, a police officer may extend the holding period to a maximum of 60 days. The holding period may be extended beyond 60 days by a court of competent jurisdiction upon a finding of probable cause that the property is stolen and further holding is necessary for the purposes of trial or to safeguard such property. The dealer shall assume all responsibility, civil or criminal, relative to the property or evidence in question, including responsibility for the actions of any employee with respect thereto. 
(d)  All dealers in secondhand property regulated by this article and F.S. ch. 538 shall maintain transaction records for five years. 
(e)  Subject to the restrictions in section 26-206, a secondhand dealer may engage in a title loan transaction, and the physical possession requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall not apply if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The secondhand dealer maintains physical possession of the motor vehicle title. 
(2)  The owner maintains possession of or control over the motor vehicle throughout the transaction. 
(3)  The owner is not required to pay rent or any other charge for the use of the motor vehicle. 
(4)  A secondhand dealer who engages in a motor vehicle title loan transaction has the right to repossess the motor vehicle upon failure of the owner to redeem the title. The secondhand dealer shall only repossess a motor vehicle through an agent who is licensed by the state to repossess motor vehicles. The secondhand dealer may dispose of the motor vehicle as provided in F.S. § 538.16. However, any sale or disposal of the motor vehicle shall be made through a motor vehicle dealer licensed under F.S. § 320.27. 
(5)  A secondhand dealer who accepts a motor vehicle title in a title loan transaction may charge a maximum fee of 22 percent per month. 
(6)  No charges other than those charges permitted in subsection (e)(5) of this section shall be allowed, and the charges shall be fully disclosed, conspicuously in writing, and initialed by the motor vehicle owner at the initiation of the transaction. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 538.06.  
Sec. 26-206. - Certain acts and practices prohibited. 
It is unlawful for a secondhand dealer or any employee thereof to do or allow any of the following acts: 
(1)  Knowingly make a transaction with: 
a.  Any person who is under the influence of drugs or alcohol when such condition is visible or apparent; 
b.  Any person under the age of 18 years; or 
c.  Any person using a name other than his own name or the registered name of his business. 
(2)  Have a secondhand store open or engage in or conduct business as a secondhand dealer between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. A secondhand dealer shall not conduct any transaction at a drive-through window or similar device. 
(3)  Fail to have a state sales tax registration number. 
(Code 1960, § 13-11(d); Ord. No. 9, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 81-52, §§ 1—3; Code 1983, § 11-114) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 538.15; age of majority, F.S. § 743.07.  
Chapter 30 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; utilities, ch. 86. 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Basic cable rates means the monthly charges for a subscription to the basic service tier and the associated equipment. 
Basic service tier means a separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including as a minimum but not limited to all must-carry signals, and PEG channels required by the franchise to be carried in the basic tier, and all domestic television signals other than superstations. 
Benchmark means a per-channel rate of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the FCC has determined is reasonable. 
Cable act of 1992 or act means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992. 
Cable operator means any person or group of persons who: 
(1)  Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable system; or 
(2)  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
Cable system or cable television system means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that services only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management, unless such facility uses any public right-of-way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title 11 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or 
(4)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
Channel means a unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation. 
Cost of service showing means a filing in which the cable operator attempts to show that the benchmark rate or the price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier and to continue to attract capital. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Initial basic cable rates means the rates that the cable operator is charging for the basic service tier, including charges for associated equipment, at the time the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and intent to regulate basic cable rates. 
Must-carry signal means the signal of any local broadcast station, except superstations, which is required to be carried on the basic service tier. 
PEG channel means the channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use and facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity. 
Price cap means the ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city, based on a formula using the GNP fixed weight price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and changes in overall inflation. 
Reasonable rate standard means a per-channel rate that is at or below the benchmark or price cap level. 
Regulations mean the federal regulations promulgated pursuant to the act. 
Superstation means any nonlocal broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by satellite, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system. 
(Code 1983, § 6.5-31; Ord. No. 94-8, § 1, 4-5-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-2. - Cumulative effect of chapter. 
This chapter shall be cumulative with respect to any other federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation regarding cable television. 
(Code 1983, § 6.5-38; Ord. No. 94-8, § 1, 4-5-94)  
Sec. 30-3. - Intent, supplemental procedures and federal regulations. 
(a)  Definition. The term "supplemental," as used in this section, means that which is not delineated in sections 30-1 and 30-4 through 30-6 and which is present in the act and the regulations. 
(b)  Intent. The intent of sections 30-1 and 30-4 through 30-6 is to conform to the provisions of the act and the regulations. Any ambiguity in this chapter should be resolved in favor of the interpretation that is consistent with the act and regulations. 
(c)  Supplemental procedures. Any supplemental procedures available to franchising authorities pursuant to the act and the regulations are adopted and may be used by city commission as its procedures. 
(d)  Federal regulations. Any supplemental powers available to franchising authorities pursuant to the act or the regulations are adopted and may be exercised by the city as its powers. 
(Code 1983, § 6.5-35; Ord. No. 94-8, § 1, 4-5-94)  
Sec. 30-4. - Initial review of basic cable rates. 
(a)  Notice. The city shall notify all cable operators in the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the city intends to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated equipment as authorized by the cable act of 1992. 
(b)  Cable operator response. Within 30 days of receiving notice from the city, a cable operator shall file with the city its current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material concerning the reasonableness of its rates. 
(c)  Expedited determination and public hearing. 
(1)  If the city commission is able expeditiously to determine that the cable operator's rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment are within the FCC's reasonable rate standards, as determined by the applicable benchmark, the city commission shall: 
a.  Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views. 
b.  Act to approve the rates within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city. 
(2)  If the city commission takes no action within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic rates with the city, the existing rates will continue in effect. 
(d)  Extended review period. 
(1)  If the city commission is unable to determine whether the rates in issue are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material before it or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city commission shall, within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city and by adoption of a formal resolution, toll the 30-day deadline and invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination: 
a.  Ninety days if the city commission needs more time to ensure that a rate is within the FCC's reasonable rate standards; or 
b.  One hundred fifty days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate above the applicable benchmark. 
(2)  If the city commission has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-day period, the existing rates shall remain in effect and the city commission shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the existing rate and on whose behalf the amounts are paid. 
(e)  Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the proposed rate, the city commission shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections. 
(f)  Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed initial rate may request the city clerk to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing any time before the decision resolution is adopted. 
(g)  Benchmark analysis. If a cable operator submits its current cable rate schedule as being in compliance with the FCC's reasonable rate standard, the city commission shall review the rates using the benchmark analysis in accordance with the standard from authorized by the FCC. Based on the city commission's findings, the initial basic cable rates shall be established as follows: 
(1)  If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those rates shall become the initial cable rates and the cable operator's rates will be capped at that level. 
(2)  If the current basic rates exceed the benchmark, the rates shall be the greater of the cable operator's per-channel rate on September 30, 1993, reduced by ten percent or the applicable benchmark, adjusted for inflation and any change in the number of channels occurring between September 30, 1992, and the initial date of regulation. 
(3)  If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the cable operator's per-channel rate was below the benchmark on September 30, 1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark, adjusted for inflation. 
(h)  Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce the rates to the permitted level, the cable operator shall have the opportunity to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify an initial basic cable rate above the FCC's reasonable rate standard. The city commission will review a cost-of-service submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city commission may approve initial basic cable rates above the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary showing. If a cost-of-service determination results in rates below the benchmark, city commission may set the rates at such lower level. Any rate set on a cost-of-service showing shall be subject to any maximum or minimum rate requirements that may be dictated by the act and the regulations. 
(i)  Decisions. 
(1)  Formal resolution. After completion of its review of the cable operator's proposed rates, the city commission shall adopt its decision by formal resolution. The decision shall include of the following: 
a.  If the proposal is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or is justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the city commission shall approve the initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable operator; or 
b.  If the proposal is not within the FCC's reasonable rate standard and the cost-of-service analysis, if any, does not justify the proposed rates, the city commission shall establish initial basic cable rates that are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a cost-of-service analysis. 
(2)  Rollbacks and refunds. If the city commission determines that the initial basic cable rates as submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or that the cable operator's cost-of-service showing justified lower rates, the city commission may order the rates reduced in accordance with subsection (g) or (h) of this section, as applicable. In addition, the city commission may order the cable operator to pay to subscribers refunds of the excessive portion of the rates with interest, computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments, retroactive to September 1, 1993. The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city commission's decision resolution. 
(3)  Statement of reason for decision and public notice. If rates proposed by a cable operator are disapproved in whole or in part or if there were objections made by other parties to the proposed rates, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision and the city commission must give notice of its decision. Public notice of the decision shall be given by the city. 
(j)  Appeal. The city commission's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 6.5-32; Ord. No. 94-8, § 1, 4-5-94)  
Sec. 30-5. - Review of request for increase in basic cable rates. 
(a)  Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall file a request with the city and notify all subscribers at least 30 days before the cable operator desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often than is permitted by FCC rules. 
(b)  Expedited determination and public hearing. 
(1)  If the city commission is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rate increase request for basic cable service is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap, the city commission shall: 
a.  Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and 
b.  Act to approve the rate increase within 30 days from the date the cable operator files its request with the city. 
(2)  If the city commission takes no action within 30 days from the date the cable operator files its request with the city, the proposed rates will go into effect. 
(c)  Extended review period. 
(1)  If the city commission is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material before it or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city commission shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, toll the 30-day deadline and invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final decision: 
a.  Ninety days if the city commission is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap; and 
b.  One hundred fifty days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate increase above the applicable price cap. 
(2)  The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review period. 
(3)  If the city commission has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-day period, the proposed rates may be put into effect by the cable operator, and the city commission shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the rate increase if it is put into effect and on whose behalf the amounts are paid. 
(d)  Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the requested rate increase, the city commission shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections. 
(e)  Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed rate increase may request the city clerk to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing any time before the decision resolution is adopted. 
(f)  Delayed determination. If the city commission is unable to make a final determination concerning a requested rate increase within the extended time period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to subsequent refund if the city commission later issues a decision disapproving any portion of the increase. 
(g)  Price cap analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC's price cap, the city commission shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city commission's findings, the basic cable rates shall be established as follows: 
(1)  If the proposed basic cable rate increase does not exceed the price cap established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new basic cable rate. 
(2)  If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap established by the FCC, the city commission shall disapprove the proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap. 
(h)  Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price cap, the city commission will review the submission pursuant to the FCC's standards for cost-of-service review. The city commission may approve a rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary showing or a rate below the price cap if that is the result of the cost-of-service review. Any rate set on a cost-of-service showing shall be subject to any maximum rate requirements that may be dictated by the act or the regulations. 
(i)  Refunds. 
(1)  The city commission may order refunds of subscribers' rate payments with interest if: 
a.  The city commission was unable to make a decision within the extended time period as described in subsection (c) of this section; 
b.  The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the extended review period; and 
c.  The city commission determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds the applicable price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the city commission disapproves any portion of the rate increase. 
(2)  The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city commission's decision resolution. 
(j)  Appeal. The city commission's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 6.5-33; Ord. No. 94-8, § 1, 4-5-94)  
Sec. 30-6. - Cable operator information. 
(a)  Generally. Information may be required of a cable operator as follows: 
(1)  If the cable operator has submitted initial rates or proposed an increase that exceeds the reasonable rate standard, the city commission may require the cable operator to produce information in addition to that submitted, including proprietary information, if needed to make a rate determination. In these cases, a cable operator may request the information be kept confidential in accordance with this section. 
(2)  If initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable rate standard, the city commission may request additional information only in order to document that the cable operator's rates are in accord with the standard. 
(b)  Request for confidentiality. 
(1)  A cable operator submitting information to the city commission may withhold information pending a disposition of a request in writing that the information not be made routinely available for public inspection. 
(2)  Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for requesting the withholding of the records from inspection and a statement of the facts upon which those reasons are based. 
(c)  City commission action. Requests which comply with the requirements of subsection (b) of this section will be acted upon by the city commission. The city commission will grant the request if permitted to do so by state law and if the cable operator presents, by a preponderance of the evidence, a case for nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the request is granted, the information shall be submitted to the city and the ruling will be placed in a public file in lieu of the information withheld from public inspection. If the city commission denies the request, the city commission shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  If the information was to have been submitted voluntarily without any direction from the city, the cable operator may continue to withhold the information unless the city commission requires the cable operator to submit the information after a finding by city commission that the public interest requires the information to be submitted and disclosed. 
(2)  If the information was required to be submitted by the city commission, the information shall be submitted to city commission and will be made available for public inspection. 
(d)  Appeal. If the city commission denies the request for confidentiality, the cable operator may seek review of that decision from the FCC within five working days of the city commissions's decision, and the city commission's decision will be stayed pending review. 
(Code 1983, § 6.5-34; Ord. No. 94-8, § 1, 4-5-94)  
Sec. 30-7. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Refunds. The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under the following circumstances: 
(1)  A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment; or 
(2)  The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city. 
(b)  Fines. If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order, the cable operator shall be subject to a fine of $500.00 for each day the cable operator fails to comply. 
(Code 1983, § 6.5-36; Ord. No. 94-8, § 1, 4-5-94)  
Chapter 34 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Water shortage regulations, § 86-61. 
State Law reference— Emergency management, F.S. ch. 252; declaration of state of emergency, F.S. § 870.041 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Hurricane operations standard operating procedure. 
(a)  On file in the city clerk's office is the "Hurricane Operations—Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)" written policy statement that is adopted as the official policy to be followed by city departments and officials of the city government. 
(b)  Each department shall prepare an "annex" which shall be approved by the city manager as an administrative regulation supplementing the "Hurricane Operations—Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)." 
(Code 1983, § 2-6; Ord. No. 85-40, §§ 1, 2, 8-30-85; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 1-19-93) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; watercraft, § 94-31 et seq.; beaches, § 94-66 et seq.  
Secs. 34-2—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency means a condition which threatens or adversely affects the public health, safety or security and which threatens to be beyond the control of those public and private agencies normally responsible for the management of such a condition, resulting from an act or threatened act of war, riot, terrorism, mob or other act of violence; from a weather event such as lightning, flood, hurricane, cyclone, tornado or waterspout; from a disruption in the city's utility system; hazardous waste spill; or from any other cause. 
Emergency interim successor means a person designated pursuant to this article for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties but not the office of an officer if such officer or a duly authorized deputy is unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office. 
Normal average retail price means the price at retail for merchandise; goods or services at which similar merchandise, goods or services were being sold during the 90 days immediately preceding a declaration of public emergency. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-3; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-32. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to designate a city official to declare a local state of emergency to enable the timely and effective use of all available city resources to prepare for, respond to and recover from a natural or manmade disaster or emergency or the imminent threat thereof likely to affect the security, safety or health of the city and its residents, whether such events occur within or without the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be intended to relieve city departments of their normally assigned duties, responsibilities and functions. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as a delegation of authority to abridge or diminish the legislative or administrative powers of the city commission. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-1; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 34-33. - Legislative authority. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by F.S. § 252.38. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-2; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 34-34. - Applicability of article. 
All officers, employees, contractors, vendors, boards, commissions, authorities and other agencies of the city are subject to this article. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-4; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 34-35. - Director of emergency management. 
(a)  The city manager shall perform the function of director of emergency management and shall implement, manage and report on all actions authorized and taken under this article. 
(b)  The city manager, when acting as the director of emergency management, shall have the power, duty and responsibility to: 
(1)  Direct the creation, revision, and exercise of emergency response plans conforming to state and county emergency plans for the mitigation of, preparation for, response to and recovery from emergencies. 
(2)  Direct the efforts of the emergency management coordinating committee in the preparation for, response to and recovery from emergency conditions. 
(3)  Recommend a budget for the creation and maintenance of an emergency response capability as provided in this article. 
(4)  Promulgate emergency regulations necessary to the protection of life and property, establishment of public order, and control of adverse conditions affecting public welfare resulting from an emergency. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-5; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 34-36. - Coordinator of emergency services. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint a coordinator of emergency services whose duties shall include the ongoing planning for a coordination of those actions necessary to the creation and maintenance of an effective emergency response capability to prepare for and manage emergency conditions. 
(b)  The coordinator of emergency services shall have the responsibility and duty to: 
(1)  Supervise the development and maintenance of city emergency plans, including annual updates. 
(2)  Chair the emergency management coordinating committee. 
(3)  Plan for and develop an emergency operations control center to include equipping, staffing, and establishing operational procedures necessary for the management and control of emergency conditions. 
(4)  Develop and manage the city's emergency awareness public information program. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-6; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 34-37. - Emergency management coordinating committee. 
(a)  There shall be an emergency management coordinating committee composed of the department directors which shall be chaired by the coordinator of emergency services. 
(b)  The emergency management coordinating committee shall have the responsibility and duty to: 
(1)  Function as the emergency management agency during a declared emergency. 
(2)  Assist in the creation, revision and exercise of emergency plans. 
(3)  Advise the director of emergency management of requirements for resources necessary to the creation, maintenance, and exercise of a capable, efficient emergency response capability. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-7; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 34-38. - Declaration of state of emergency. 
(a)  In the following order, the mayor, vice-mayor, commissioner, or city manager shall have the authority to declare a state of emergency by proclamation. Upon the absence or unavailability of the mayor, the vice-mayor may issue such a declaration, and upon the absence or unavailability of the mayor and the vice-mayor, a city commissioner or the city manager or, upon the absence or unavailability of the city manager, an acting city manager may issue such a declaration. 
(b)  Any declaration of a state of emergency and all emergency regulations activated under this article shall be confirmed by the city commission by resolution within five working days of such declaration or at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city commission, whichever occurs first, unless the nature of the emergency renders a meeting of the city commission extremely impractical. Confirmation of the emergency declaration shall disclose the reasons for, anticipated impacts of, actions proposed and taken to manage the emergency and other pertinent data relating to the declaration of emergency. 
(c)  The state of emergency shall continue until there is a finding by the official declaring the emergency that the emergency no longer exists or until a meeting of a quorum of the board of city commissioners can take place and terminate the state of emergency by proclamation. 
(d)  Upon the determination of an emergency, the mayor, vice-mayor or city manager shall have the power to issue and rescind executive orders, proclamations and rules. Such executive orders, proclamations and rules shall have the force and effect of law and may deal with the following matters: 
(1)  Suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, explosives and combustibles (except for ammunition whether city has the authority to pursuant to F.S. § 790.33, including amendments thereto enacted by Laws of Florida Chapter 2011-109. 
(2)  Establish curfews, including but not limited to the prohibition of or restrictions on pedestrian and vehicular movement, standing and parking, except for the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, police, emergency medical services and hospital services, including the transportation of patients, utility emergency repairs and emergency calls by physicians. 
(3)  Utilize all available resources of the city government as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency, including emergency expenditures, not to exceed $50,000.00. 
(4)  Declare certain areas off limits. 
(5)  Make provisions for availability and use of temporary emergency housing and emergency warehousing of materials. 
(6)  Establish emergency operating centers and shelters, in addition to or in place of those provided for in the city's emergency plan. 
(7)  Declare that during an emergency, it shall be unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to use the fresh water supplied by the city or the county, for any purpose other than cooking, drinking or bathing. 
(8)  Declare that during an emergency, it shall be unlawful and an offense against the city for any person operating within the city to charge more than the normal average retail price for any merchandise, goods or services sold during the emergency. The average retail price, as used in this subsection is defined to be that price at which similar merchandise, goods, or services were being sold during the 90 days immediately preceding the emergency or a markup which is a larger percentage over wholesale cost than was being added to wholesale cost prior to the emergency. 
(9)  Confiscate merchandise, equipment, vehicles or property needed to alleviate the emergency. Reimbursement shall be within 60 days and at customary value charged for the items during 90 days previous to the emergency. 
(10)  Make provisions for rationing of fuel, ice and other essentials. 
(11)  Evacuation planning. 
(e)  A state of emergency, when declared as provided in this section, shall continue in effect from day to day until declared to be terminated. 
(f)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency, the city manager shall as promptly as practicable, file the declaration in the office of the municipal clerk who shall deliver it to appropriate news media for publication and radio and television broadcast thereof. If practicable, such state of emergency declaration or emergency measure shall be published by other means such as by posting and loudspeakers. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-8; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11; Ord. No. 11-29, § 1, 9-27-11)  
Sec. 34-39. - Certification of emergency conditions. 
A certification of emergency conditions to the city manager may be verbal, but each verbal certification shall be confirmed in writing within 24 hours following an emergency declaration. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-9; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 34-40. - Suspension of local building regulations. 
The city manager may authorize the suspension of local building regulations during and following a declared state of emergency when the building official certifies that such action is necessary to the expeditious restoration of property damaged by the emergency event. Such suspension of building regulations may be applied on a case-by-case basis as required to remedy specific conditions and to facilitate the provision of emergency housing to disaster victims. The building official shall specify the provisions of the building code to be suspended and the reasons therefor when certifying the necessity of such suspension to the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-10; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 34-41. - Termination of state of emergency. 
A state of emergency shall be terminated upon the certification of the officer or agency requesting the declaration of the state of emergency that the conditions leading to or causing the emergency conditions no longer exist and that the city's agencies and departments are able to manage the situation without extraordinary assistance. Notice of such termination shall be made to the public by the city manager by the same means as the notices of the declaration of the state of emergency. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-11; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 34-42. - Commission authority limitations. 
Notice in this article shall not be construed to limit the authority of the board of city commissioners to declare or terminate a state of emergency and take any action by law when sitting in a regular or special session. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-12; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 34-43. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who refuses to comply with or who violates any section of this article or the emergency measures which may be made effective pursuant to this article shall be punished according to law and, upon conviction for such offenses, shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. Each day of continued noncompliance or violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to subsection (a) of this section, any licensee of the city found guilty of violating any provision of this article or the emergency measures which may be made effective pursuant to this article may have his license suspended or revoked by the board of city commissioners. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any refusal to comply with or violation of this article or the emergency measures which may be effective pursuant to this article. Such other lawful action shall include but shall not be limited to an equitable action for injunctive relief or any action at law for damages. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-13; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 34-44. - Conflicts. 
(a)  If this article conflicts with any other ordinance or this Code or other applicable law, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(b)  Any portion of this article found to be in conflict with the Pinellas County Emergency Management Plan shall not be enforceable. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-14(a), (c); Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 34-45. - Authority in evacuation zones. 
(a)  Preemption. The emergency management coordinating committee shall have the authority to delegate, to the chief of police, sole and exclusive authority to regulate the ingress and egress of persons and vehicles in those zones which are required to be evacuated in a declaration of a state of local emergency, and to designate the terms and conditions of reentry into such areas upon official declaration that the evacuated zones are safe and secure for reentry. In the exercise of such authority, the police chief shall consult with the emergency management coordinating committee, the executive group of the Pinellas County Emergency Operations Center and all affected local governments. 
(b)  Prohibition. The police chief is authorized to delegate to any local law enforcement agency the authorities granted in this section relative to their respective jurisdictions, upon his determination that such delegation of authority is necessary and proper. 
(c)  Jurisdiction. All territory within the legal boundaries of the city, including all incorporated and unincorporated areas, shall be embraced by this article. 
(Code 1983, § 8.5-15(a), (b), (d); Ord. No. 94-58, §§ 1—5, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 8-23-11)  
Chapter 38 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— City commission, art. III. 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Supervisor of elections. 
The city clerk shall be the supervisor of elections for the city, but shall have no duties which are inconsistent with those of the county supervisor of elections. 
(Code 1983, § 8-16; Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93)  
Sec. 38-2. - Electors. 
All persons qualified to vote as electors of this state, under the constitution and the statutes of the state, who reside within the corporate limits of the city and who are duly registered with the supervisor of elections of the county and of the city shall be qualified electors of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 8-2; Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93) 
State Law reference— Municipal electors, F.S. § 166.032.  
Sec. 38-3. - Election districts. 
(a)  The boundaries of the election districts shall be as follows: 
(1)  District no. 1. All lands lying east of the Gulf of Mexico and Blind Pass, south of Devil's Elbow, and north and west of the following lines: Begin at a point where the northerly property boundary of Envoy Point Condo intersects the western limits of the city in the Gulf of Mexico; then proceed in a northeasterly direction along such line to the centerline of Sunset Way right-of-way; then southeast along such centerline to the centerline of 72nd Avenue right-of-way; then northeast along such centerline to the most northerly corner of Lot 11, Block A, Bayside Second Addition to St. Pete Beach; then southeast along the north line of lot 11 to the most easterly corner of such lot 11; then continue northeast to the centerline of the intracoastal channel; then proceed northwest along such centerline to the westward extension of the south line of Coral Pointe at Harbourside, Buildings A through F; then northeast along such line to the easternmost limits of submerged lands owned by the city; then north and then southwest along the boundary of such submerged lands to the centerline of the intracoastal channel; then northwest along such centerline to Devil's Elbow. 
(2)  District no. 2. All lands lying south of district no. 1, east of the Gulf of Mexico, west of the intracoastal channel, and north of the following line: Begin at a point where the westerly extension of the north line of lot 1, Brightwaters Beach Motel Replat (Seamark Condo) intersects the western limits of the city in the Gulf of Mexico; then proceed northeasterly along such line to the centerline of the right-of-way of Gulf Boulevard (State Road 699); then northwesterly along such centerline to its intersection with the westward extension of the south right-of-way line of 55th Avenue; then northeast along such right-of-way line to the most westerly corner of lot 1, block 1, Brightwaters Beach Estates Subdivision; then southeast along the southwesterly line of such block 1; then east to the centerline of the intracoastal channel. 
(3)  District no. 3. All lands south of district no. 2, east of the Gulf of Mexico, west of the intracoastal channel, and north of the following line: Begin at a point where the westerly extension of the south line of block C, Don Ce Sar Place (Don Ce Sar Hotel) intersects the western limits of the city in the Gulf of Mexico; then proceed east along such line, crossing Gulf Boulevard; then continue east along the north right-of-way line of West Maritana Drive to the centerline of the right-of-way of Casablanca Avenue; then south along such centerline to little McPherson Bayou; then southeast and south along the west right-of-way of West Maritana Drive to the south point of Don Ce Sar Place; then northeast along the east right-of-way line of South Maritana Drive; then continue northeast to the centerline of the right-of-way of the Pinellas Bayway (State Road 682); then east to the centerline of the intracoastal channel. 
(4)  District no. 4. All lands south of district no. 3, east of the Gulf of Mexico, north and west of Pass-a-Grille Channel, and west of the intracoastal channel. 
(b)  The boundaries of the election districts of the city as set forth in subsection (a) of this section are based upon a study and analysis of the qualified electors residing in the respective districts. The adjustments in the boundaries of such districts have been made in order to achieve as nearly as practicable an equal number of qualified electors in each of such districts and to conform to the election precincts designated by the board of county commissioners. 
(c)  The districts, as defined and prescribed in subsection (a) of this section, are established as the election districts of the city for the election of city commissioners and for such other necessary purposes, and the boundaries shall remain effective until such time as amended by appropriate action of the city commission in accordance with section 38-4. 
(Code 1960, § 7-3; Ord. No. 87; Ord. No. 108; Ord. No. 129, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 144, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 226, § 1; Ord. No. 249, § 2; Code 1983, § 8-1; Ord. No. 92-14, § 1, 7-21-92; Ord. No. 98-51, § 1, 7-21-98) 
Charter reference— Election districts, § 5.10.  
Sec. 38-4. - Commission districts; adjustment of districts. 
(a)  Number of districts. There shall be four city commission districts. 
(b)  Redistricting. Commencing with the regular meeting of the city commission held in accordance with the city Charter and this Code on the second Tuesday in June of 1976 and every two years thereafter, the city commission shall reexamine the boundaries of the districts of the city, as prescribed in section 38-3, and shall, at the regular city commission meeting in July next following, readjust such boundaries so that the number of qualified electors residing in each such district shall be as nearly even in number as practicable. Any change in the boundaries of such districts as prescribed shall be made by city ordinance passed in accordance with the Charter and as follows: 
(1)  Each district shall be formed of compact, contiguous territory, and its boundary lines shall follow the centerlines of streets. 
(2)  The districts shall be based upon the principle of equal and effective representation as required by the United States Constitution and as represented in the mathematical preciseness reached in the legislative apportionment of the state. 
(c)  Procedure. The procedure for the commission's consideration of redistricting shall be the same as for other ordinances, provided that if a summary of the ordinance is published, it must include both a map and a description of the recommended districts. 
(d)  Effect of enactment. The new commission districts and boundaries, as of the date of enactment, shall supersede previous commission districts and boundaries for all purposes including the next regular city election and nominations. 
(Code 1983, § 8-11; Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93)  
Sec. 38-5. - Adoption of state election code. 
The provisions of Florida Election Code are hereby adopted and will be applicable, where appropriate, to city elections. The requirements of the State of Florida Election Code pertaining to early voting, including without limitation the provisions of F.S. §§ 101.015, 101.5612 and 101.657, to extent said sections pertain to early voting, shall not apply within the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent early voting in St. Pete Beach municipal elections conducted at facilities located outside the City of St. Pete Beach. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § 1, 1-11-05) 
Charter reference— Requirement to adopt an election code, art. V. 
State Law reference— Adoption of state election provisions, F.S. § 100.3605(1); Pinellas County municipal elections, date, Laws of Fla., ch. 83-502.  
Sec. 38-6. - Candidates; qualifications; petition. 
(a)  Every person who shall be a candidate for the office of city commissioner or of mayor-commissioner shall, before submitting the application for office, first obtain a candidate's guidebook from the city clerk. This candidate guidebook shall contain the guidelines that must be followed by persons seeking to be candidates for city commissioner or mayor-commissioner. The guidebook shall include those publications required by state law and shall also contain an application, petition cards and such other pertinent information as may be appropriate to assist the candidate in seeking elective office within the city. The prospective candidate shall pay a nonrefundable fee to help cover the administrative costs for the compilation of the candidate guidebook. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in Appendix A to this Code. The prospective candidate shall then file with the city clerk the application to have his name printed upon the ballot as a candidate for the office to which he aspires, in which application he shall declare the district of his residence and whether he shall be a candidate for commissioner or mayor-commissioner, and such application shall be filed no less than 45 days before the date of the election. The city commission shall set the dates for the qualification period by resolution not later than 90 days prior to the date of the election. 
(b)  An individual qualifying as a candidate who holds another elective or appointive office must comply with F.S. § 99.012. 
(c)  Each application submitted by a candidate for office for position of mayor-commissioner or city commissioner shall conform to the following: 
(1)  The application shall be accompanied by a qualifying fee, which is established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(2)  The application shall also include an affidavit from the candidate stating that he has met all state and municipal requirements to run for office and that he is a registered voter residing within the city. 
(3)  Additionally, the affidavit shall provide that the applicant is not a candidate for or a nominee of or a representative of any political party or committee or convention representing or sitting for any political office, other than the one sought in accordance with the application. 
(4)  The application shall set forth the district within the city in which the applicant resides. 
(5)  The application shall include the petition or request of the applicant to become a candidate for the particular office sought. 
(6)  A petition of a candidate for mayor-commissioner shall be signed by not less than 15 qualified electors of the city, and a petition for a candidate for city commissioner shall be signed by not less than 15 qualified electors of the district of the city wherein the candidate resides. 
(7)  No elector shall sign more than five petitions for the candidacy of any person to city office for any one election. 
(8)  The city shall prescribe the form of the appropriate petition papers. The city clerk shall make the appropriate petition papers available. 
(d)  When a petition for nomination is presented to the city clerk, it shall forthwith be examined to ascertain whether it conforms to this section. If found not to conform, the city clerk shall state the reason why such petition cannot be filed and shall return the petition to the person presenting the petition. 
(Code 1983, § 8-3; Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93; Ord. No. 94-35, §§ 1, 2, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 95-53, § 1, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 02-27, § 1, 12-17-02) 
Charter reference— Election of commissioners by district and the mayor is elected at large, §§ 3.02, 3.03.  
Sec. 38-7. - Election date of commissioners. 
The regular election for the city commission shall be held on the second Tuesday of March, unless the city commission determines, by ordinance, pursuant to F.S. § 100.3605(2), that it is appropriate to schedule that election for some other date in March. 
(Code 1983, § 8-13(a); Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93; Ord. No. 97-29, § 1, 12-2-97; Ord. No. 11-28, § 1, 9-27-11; Ord. No. 11-35, § 1, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 10-27-15) 
Charter reference— Election, qualifications and terms of commissioners, § 3.02. 
State Law reference— Pinellas County municipal election date, Laws of Fla., ch. 83-502.  
Sec. 38-8. - Election date of mayor-commissioner. 
The regular election for mayor-commissioner shall be held on the second Tuesday of March, unless the city commission determines by ordinance that it is appropriate to schedule that election for some other date in March. 
(Code 1983, § 8-14(a); Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93) 
Charter reference— Election, qualifications and term of mayor-commissioner, § 3.03.  
Sec. 38-9. - Notice of election. 
(a)  Certification. The city clerk shall, on or before the 30th day before every general election, certify a list of the names of those persons who are entitled to appear as candidates for office on the ballot to be used at the general election, setting forth the office to be filled and the office for which each person is a candidate. 
(b)  Publication. Notice of calling and holding such election shall be given by publication in a newspaper having general circulation throughout the city, which notice shall contain a list of candidates, the offices to be filled, and the time when and the place where such election will be held. Such notice shall be published in compliance with F.S. § 100.342 at least 30 days prior to the holding of such election, once in the fifth week and once in the third week. 
(Code 1983, § 8-6(a), (b); Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93)  
Sec. 38-10. - Form of ballots. 
The city commission, by resolution, shall prescribe the form of the ballots, including the method for listing candidates for city commissioner and mayor-commissioner elections and any other city election. 
(Code 1983, § 8-4(a); Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93) 
State Law reference— Ballot referendum questions, F.S. § 101.161.  
Sec. 38-11. - Death or withdrawal of candidate prior to election. 
(a)  If the death or withdrawal of a qualified candidate following the end of the qualifying period results in only one candidate remaining on the ballot for that office, the remaining candidate shall be declared elected and no election for that office shall be required. 
(b)  If only one candidate has qualified for office and prior to the end of a qualifying period that candidate dies or withdraws, the city commission may, by resolution, extend the qualifying period for an additional ten days for the specific office to be filled. In such an event, the city shall notify all residences in the district or, if it is a mayoral race, all citizens of the extended time for qualifying. 
(c)  If the death or withdrawal of a qualified candidate following the end of the qualifying period results in no candidates remaining for an office and more than 21 days remain prior to the date of the scheduled election, qualifying shall be reopened to allow candidates to qualify for the election to that office in accordance with the Charter and this Code. 
(d)  If less than 21 days remain to the election date, after the death or withdrawal from the ballot of the lone qualifying candidate of an office, the city commission shall fill the vacancy on an interim basis and shall schedule a special election to be held not sooner than 60 days nor more than 90 days from the original election date. The interim commissioner shall serve, with all of the rights, duties, and obligations of a duly elected city commissioner, until replaced by the person elected in the special election. 
(e)  The name of any qualified candidate who has died or withdrawn shall not be printed on the ballot. If the ballot cannot be changed, any votes for that candidate shall be null and void and shall not be counted as part of the number votes needed to achieve a majority vote. 
(f)  No candidate who has paid a qualifying fee shall be entitled to receive a refund of that fee for any reason. 
(Code 1983, § 8-12; Ord. No. 91-17, § 1, 7-16-91; Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93) 
State Law reference— Filling of vacancies, F.S. § 166.031(6).  
Sec. 38-12. - Canvassing board. 
The canvassing board for city elections shall be comprised of the city clerk, the city attorney and the mayor-commissioner, unless the mayor-commissioner is an opposed candidate for election. In any year in which the mayor-commissioner is an opposed candidate for election, a city commissioner who is not an opposed candidate for election shall be appointed by a majority of the city commission to serve on the canvassing board for said election. The city commission may also delegate the canvassing board responsibilities to the Pinellas County Canvassing Board. Canvassing board meetings shall be scheduled in accordance with Florida law. The presence of two members of the canvassing board shall be required to establish a quorum. The affirmative vote of at least two members shall be required for the approval of any matter before the board, and said votes may be made by the signature of the board member where applicable. 
(Code 1983, § 8-7; Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93; Ord. No. 06-10, § 1, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 09-29, § 1, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 38-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, adopted Feb. 28, 2006, repealed § 38-13, which pertained to recessing canvassing board meeting. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 38-14. - Election results. 
(a)  Multiple candidates. When two or more persons qualify as candidates for the office of city commissioner or mayor-commissioner for any of the designated seats of the city commission to be filled, the persons so qualified shall be voted upon, and the person receiving the highest number of votes cast at such regular city election, provided that the highest number of votes is a majority of the votes cast, shall be declared elected. If no candidate has received a majority of the votes cast, a runoff election shall be held between the persons receiving the two highest number of votes cast. 
(b)  Tie vote. If two candidates receiving the largest number of votes tie, there shall be a runoff election to determine the winner. 
(c)  Single candidate. If not more than one person qualified as a candidate for a designated seat on the city commission or for mayor-commissioner to be filled at an election, that seat shall not be listed on the regular city election ballot. 
(d)  Runoff election. If any runoff election is necessitated, it shall be held not later than 60 days after the regular election. 
(Code 1983, § 8-5; Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93; Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 03-30, § 1, 1-13-04; Ord. No. 11-10, § 1, 3-22-11)  
Sec. 38-15. - Protests of election returns; procedures; venue. 
(a)  Any candidate for election shall have the right to protest the returns of the election as being erroneous by filing with the city clerk a sworn, written protest. The city clerk shall deliver a copy of the written protest to the city commission, sitting as the canvassing board, by no later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. 
(b)  Such protests shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the time the city commission as canvassing board adjourns or within five days after 12:00 midnight of the date the election is held, whichever last occurs. 
(c)  Any candidate whose name appeared on the ballot or any city elector who supports or opposes an issue which appeared on the ballot may request the canvassing board either to hold a manual recount or to hold a machine recount. The canvassing board shall determine, by majority vote, whether to hold either type recount or whether it is appropriate to hold any recount at all. 
(d)  If a recount changes the result of an election, the candidate losing under the recount or the group supporting or opposing an issue, which lost under the recount, may, within 24 hours of the determination that there has been a change in results, file a sworn, written protest with the city clerk, requesting a further recount, which shall either be manual or machine. The city clerk shall deliver this protest to the canvassing board at the next business day, and the canvassing board shall meet no later than the following business day thereafter to determine whether or not another recount is appropriate. 
(e)  Any candidate for election or any group in support of or in opposition of an issue on the ballot shall have the right to protest the returns of the election or the practices attendant thereto as being fraudulent by presenting to any circuit judge of the county a sworn, written protest. Such protest shall be presented to a circuit judge prior to the time the canvassing board adjourns or within five days after 12:00 midnight of the date the election occurs, whichever last occurs. 
(Code 1983, § 8-15; Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93) 
State Law reference— Protest of elections, F.S. § 102.166.  
Sec. 38-16. - Installation of newly elected members. 
Newly elected members of the city commission shall be installed at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city commission following the completion of the election thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 8-9; Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93; Ord. No. 06-10, § 3, 2-28-06)  
Sec. 38-17. - Oath of office. 
All elected officials of the city, before entering upon the duties of office, shall by oath or affirmation: 
(1)  State that such official is a full-time resident of the district from which such official was elected or, if it is the mayor, a full-time resident of the city; 
(2)  Subscribe to faithfully perform the duties of office; and 
(3)  Subscribe to faithfully support the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America and the state. 
(Code 1983, § 8-10; Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 1-5-93)  
Chapter 42 - EMERGENCY SERVICES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, adopted May 14, 2013, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, §§ 42-26—42-32, pertained to similar subject matter and derived Ord. No. 83-38, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 1983; the Code of 1983, § 12-56; Ord. No. 84-57, § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 1984; Ord. No. 91-30, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 1991 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; alarm system contractors, F.S. § 489.501 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical or radio-controlled device which is designed to be used for the detection of flames, smoke, heat or water flow in a building, structure or facility which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, direct-dial devices, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Excluded from the definition of alarm systems are devices which are designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible or perceptible in or from any motor vehicle or auxiliary devices installed by telephone companies to protect telephone systems from damage or disruption of service. 
Automatic dialing devices means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection, wireless or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indication the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
Commercial premises means any structure or area which is not defined in this section as a residential premise. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through the mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the neglect or intentional misuse by the owner or lessee of an alarm system or by his employees, servants or agents or by any other activation of the alarm system not caused by or because of an actual fire. Such terminology does not include alarms caused by acts of nature such as hurricanes, tornadoes, other severe weather conditions, or alarms intentionally activated by an owner or lessee of an alarm system by his servants, or other agents who visually observed or heard suspicious circumstances which would cause a careful and prudent person to believe that an actual fire or hazardous condition existed at the premises protected by the alarm system. 
False alarm response exists when a firefighter is dispatched to or otherwise learns of the activation of an alarm system which is subsequently is found to be a false alarm. 
Fee means an assessment of costs imposed pursuant to this article to defray the expense of responding to a false alarm. 
Fire official means any respective municipal firefighter or their designated representative. 
Newly installed fire alarm system means a system that has been installed and operating for a period of less than 31 days. 
Residential premises means any structure or combination of structures which serves as a dwelling unit, including single-family and multi-family units. 
Responsible party means the person occupying or controlling the premises on which the alarm is located. 
Security alarm means an alarm system subject to the provisions of Section 54-2 Pinellas County Code or its successor and not regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 42-27. - Notification. 
Every person who shall own, operate or lease any fire alarm system within the city, whether existing or to be installed in the future, shall notify the fire department on forms to be provided of the following: 
(1)  The type, make model of the alarm system; 
(2)  Whether installed in a residential or commercial premises; 
(3)  The name, address, business or home phone number of the owner or lessee of the fire alarm system; and 
(4)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of no less than two persons to be notified of alarm activation. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 42-28. - Response to false alarms; required reports; corrective action penalties; disconnection. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, responsibility for a false alarm shall be borne by the person occupying or controlling the premises on which the alarm is located. 
(b)  The following shall be required by each person who owns, operates or controls any commercial or residential premises for each incident of a response to a false alarm. 
(1)  For each of the first, second and third false alarm response to a premise within a calendar year, the responsible party shall within ten days file with the fire department a written report detailing the cause of the false alarm and the corrective action taken. A licensed contractor's service receipt detailing the service performed and corrective action taken will suffice as a written report. 
(2)  For a fourth or any succeeding false alarm response to a premise within a calendar year, a fee shall be charged. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to this Code. If such fourth or any succeeding false alarm response is a result of failure to take corrective action, the fire department may order the disconnection of the alarm system and may order a mandatory fire watch for the premises, as such fire watch may be authorized by the fire code as adopted by the city or applicable to the city. Additionally, it shall be a violation of this article not to disconnect or to reconnect such alarm system without the permission of the fire department, provide that no disconnection shall be ordered on any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation. Any order for disconnection shall be rescinded by the fire department upon presentation of demonstrative evident of corrective action and subsequent inspection by the fire department and a finding that adequate corrective action has been taken. 
(3)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any newly installed fire alarm system for a period of 30 days from the date of installation. 
(4)  Testing alarms systems. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, it shall not be a violation of this section to test an alarm system pursuant to the testing procedures of the contracted alarm monitoring provider, or in the absence of such provider, under the following conditions: 
a.  Where there is no visual, audio, electronic or other indication of the alarm which can be seen, heard, or received beyond the boundaries of the property upon which the test is occurring; or 
b.  Where there is a visual, audio, electronic, or other indication of the alarm which can be seen, heard, or received beyond the boundaries of the property upon which the test is occurring, and one of the following two precautions are observed: 
1.  Adequate measures are taken to ensure that anyone seeing, hearing, or receiving the indication of an alarm will not report it either directly or indirectly to the fire department as an alarm requiring assistance of the fire department; or 
2.  The fire department is notified that the test is to occur and is instructed not to respond by the responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 42-29. - Failure to report to premises after notification by the fire department. 
Every person who owns operates or leases an alarm system and shall knowingly or purposefully fail to respond to his premises or facility after notification by the fire department of the activation of any alarm system, whether false or not, within one hour of notification shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 42-30. - Automatic dialing devices. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to install, maintain, own, possess or operate any automatic dialing device alarm system regulated or programmed to make connection with any telephone number installed in any city facility. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 42-31. - Administrative hearing. 
Any person who shall be notified of the assessment of any penalty for multiple false alarms or an order to disconnection of any alarm system shall be entitled to an administrative hearing before the fire department to show cause why such assessment or disconnection should not be made. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 42-32. - Disposition of fees. 
Fees will be collected by the city's finance department for deposit in the general revenue fund. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 42-33. - Security alarms. 
Security alarm systems, as described by Section 54-2, Pinellas County Code, or its successor are regulated by the provisions by the Pinellas County Code and not by this article. Enforcement of such regulation is by the Pinellas County Sheriff. 
Every person who owns operates or leases a security alarm system shall register his/her alarm system with the Pinellas County Sherriff's Office SHARP alarm registration program. 
(Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 5-14-13)  
Chapter 46 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation committee, § 22-101 et seq.; beach maintenance regulations, § 94-101; natural resources, ch. 114; supplemental zoning district regulations, § 134-1076 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; abatement of nuisances by injunction, F.S. § 60.05 et seq.; nuisances injurious to health, F.S. ch. 386; public nuisances generally, F.S. ch. 823. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Distribution of handbills and other advertising. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, affix or distribute any handbill, circular, card, booklet, placard or other advertising commercial matter whatsoever in or upon any public street or other public place or in or upon any motor vehicle located thereon. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to go in, on or upon any private residence, apartment or premises for the purpose of distributing any handbill, circular, card, booklet, placard or other advertising and commercial matter whatsoever, without first having received from the owner or occupant permission to so enter such premises and distribute such material. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit or otherwise regulate the distribution or sale of newspapers regularly sold by copy or by subscription or to prevent the lawful distribution of religious, local community organization and civic monthly bulletins, charitable or political matter or anything other than commercial and business advertising matter. 
(Code 1960, § 2A-2; Ord. No. 203, §§ 1—3; Code 1983, § 12-12) 
Cross reference— Amusement and entertainment, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 26; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 70; streets and sidewalks, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; beaches, § 94-66 et seq.; signs, ch. 122.  
Secs. 46-2—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 70; buildings and building regulations, ch. 98; natural resources, ch. 114; signs, ch. 122; supplemental zoning district regulations, § 134-1076 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means the doing of an unlawful act or the omitting to perform a duty or the suffering or permitting of any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing: 
(1)  Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; 
(2)  Offends decency; 
(3)  Is offensive to the senses; 
(4)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage; 
(5)  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; 
(6)  Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others; or 
(7)  Is declared by ordinance to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1983, § 13-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-32. - Article supplemental. 
This article shall be supplemental to all other sections of this Code and other ordinances and shall be deemed to provide a supplemental, additional and alternative procedure. Any action taken pursuant to this article in regard to nuisance abatement shall be considered cumulative and in addition to penalties and to other remedies provided elsewhere by ordinance or law. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 7(L), (M); Code 1983, § 13-9)  
Sec. 46-33. - Enumeration. 
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property of any of the following items, conditions or actions is declared to be and constitutes a nuisance, provided this enumeration shall not be construed as a designation of all nuisances: 
(1)  Vegetation as follows: 
a.  Any weeds such as broom grass, jimson, burdock, ragweed, sandspur or other similar weeds or any other vegetation, other than trees, ornamental bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, with a height exceeding 12 inches. 
b.  Dead branches or fronds on trees or shrubs. 
c.  Trees and shrubs planted in such a manner as to obstruct vehicular and pedestrian traffic along roadways, sidewalks and public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Accumulation of trash, litter, debris, garbage, bottles, paper, cans, rags, dead or decayed fish, fowl, meat or other animal matter; fruit, vegetables, offal, bricks, concrete, scrap lumber or other building debris or other refuse of any nature. 
(3)  Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin. 
(4)  Buildings and structures as follows: 
a.  Any building, dock or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation or use or which is kept in such an insanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous life safety code violation or fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located. 
b.  Any building, structure or other improvement on which the paint or other exterior coating or surface is flaking or has deteriorated to the point that the building, structure or other improvement is unsightly in appearance and thus adversely affects the aesthetic appearance of the area. 
(5)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(6)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within 12 hours after death. 
(7)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other substances. 
(8)  Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained. 
(9)  Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot, piece of ground or swimming pool. 
(10)  Dense smoke, noxious or lethal fumes, lethal gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities. 
(11)  Any condition constituting a violation of the fire prevention code, as adopted in section 98-26 and as amended and/or the NFPA-101-Life Safety Code, as amended. 
(12)  Any wornout, scrapped, partially dismantled, nonoperative, unusable or discarded materials or objects, such as automobiles or parts thereof, building materials, machinery, metal, wastepaper, rags, glassware, tinware, vehicles, boats or parts thereof, or other items of junk. 
(13)  The storage of any vehicle, whether motorized or nonmotorized, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, trailers, campers, recreational vehicles, motor homes, boats, boat trailers, or parts thereof, without a valid license plate or valid vehicle or trailer or boat-trailer or other registration certificate, showing the vehicle or part thereof to be titled in the name of the owner or occupier of the property upon which the vehicle or part thereof is located. Failure to have such license or other registration certificate specifically attached to the vehicle or part thereof shall be prima facie evidence that the property is worn out, scrapped, nonoperative, unusable or discarded, as provided in subsection (12) of this section. 
(Code 1960, § 12-11; Ord. No. 168; Ord. No. 80-25; Ord. No. 81-56; Code 1983, § 13-2; Ord. No. 85-61, § 1, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 95-26, § 1, 7-5-95)  
Sec. 46-34. - Prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance or suffer or permit a nuisance to exist, as that term is defined in section 46-31 and as it is enumerated in section 46-33, upon any property which the person may or does own, lease, occupy, or possess. 
(b)  Each day in which a nuisance has been or is created, suffered, or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The city shall be entitled to issue citations returnable to the county court for violation of this article for each day a violation exists. 
(d)  Failure to obtain a proper tree permit shall result in a penalty charge equal to twice the cost of the original permit or $100.00, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1960, §§ 12-5, 12-6; Ord. No. 82, §§ 2, 3; Code 1983, § 13-3; Ord. No. 95-26, § 1, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 01-42, § 1, 12-4-01)  
Secs. 46-35—46-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ABATEMENT PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 46-61. - Notice to abate. 
(a)  If the city manager concludes that a nuisance exists in accord with section 46-33, the city shall so notify the record owner of the property upon which the nuisance exists, in writing, and demand that such owner cause the condition to be remedied. The notice shall be given either by personal service by an agent of the city or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property described as his name and address are shown upon the records of the county tax assessor, at the discretion of the city manager. Notification shall be deemed complete and sufficient when so addressed and deposited in the United States mail, with proper postage prepaid. If such notice is returned by postal authorities, the city manager shall cause a copy of the notice to be served upon the occupant of the property or upon any agent of the owner thereof. If personal service upon the occupant of the property or upon any agent of the owner thereof cannot be performed after a reasonable search by the city manager, the notice shall be accomplished by physical posting on the premises. 
(b)  Such notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF NUISANCE 
Name of Owner _____ 
Address of Owner _____ 
Our records indicate that you are the owner(s) of the following property in the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida: 
(Describe Property) 
An inspection of this property discloses, and I have found and determined that a nuisance has occurred in that: 
(Describe here the condition which creates the nuisance) 
You are hereby notified that unless the condition above described is remedied so as to abate the nuisance within seven days from the date hereof, the City of St. Pete Beach will proceed to remedy this condition and the cost of the work to remedy the condition, advertising costs, administrative costs and other expenses, will be imposed as a lien on the property described. To remedy the condition causing the nuisance, the following must occur: 
A hearing shall be held before the City Manager of the City of St. Pete Beach, or his designee, at ___________, St. Pete Beach, Florida 33706, on the _____ day of ________, 19___, at which time you or any persons you desire may introduce such evidence as you deem necessary to show that the condition alleged in this notice does not exist, has not occurred, or does not constitute a nuisance. Provided that in the event you determine to take the action set forth above, to correct said nuisance, you may, in writing, notify the City Manager and upon determination that the nuisance has been abated, the hearing shall be cancelled. 
CITY OF ST. PETE BEACH 
By: _____     
OFFICER 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 7(A); Code 1983, § 13-4; Ord. No. 85-61, § 2, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 86-50, § 1, 10-21-86)  
Sec. 46-62. - Hearing before city manager. 
(a)  When notification has been accomplished pursuant to section 46-61, at the time so designated in the notice of nuisance or at such other time specified by the city manager, after notice has been furnished to the property owner, a hearing shall be held before the city manager in order to determine that the condition alleged in the notice does or does not exist, has or has not occurred or does or does not constitute a nuisance. If the city is unable to personally serve notice on the owner of the property, a notice, in the form set forth in section 46-61, may be posted in a conspicuous location on the property. 
(b)  At the hearing the city and the property owner may introduce such evidence as is deemed necessary. The city manager shall hold hearings on a regular basis at such time and place as he determines, and he shall establish rules and regulations for the review procedure. Following review by the city manager, the owner will have exhausted his administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 7(B); Code 1983, § 13-5; Ord. No. 85-61, § 3, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 46-63. - Abatement by city authorized. 
When notification either by delivery in person to the owner or by posting in a conspicuous location on the property has been accomplished according to section 46-61 and if the condition described in the notice has not been remedied, the city manager shall cause the nuisance to be abated by the city or an independent contractor employed by the city, at the expense of the property owner. If a hearing has been held and has been concluded adversely to the property owner, thus requiring remedy of the condition set forth in the notice of nuisance, and the condition is not remedied within five days following the date of the hearing or within any additional time set by the city manager, the city manager shall cause the nuisance to be abated by the city or an independent contractor employed by the city, at the expense of the property owner. The cost necessary to remedy the condition shall be an expense to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 7(C); Code 1983, § 13-6; Ord. No. 85-61, § 4, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 46-64. - Collection of city's abatement expenses. 
(a)  After causing a nuisance to be abated pursuant to this article, the city manager shall determine the costs involved, including all costs described in section 46-63, plus any attorney's fees borne by the city through any appellate action, and shall determine the proportionate costs that any lot, tract or parcel of land should bear. The city manager shall cause the preliminary assessment roll to be prepared containing a complete list of the properties upon which nuisances have been abated by the city under this article and of properties abutting ponds or water bodies which were maintained by the city, setting opposite each lot, parcel or tract of land its proper proportionate share of the cost of doing the work, including all costs described in section 46-63 plus attorney's fees through appellate proceedings, if any. Such record shall be known as "preliminary assessment for nuisance abatement," which assessment shall upon completion be submitted to the city commission. Immediately after submission of the preliminary assessment roll to the city commission, the city commission shall fix a date for a public hearing upon the assessments contained in the preliminary assessment roll. 
(b)  Immediately upon the determination by the city commission of the date for public hearing upon the proposed assessment, the city manager shall cause to be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation a notice in substantially the following form: 
Notice to Taxpayers 
You are hereby notified that the City of St. Pete Beach has just abated a nuisance in the City of St. Pete Beach, and has determined the amount to be assessed against each of lots, tracts or parcels of land to defray the cost thereof. A list of said nuisances and amount to be assessed against each of said properties is on file and open for inspection in the office of the Director of Finance of the City of St. Pete Beach. You are further notified that the City Commission of the City of St. Pete Beach will hold a public hearing on the _____ day of ________, 19___ in the Commission Chambers at the City Hall in the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida, for the purpose of hearing any complaints or protests that any affected party may wish to offer why said assessments should not be made final. 
_____
City Manager 
(c)  The notice shall be published one time and the hearing provided for by the notice shall be not less than five days from the date of publication of the notice. 
(d)  The city commission shall meet at the time and place specified in the notice and hear any and all complaints that any person affected by the proposed assessment wishes to offer and shall correct any and all mistakes or errors appearing upon the preliminary assessment roll. The city commission shall then approve the preliminary assessment roll, as submitted or as corrected, and the roll shall then be final. 
(e)  When the preliminary assessment roll is approved by the city commission and made final, the amounts assessed against the respective properties shall, from the date of approval, be and constitute a lien against the properties until paid. Upon approval of the assessment roll by the city commission, the city manager shall immediately cause the assessment roll to be filed in the office of the city clerk, and it shall be kept there for public inspection during business hours. The city manager may file and record, in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county, notice of the liens against the properties, showing thereon the amount and nature of the lien and legal description of the property. 
(f)  The principal amount of all assessment liens levied and assessed under this section shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from a date 30 days after the date of approval of the assessment, and this interest shall also constitute a lien against the property assessed, in the amount of the assessment plus accrued interest. 
(g)  The director of finance shall keep complete records relating to the amount payable for liens and interest described in this section and shall from time to time send a statement of the principal and interest due upon such liens to the record owner of the property upon which the lien exists. 
(h)  At any time after the expiration of 30 days from the date of approval of the assessment roll, the city may proceed to foreclose the liens for special assessment in the manner prescribed in F.S. ch. 173. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 7(D)—(K); Code 1983, § 13-7; Ord. No. 85-61, § 5, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 46-65. - Charges for administrative fees, lot clearing or mowing. 
The charges for nuisance abatement described in this section shall be assessed by the city manager whenever a notice of abatement is sent under section 46-61. The charges shall be established by resolution of the city commission and are listed in Appendix A to this Code. Charges shall be assessed for the following: 
(1)  An administrative fee for all administrative and clerical work done by the city administration in connection with the lot clearing or lot mowing. 
(2)  Lot mowing charges for lots which are either vacant or improved shall be assessed in an amount equal to the cost to the city to have such lot mowing accomplished, in addition to the administrative fee set forth in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Tree trimming and tree removal shall be assessed in an amount equal to the cost to the city to have such tree trimming accomplished, in addition to the administrative fee set forth in subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)  Clerical work and secretarial services, as well as all other notification costs, shall be charged at a rate equivalent to the actual cost to the city. Attorney's fees shall be charged in an amount equal to the actual charge to the city if, in the sole discretion of the city, legal services are required. 
(Code 1960, § 12-4.1; Ord. No. 360, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 80-34, § 1; Code 1983, § 13-8; Ord. No. 84-33, § 1, 7-17-84; Ord. No. 86-13, § 1, 6-3-86; Ord. No. 86-51, § 1, 10-21-86; Ord. No. 86-60, § 1, 12-16-86; Ord. No. 99-5, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 2-2-99)  
Sec. 46-66. - Repeat nuisance violations. 
Following the first notice under section 46-61 to abate a nuisance described under section 46-33(1), (2) and (3), any subsequent violation of said nuisance classifications on the same property within a 12-month period may be abated by the city manager without further notice under section 46-61, unless the property owner has provided the city manager with an adequate guarantee that the property shall be maintained over the next 12-month period. All the costs of abating the nuisance, including administrative costs, shall be assessed against the property owner and shall be collectible as provided under section 46-64. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 1, 2-2-99)  
Secs. 46-67—46-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED, WRECKED, ABANDONED PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Secondhand goods dealers, § 26-171 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 70; supplemental district regulations, § 134-1076 et seq. 
State Law reference— Abandoned property, mandatory procedure, F.S. § 705.101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 46-96. - Determination of abandoned or unclaimed property. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, property shall be considered abandoned or unclaimed if: 
(1)  The owner of the property cannot be found after inquiry has been made by the city; 
(2)  The property has been left on city-owned lands or on any city street, alley or easement; or 
(3)  It appears that no person is attending to or taking care of the property for a period of at least 48 hours. 
(b)  The determination by the city that any personal property has been left under circumstances giving rise to the conclusion that the property is unclaimed or abandoned for a period of 48 hours from and after the location of the property has been reported to the city shall constitute prima facie evidence that the property has been abandoned or unclaimed. 
(Code 1983, § 12-14(b); Ord. No. 85-64, § 2, 1-7-86)  
Sec. 46-97. - Declaration of nuisance. 
It is declared that the abandonment of or leaving unclaimed any personal property within the city limits constitutes a nuisance. 
(Code 1983, § 12-14(a); Ord. No. 85-64, § 1, 1-7-86)  
Sec. 46-98. - Custody by city; storage charge. 
Upon determining that property is abandoned or unclaimed, the city may take the property into custody and store it. A storage charge shall be levied by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to this Code. The property shall not be released to any person claiming any interest until payment of the storage charge has been made. 
(Code 1983, § 12-14(c); Ord. No. 85-64, § 3, 1-7-86)  
Sec. 46-99. - Search for and notice to owner. 
Upon taking the abandoned or unclaimed property into custody, the city shall make a diligent search and inquiry in order to ascertain the name of the rightful owner. Thereafter, the city shall promptly notify the owner that it has taken the property into its possession. Further, the city shall apprise the owner of the storage charge. 
(Code 1983, § 12-14(d); Ord. No. 85-64, § 4, 1-7-86)  
Sec. 46-100. - Notice of sale. 
If the abandoned or unclaimed property remains abandoned or unclaimed, after storage by the city for a period of 90 days, the city shall notify the owner of the intention to sell the property at public auction and apply the proceeds therefrom to any cost and expenses, including storage fees, due the city. If the city is unable to determine the name and residence of the owner of the property, the city shall post notice of its intention to sell the property at public auction, within city hall. 
(Code 1983, § 12-14(e); Ord. No. 85-64, § 5, 1-7-86)  
Sec. 46-101. - Sale at auction. 
Under this article, the city may, 30 days after notifying the owner or 30 days after having posted the required notice, sell the property at public auction and apply the proceeds to all city costs and expenses, including storage charges. Any excess shall be delivered to the owner of the property, if known. If the owner is not known, the proceeds shall be paid into the city's general fund. 
(Code 1983, § 12-14(f); Ord. No. 85-64, § 6, 1-7-86)  
Secs. 46-102—46-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 2002, amended Art. IV, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainment, ch. 10; animals, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 26; parks and recreation, ch. 58; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 62; streets and sidewalks, ch. 74; occupational license tax, § 78-91 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; waterways, ch. 94; buildings and building regulations, ch. 98; supplemental zoning district regulations, § 134-1076 et seq. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle noise regulations, F.S. § 316.293. 
 
Sec. 46-130. - Declaration of purpose. 
(a)  Excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise within the city limits is a condition, which has existed for some time. The amount, and intensity of such noise is increasing and is a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of city residents. 
(b)  It is in the public interest that the regulations contained in this article be adopted as public policy to promote the public health, comfort, safety, welfare and repose of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 9-18-02)  
Sec. 46-131. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this ordinance, shall have the following meanings: 
Ambient sound level is the total sound pressure level in the area of interest including the sound source of interest. 
A-weighting is the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing frequency sensitivity. 
Background sound level is the total sound pressure level in the area of interest excluding the sound-source of interest. 
Commercial property is any property used for the sale of merchandise, service of food or for the performance of a professional or commercial service; provided commercial property shall not be defined to include property which includes as a use within the enterprise transient sleeping quarters. 
Construction is any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, or demolition of buildings or structures. 
Decibel (dB) is the accepted unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location. 
dBA is the A-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
Emergency is any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage that demands immediate action. 
Emergency work is any work or action performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency or any situation deemed as dangerous. 
Impulsive sound is a sound having a duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
Institutional property is any property which is used for hospitals and schools. 
Loud and raucous as defined in section 46-133(a). 
Muffler, a sound-dissipating device or system for attenuating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine 
Multi-family dwelling is any building that has been divided into separate residential living units, but shall not include any transient or tourist lodging facility as defined in the zoning code. 
Noise disturbance. See definition "Loud and raucous". 
Public space is any real property or structure thereon that is owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Real property line is the line, including its vertical extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another. 
Residential property is any property in which sleeping quarters are provided. Without limiting the scope of this definition, but by way of example, residential property shall include property on which commercial services may be provided together or mixed with transient sleeping quarters. 
Sound level meter (SLM) is an instrument used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to Type I or Type 2 standards as specified in ANSI Standard S 1.4-1983 or the latest version thereof. 
Sound pressure level (SRL) is 20 multiplied by the logarithm, to the base 10, of the measured sound pressure divided by the sound pressure associated with the threshold of human hearing, in units of decibels. 
(Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 9-18-02)  
Sec. 46-132. - Sound level limitations. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound source in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits set forth in Table 1, using the slow response setting of a SLM, which sound source shall constitute a noise disturbance: 
(1)  When measured at or within the real property line of the receiving property; or 
(2)  For property bordering on Gulf Blvd. between 75th Ave. and Hotel Place, Blind Pass Road, and 75th Ave., when measured at or behind a line 30 feet from the property line that runs adjacent to said roadways, unless the area is occupied by a building, and in that instance, the sound level measurement shall be taken within the building that occupies the area. 
(b)  To determine the sound level from the sound source to be measured, the background sound shall be subtracted from the ambient sound level. 
Table I. Sound Level Limits by Receiving Property 
Receiving Property 

Category 	Time 	Sound Level 

Limit (dBA) 
Residential, Institutional, or Public Space 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 	65 

55 
Commercial 	At all times 	65 
 
(c)  In a multi-family dwelling, no person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound source in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits set forth in Table 2: 
Table 2. Sound Level Limits Within Receiving Multi-Family Dwelling Unit 
Time 	Sound Level 

Limit (dBA) 
7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 	50 
45 
 
(d)  If the sound is an impulsive sound, the fast response setting shall be used and the daytime (7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m.) limits of Table 1 shall be increased by ten dBA. 
(e)  In addition to the limits of Tables 1 and 2 for any sound source which impacts residential, public or institutional property, the maximum allowable sound level limits for the individual octave bands whose centers are 63, 125, 250 and 500 Hertz shall not exceed 65 dB. 
(Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 9-18-02)  
Sec. 46-133. - Loud and raucous/enumeration. 
(a)  Prohibited generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud and raucous noise. Loud and raucous shall mean any sound that, because of its volume level, duration and character, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(b)  Noise from the following activities, if loud and raucous, are in violation of this article, unless exempt under section 46-134. 
(1)  Exhaust from engines. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine or stationary internal combustion engine except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud and raucous noises therefrom. 
(2)  Pile drivers, steam shovels. The operation between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day or at any time on Sunday of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, dredge, steam or electric hoist or other appliance. 
(3)  Blowers, fans, engines. The operation of any blower, power fan or any internal combustion engine, which causes loud and raucous noise, unless the noise from such equipment has a muffler device sufficient to prevent loud and raucous noise. 
(4)  Radios, amplifiers, phonographs. The using, operation or permitting to be placed, used or operated any radio, amplifier, musical instrument, phonograph or other device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to cause loud and raucous noise. 
(5)  Yelling, shouting, whistling. Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing at any time or place so as to create a loud and raucous noise between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. on any day 
(6)  Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which habitually causes a loud and raucous noise. 
(7)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any motor vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud grating, grinding, rattling or other loud and raucous noise or which is not equipped with a muffler in a good working order and in constant operation as to prevent loud and raucous noise. 
(8)  Schools, public buildings, churches, hospitals. The creation of any loud and raucous noise heard within any school, public building, church, or the grounds thereof while in use, which interferes with the workings of such institution. 
(9)  Attracting attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device to create a loud and raucous noise. 
(10)  Dumping. The dumping of bottles or cans into a dumpster between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. resulting in loud and raucous noise. 
(11)  Noise from electric bass or drums either produced by a live band or through a sound system that is loud and raucous. 
(Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 9-18-02)  
See 46-134. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following are exempt from the sound level limits of section 46-132 and the loud and raucous regulation of section 46-133: 
(1)  Sound from emergency signaling devices. 
(2)  Sound from church bells and chimes when a part of a religious observance or service. 
(3)  Sound from landscape and yard equipment when operated between 7:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., provided all motorized equipment is equipped with functioning mufflers. 
(4)  Sound from waste disposal activity between 7:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(5)  Sound from construction activity between 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, provided all motorized equipment used in such activity is equipped with functioning mufflers. 
(6)  The generation of sound from the performance of emergency work. 
(7)  Sound generated from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or events. 
(8)  Sound associated with state, county or city emergency repair or work related to public projects (e.g., road sewer construction or repair, beach re-nourishment, etc.) The city manager may also exempt the sound associated with any state, county or city construction or repair on a planned public project where he makes a written finding that the exemption is a necessary condition for allowing the construction project to proceed. 
(9)  The city manager may authorize suspension of the enforcement if these regulations would result in a violation of any life safety regulation. 
(Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 9-18-02)  
Sec. 46-135. - Motor vehicle horns. 
The  sounding of any motor vehicle horn or signaling device, except as a danger warning, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 9-18-02)  
Sec. 46-136. - Construction noise. 
Section  98-1 limits the hours of construction to prevent construction noise disturbance during certain hours. 
(Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 9-18-02)  
Sec. 46-137. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation that violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine in accordance with the schedule set forth herein. Each instance of a violation of these regulations shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1)  First violation ..... $150.00 
(2)  Second violation ..... 250.00 
(3)  Third or subsequent violation ..... 500.00 
(b)  Each instance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of section of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement by the city. Each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 9-18-02)  
Sec. 46-138 - Aiding and abetting 
Whoever aids, abets, counsels, hires, induces or otherwise procures a violation of these regulations, and such violation is committed is subject to being charged, and punished as provided herein, whether that person is or is not actually or constructively present upon the violation of the regulations. 
(Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 9-18-02)  
Sec. 46-139. - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to the penalty provided for violating this article, the city commission is authorized to initiate any appropriate civil action or proceeding, including suit for injunctive relief, in order to prevent or abate violations of this article. The prevailing party shall be entitled to recover attorney fees through any appellate proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 9-18-02)  
Sec. 46-140. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by a code enforcement officer or police officer of St. Pete Beach. 
(b)  In lieu of issuing a citation or notice of violation, the code enforcement officer or police officer may issue an order requiring immediate abatement of any sound source alleged to be in violation of Chapter 46, Article IV. 
(Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 9-18-02)  
ARTICLE V. - CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY CODE  
DIVISION 1. - CHRONIC NUISANCE SERVICES 
 
Sec. 46-141. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of St. Pete Beach Chronic Nuisance Property Code" or "chronic nuisance property code." 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 46-142. - Pattern of nuisance activity. 
(a)  Nuisance activity means any activities relating to the following violations, whenever engaged in by the property owner, agent, tenant, or invitee of the property owner, agent or tenant: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages as defined in chapter 6 of this Code. 
(2)  Nuisance abatement as defined in chapter 46 of this Code. 
(3)  Noise as defined in chapter 46 of this Code. 
(4)  Junked, wrecked, abandoned property as defined in chapter 46 of this Code. 
(5)  Possession of alcoholic beverages by person under age 21 prohibited as defined under F.S. § 562.111. 
(6)  Dangerous dogs as defined under F.S. § 767.12. 
(7)  Assault as defined under F.S. § 784.011. 
(8)  Felony battery; domestic battery by strangulation as defined under F.S. § 784.041. 
(9)  Aggravated battery as defined under F.S. § 784.045. 
(10)  Discharging firearm in public as defined under F.S. §790.15(1). 
(11)  Renting space to be used for prostitution as defined under F.S. § 796.06. 
(12)  Prostitution as defined under F.S. § 796.07. 
(13)  Exposure of sexual organs as defined under F.S. § 800.03. 
(14)  Criminal mischief as defined under F.S. § 806.13. 
(15)  Burglary as defined under F.S. § 810.02. 
(16)  Trespass in structure or conveyance as defined under F.S. § 810.08. 
(17)  Trespass on property other than structure or conveyance as defined under F.S. § 810.09. 
(18)  Theft as defined under F.S. § 812.014. 
(19)  Dealing in stolen property as defined under F.S. § 812.019. 
(20)  Robbery as defined under F.S. § 812.13. 
(21)  Convenience business security as defined under F.S. § 812.173. 
(22)  Nuisances as defined under F.S. § 823.01. 
(23)  Cruelty to animals as defined under F.S. § 828.12. 
(24)  Harassment of a participant of a neighborhood crime watch program as defined under F.S. § 843.20. 
(25)  Disorderly intoxication as defined under F.S. § 856.011. 
(26)  Open house parties as defined under F.S. § 856.015. 
(27)  Loitering or prowling as defined under F.S. § 856.021. 
(28)  Loitering or prowling in close proximity to children as defined under F.S. § 856.022. 
(29)  Criminal gang enforcement and prevention as defined under F.S. Ch. 874. 
(30)  Breach of the peace; disorderly conduct as defined under F.S. § 877.03. 
(31)  Any offense under the Florida Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act as defined under F.S. Ch. 893. 
(32)  Any other offense under state or federal law that is punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year. 
(33)  Failure to correct code violations on or before the date specified in a notice of violation issued in accordance with section 22-276 of this Code. 
(b)  Pattern of nuisance activity . Real property shall be deemed to exhibit a pattern of nuisance activity if: 
(1)  The sheriff's department has responded to three or more nuisance activities at the property within 30 days; or 
(2)  The sheriff's department has responded to seven or more nuisance activities at the property within six months; or 
(3)  Failure of the owner, proprietor or manager of a transient use or commercial establishment to sufficiently control nuisance activity and cooperate responsively with the sheriff regarding same; or 
(4)  Failure to correct code violations by the time ordered by the special magistrate in any order entered pursuant to section 22-277 of this Code; or 
(5)  As otherwise provided by this Code. 
(c)  Construction and application . Pattern of nuisance activity shall not be construed to include: 
(1)  A nuisance activity where the property owner, agent, tenant, or invitee of the property owner, agent or tenant is the victim of a crime; 
(2)  A nuisance activity that does not arise from the conduct of the property owner, agent, tenant, or invitee of the property owner, agent or tenant; or 
(3)  A complaint or call for service to which the sheriff's department responded and determined that no violation was committed. 
(d)  Separate occurrences . For purposes of this article, each day that the sheriff's department responds to a nuisance activity at the property shall be a separate occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 46-143. - Declaration of chronic nuisance property; action plan. 
(a)  Declaration of chronic nuisance property . If a pattern of nuisance activity exists upon real property, the city may declare the property to be a chronic nuisance. The city shall notify the property owner by certified mail, return receipt required and by first class mail to the address listed on the ad valorem tax roll. Notice shall be posted at the property where the nuisance activities occurred. The declaration of chronic nuisance property shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  A reference to chapter 46, article III (the City of St. Pete Beach "Chronic Nuisance Property Code"); 
(2)  The address and parcel control number of the property; 
(3)  The dates that the nuisance activities occurred at the property; 
(4)  A description of the nuisance activities; 
(5)  A statement that the property owner is required to provide the city with a written action plan outlining the specific measures that the property owner will take to eliminate the re-occurrence of nuisance activities on the property. A statement that the action plan must be provided to the city no later than 15 days from the date of the declaration notice of chronic nuisance property; 
(6)  A statement that failure to provide the city with a timely written action plan will result in a violation of this article and the entry of a chronic nuisance service order by the special magistrate; 
(7)  A statement that the costs of any chronic nuisance services provided by the city to a property that has been declared to be a chronic nuisance may be levied against the property as a non-ad valorem assessment superior to all other private rights, interests, liens, encumbrances, titles and claims upon the property and equal in rank and dignity with a lien for ad valorem taxes; and 
(8)  A statement that unpaid assessments may be certified to the tax collector for collection pursuant to the uniform method provided in F.S. § 197.3632. 
(b)  Development of action plan. The property owner shall provide the city with a written action plan outlining the specific measures that the owner will take to eliminate the re-occurrence of nuisance activities at the property. The property owner shall provide the action plan to the city no later than 15 days from the date of the declaration notice of chronic nuisance property. Failure to provide the city with a timely action plan shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)  Adequacy and implementation of action plan. If the city determines that the action plan is adequate to eliminate the re-occurrence of nuisance activities on the property, the city shall notify the property owner by certified mail, return receipt required and first class mail. The city shall establish a reasonable time period not exceeding 45 days from the date that the action plan is determined to be adequate to implement the action plan. The city may extend the time period beyond 45 days if additional time is necessary to implement the action plan. Failure to implement the action plan within the time period established by the city shall be a violation of this article. If the property owner implements the action plan within the time period established by the city, the declaration of chronic nuisance will be closed and no further action shall be required, except that the city may require the property owner to revise the action plan in the event that a nuisance activity re-occurs. 
(d)  Revision of inadequate action plan. If the city determines that the action plan is not adequate to eliminate the re-occurrence of nuisance activities on the property, the city may require the property owner to revise the action plan. The property owner shall provide the revised action plan to the city no later than ten days from the date that the action plan is determined to be inadequate. Failure to revise the action plan or to provide the city with a timely revised action plan shall be a violation of this article. The provision of an inadequate action plan on three consecutive occasions shall be a violation of this article and may result in the entry of a chronic nuisance service order against the property. 
(e)  Factors determining adequacy of action plan. Factors to be considered in determining the adequacy of an action plan may include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Commencement of an eviction action pursuant to F.S. ch. 83 to remove from the property those individuals engaged in the nuisance activity; 
(2)  Implementation of crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) measures; 
(3)  Frequency of site visits and inspections at various times of both day and night; 
(4)  Hiring of property management; 
(5)  Hiring of private security; 
(6)  Installation of security cameras; 
(7)  Use of a written lease agreement; 
(8)  Criminal background checks for prospective tenants and lease renewals; 
(9)  Posting of 'no trespassing' signs at the property and execution of a 'no trespass affidavit' authorizing the sheriff's department to act as an agent of the property owner to enforce trespass statutes on the property; 
(10)  Regular requests for offense and incident reports relating to the property that are available through the records custodian of the sheriff's department records division; 
(11)  Written documentation of all efforts to curtail or eliminate the re-occurrence of nuisance activities on the property; 
(12)  Any other action that the city determines is reasonably sufficient to curtail or eliminate the re-occurrence of nuisance activities on the property. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 46-144. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Notice of violation . If the property owner fails to satisfy any requirement of this article, the city shall notify the property owner by certified mail, return receipt required and first class mail to the address listed on the ad valorem tax roll. The notice of violation shall be posted at the property where the nuisance activities occurred. The notice of violation shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The address and parcel control number of the property; 
(2)  A description of the facts constituting a violation of this article; 
(3)  A statement that the property has been declared to be a chronic nuisance; 
(4)  A statement that unless the property owner files a timely request for hearing pursuant to section 46-145, the property owner shall be deemed to have waived the right to contest the notice of violation; 
(5)  A statement that the costs of any unpaid chronic nuisance services provided by the city may be levied against the property as a non-ad valorem assessment superior to all other private rights, interests, liens, encumbrances, titles and claims upon the property and equal in rank and dignity with a lien for ad valorem taxes; and 
(6)  A statement that unpaid assessments may be certified to the tax collector for collection pursuant to the uniform method provided in F.S. § 197.3632. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 46-145. - Request for hearing. 
(a)  Request for hearing . A property owner may request a hearing before the special magistrate upon receipt of a declaration of chronic nuisance property or notice of violation regarding the action plan. A request for hearing shall be filed with the city and shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Provide a short, plain statement identifying the factual, procedural or legal error upon which the request for hearing is based; and 
(3)  Include a copy of the declaration of chronic nuisance property or notice of violation. 
(c)  Time for filing a request for hearing. A request for hearing shall be filed with the city within 15 days from the date of the declaration of chronic nuisance property or 15 days from the date the notice of violation regarding the action plan. 
(d)  Waiver of right to contest. If the owner of a chronic nuisance property fails to file a timely request for hearing, the property owner shall be deemed to have waived the right to contest the declaration of chronic nuisance property or notice of violation. 
(e)  Hearing by the special magistrate. Upon receipt of a timely request, the city shall schedule a hearing before the special magistrate. The hearing shall be limited to the review of the record of evidence upon which the city based the declaration of chronic nuisance property or notice of violation regarding the action plan. 
(f)  Decision of the special magistrate. After reviewing the record or evidence upon which the city based its determination, the special magistrate shall either uphold or reject the declaration of chronic nuisance property or notice of violation regarding the action plan, as appropriate. The decision of the special magistrate shall be in writing and shall be deemed final. If the special magistrate upholds the notice of violation, the special magistrate shall immediately enter a chronic nuisance service order in accordance section 46-146. If the special magistrate rejects the notice of violation, the special magistrate shall identify the factual, procedural or legal error upon which the decision is based. Notwithstanding, the property owner shall be required to submit and implement an action plan in accordance with section 46-143 if the special magistrate finds that a pattern of nuisance activity occurred at the property. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 46-146. - Entry of chronic nuisance service order. 
(a)  Chronic nuisance service order . If a timely request for hearing has not been filed pursuant to section 46-145 and a notice of violation has been issued, the special magistrate shall enter a chronic nuisance service order. If the special magistrate upholds the declaration of chronic nuisance property or determines after a hearing that there has been a failure to provide or implement an adequate action plan, the special magistrate shall enter a chronic nuisance service order. The city shall provide a copy of the chronic nuisance service order to the property owner by certified mail, return receipt required and first class mail to the address listed on the ad valorem tax roll. The chronic nuisance service order shall: 
(1)  Enter findings of fact establishing a pattern of nuisance activity and violation of this article; 
(2)  Authorize the city to provide chronic nuisance services to the property; 
(3)  Authorize the city to bill the costs of any chronic nuisance services to the owner of the chronic nuisance property; 
(4)  Provide for the mailing of a copy of the chronic nuisance service order by certified mail, return receipt required and first class mail to any mortgagee of record. Failure to provide a copy of the chronic nuisance service order to a mortgagee of record shall not operate to release or discharge any obligation under this article or otherwise affect the validity of a chronic nuisance service order; 
(5)  Provide for the recording of a certified copy of the chronic nuisance service order in the public records; and 
(6)  Provide for continuing jurisdiction over the chronic nuisance property. 
(b)  Duration of chronic nuisance service order . The chronic nuisance service order entered in accordance with this section shall terminate if there have been no nuisance activities at the property for one year. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 46-147. - Abatement of chronic nuisances; provision of services; apportionment. 
(a)  Abatement by city. The city may abate chronic nuisances on real property by providing chronic nuisance services to curtail or eliminate the re-occurrence of nuisance activities. The costs of such chronic nuisance services shall be billed to the property owner in accordance with section 46-148 and such costs may be collected by the city by any legal means. 
(b)  Apportionment. Chronic nuisance service costs shall be entirely apportioned to the assessed real property receiving the chronic nuisance service. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 46-148. - Establishment of costs; billing of costs; notice of delinquency. 
(a)  Chronic nuisance service costs to be established by resolution. All chronic nuisance service costs shall be established by resolution of the city commission. No chronic nuisance service cost shall be modified other than by resolution of the city commission. Chronic nuisance service costs shall only be in the amounts established by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  Billing of chronic nuisance service costs. The city shall bill all chronic nuisance service costs to the owner of the chronic nuisance property by certified mail, return receipt required and first class mail to the address listed on the ad valorem tax roll. The bill shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The address and parcel control number of the chronic nuisance property; 
(2)  The date of each chronic nuisance service; 
(3)  A brief description of each chronic nuisance service; 
(4)  The amount of the bill for each chronic nuisance service; 
(5)  A statement that the total amount of the bill shall be paid to the city within 30 days from the date of the bill and that any chronic nuisance service cost which has not been paid within 30 days from the date of the bill shall be delinquent; 
(6)  A statement that that any unpaid chronic nuisance service costs will be levied against the property as a non-ad valorem assessment superior to all other private rights, interests, liens, encumbrances, titles and claims upon the property and equal in rank and dignity with a lien for ad valorem taxes; and 
(7)  A statement that unpaid assessments may be certified to the tax collector for collection pursuant to the uniform method provided in F.S. § 197.3632. 
(c)  Notice of delinquency . The total amount of the bill shall be paid to the city within 30 days from the date of the bill. Any chronic nuisance service cost which has not been paid within 30 days from the date of the bill shall be delinquent. If the property owner fails to pay the total amount of the bill within 30 days from the date of the bill, the city shall notify the property owner of the delinquency. The notice of delinquency shall be by certified mail, return receipt required and first class mail to the address listed on the ad valorem tax roll and shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The address and parcel control number of the property; 
(2)  The amount of the delinquent billings, individual and total; 
(3)  A statement that that any unpaid chronic nuisance service costs will be levied as a non-ad valorem assessment superior to all other private rights, interests, liens, encumbrances, titles and claims upon the property and equal in rank and dignity with a lien for ad valorem taxes; and 
(4)  A statement that unpaid assessments may be certified to the tax collector for collection pursuant to the uniform method provided in F.S. § 197.3632. 
(d)  Construction of chronic nuisance service cost . Chronic nuisance service costs shall not include any amount attributable to general law enforcement activities or the general enforcement of municipal codes upon a property that has not been declared by the city to be a chronic nuisance and that has not received a chronic nuisance service order from the special magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 46-149. - Method of notice; construction. 
(a)  Notice. Unless otherwise provided, notice required by this article shall be by certified mail, return receipt required and by first class mail to the address listed on the ad valorem tax roll. Notice shall be posted at the property where the nuisance activities occurred. 
(b)  Construction of notice. A property owner shall be deemed to have notice of a nuisance activity if that property owner (1) has actual knowledge of the nuisance activity; (2) has received notice of the nuisance activity; (3) has reason to know about the nuisance activity; (4) knows about a fact related to the nuisance activity; or (5) is able to ascertain the existence of a nuisance by checking an official filing or recording. The lack of knowledge of, acquiescence, or participation in, or responsibility for a nuisance activity on the part of property owner shall not be a defense to any enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 46-150. - Change in title to chronic nuisance property. 
(a)  Purchase at judicial sale upon final judgment of foreclosure. Every purchaser of a chronic nuisance property at judicial sale upon final judgment of foreclosure shall provide the city with an action plan and implement an action plan no later than 45 days from the date of sale. 
(b)  Receivership. Every trustee of a chronic nuisance property appointed after the entry of a chronic nuisance service order shall provide the city with an action plan and implement the action plan no later than 45 days from the date of appointment of receiver in any state or federal action at law. 
(c)  Probate. Every personal representative of an owner of a chronic nuisance property shall provide the city with an action plan and implement an action plan no later than 45 days from the date of appointment. If the owner of the chronic nuisance property died intestate, beneficiaries of the estate shall be required to provide the city with an action plan and implement an action plan. 
(d)  Other changes in title to chronic nuisance property. An arms-length purchaser of a chronic nuisance property that has purchased the property after entry of a chronic nuisance service order for the property shall have 45 days from the date of closing or recording of the order, whichever occurs last, to provide the city with an action plan and implement the action plan. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 46-151. - Registration of distressed vacant property. 
(a)  Registration by owner. Every owner of a chronic nuisance property that is also distressed vacant property shall register with the city. 
(b)  Registration by foreclosing mortgagee. Every foreclosing mortgagee of a chronic nuisance property that is also distressed vacant property shall register with the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 46-152. - Construction of article. 
(a)  Levy of special assessments. This article shall not be construed to limit the city from levying special assessments and the amendments to the standard unsafe building abatement code, as adopted by the city. 
(b)  Monthly re-inspection assessments. This article shall not be construed to limit the city from imposing monthly re-inspection assessments. 
(c)  Imposition of administrative fines. This article shall not be construed to limit the city from imposing administrative fines. 
(d)  Exemptions. This article shall not be construed to apply to property owned by the city or any other governmental entity. 
(e)  Provision of this article supplemental. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the authority of the city to collect special assessments by any other method according to law. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Chapter 50 - LIBRARY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Consumption or possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages in public places prohibited, § 6-5; library advisory committee, § 22-136 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act. F.S. ch. 166. 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Fees generally. 
(a)  Residents of the participant areas of the Pinellas Public Library Cooperative, Inc., and the Tampa Bay Reciprocal Borrowing Agreement shall pay no fee for the use of the public library. 
(b)  There shall be a fee, established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code, for a one-year single-family user card to residents of county communities not participating in the Pinellas Public Library Cooperative, Inc. 
(c)  A fee established by ordinance of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code shall be charged for a special temporary visitor card to visitors from outside the Tampa Bay area. 
(d)  There shall be a charge established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code for the replacement of a lost or damaged cooperative participant card. 
(e)  As used in this section, "tourist" means a person with temporary residence in any Pinellas Public Library Cooperative community for a period of no less than seven days or no longer than 180 days. 
(Code 1960, §§ 12B-1, 12B-2; Ord. No. 80-36, § 1; Ord. No. 83-17, § 1; Code 1983, § 10-1; Ord. No. 85-20, § 1, 5-7-85; Ord. No. 90-33, § 1, 1-2-91; Ord. No. 94-34, § 1, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 96-43, § 1, 11-19-96; Ord. No. 01-43, § 1, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 2010-39, § 1, 1-11-11) 
State Law reference— User charges authorized, F.S. § 166.201.  
Sec. 50-2. - Borrowing periods; fines for late return of materials, videocassettes, audio cassettes. 
(a)  Materials borrowed from the public library for a 28-day period shall be returned within that period. A fine of $0.20 per day to a maximum of $5.00 per item shall be charged to the library patron for the late return of materials. 
(b)  Materials borrowed from the library for a seven-day period shall be returned within that period. A fine of $.50 per day to a maximum of $5.00 per item shall be charged to the library patron for the late return of such materials. 
(c)  Materials borrowed from the public library for a 14-day period shall be returned within that period. A fine of $0.20 per day to a maximum of $5.00 per item shall be charged to the library patron for the late return of such materials. 
(Code 1960, § 12B-3; Ord. No. 80-27, § 1; Code 1983, § 10-2; Ord. No. 90-33, § 1, 1-2-91; Ord. No. 94-59, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 95-13, § 1, 3-21-95; Ord. No. 95-59, § 1, 1-3-96; Ord. No. 2010-39, § 2, 1-11-11; Ord. No. 13-07, § 2, 1-22-13)  
Sec. 50-3. - Fees for repair or replacement of damaged or missing materials. 
Materials borrowed from the public library shall be returned in good condition, ready to be used by other patrons. If materials are lost or damaged, fees shall be charged. The fees shall be established by resolution of the city commission and are listed in appendix A to this Code for the following: 
(1)  Materials returned in a partially damaged conditions, e.g. wet, food stained, chewed, broken spine/case, etc. 
(2)—(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Cost of replacement for materials that are returned unusable or are lost. 
(Code 1983, § 10-3; Ord. No. 94-59, § 1, 12-20-94; Ord. No. 2010-39, § 3, 1-11-11)  
Sec. 50-4. - Miscellaneous library fees and charges. 
(a)  Copies form [from] the self-service photocopy machine, per page ..... $0.20 
(b)  Printouts from public computers, per page ..... 0.20 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 2010-39, § 4, 1-11-11)  
Chapter 54 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Skateboarding prohibited, § 74-1. 
 
Sec. 54-1. - State misdemeanors adopted. 
There are adopted by reference as if set out at length in this chapter all general laws of the state whose violation constitutes a misdemeanor. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of such laws. The penalty for such violations shall be the same imposed by state law. 
(Code 1983, § 12-1) 
Case Law reference— A municipality may enact an ordinance which creates an offense against municipal law for the same act that constitutes an offense against state law. Jaramillo v. City of Homestead, 322 So. 2d 496 (Fla. 1975). 
A municipality by ordinance may adopt state misdemeanor statutes by specific reference or by general reference, such as that contained in an ordinance making it unlawful to commit, with city limits, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. Id. 
An adoption by general reference of a misdemeanor statute permits subsequent amendments, revisions and repeals of the laws by the state legislature to apply to the municipal ordinances. Id. 
See also Hecht v. Shaw, 112 Fla. 762, 151 So. 333 (1933); McFarland v. Roberts, 74 So. 2d 88 (Fla. 1954); and State v. Smith, 189 So. 2d 846 (Fla. 4th D.C.A. 1966). 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083; discharging firearms in public, F.S. § 790.15. See also F.S. general index under heading "Fines and Civil Penalties" for listing of state law misdemeanors.  
Sec. 54-2. - Aiding or abetting. 
(a)  Whoever, directly or indirectly, solicits, induces or persuades another to commit an offense prohibited by any of the city ordinances and in the course of such solicitation commands, encourages, hires, persuades, induces or requests another person to engage in specific conduct which would constitute such an offense or an attempt to commit such offense shall be guilty of the offense of criminal solicitation. 
(b)  Anyone guilty of criminal solicitation shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 83-11, §§ 1, 2; Code 1983, § 12-1.1) 
Cross reference— Adult entertainment establishments, § 10-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Aiding or abetting commission of a crime, F.S. § 777.04.  
Sec. 54-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-29, § 3, adopted Sept. 27, 2011, repealed § 54-3, which pertained to discharge of firearms and derived from Code 1960, § 16-9; P.G. Ord. No. 26, § 1; Code 1983, § 12-5.  
Sec. 54-4 - Discharge of spear guns. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, discharge or cause to be discharged any spear or harpoon by or with a spring gun, mechanic gun, power gun or any mechanic device whatsoever within the corporate limits except for firearms which the City has the authority to regulate pursuant to F.S. § 790.33, including amendments thereto enacted by Laws of Florida Chapter 2011-109. 
(Code 1960, § 16-15; P.G. Ord. No. 61, § 1; Code 1983, § 12-7; Ord. No. 11-29, § 2, 9-27-11) 
Cross reference— Waterways, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Spearfishing, F.S. § 370.172.  
Sec. 54-5. - Use of trailers for human habitation. 
No trailer, camper, mobile home or other vehicle shall be placed or used in the city as a place of human habitation. Connection of a trailer, camper, mobile home or other vehicle to sewer, potable water or electricity is prohibited and shall constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle is being used for habitation. 
(Code 1960, § 16-14.1; Ord. No. 138, § 1; Code 1983, § 12-6; Ord. No. 95-27, § 1, 10-3-95) 
Cross reference— Supplemental zoning district regulations, § 134-1076 et seq.  
Sec. 54-6. - Public urination or defecation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in other than a toilet while at a public place. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any place where such conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others; provided, however, this subsection shall not apply where a person is urinating or defecating in a toilet. 
(Ord. No. 82-9, §§ 1, 2, 5-4-82; Code 1983, § 12-8)  
Sec. 54-7. - Use of restrooms or automobiles for dressing rooms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person over six years to use any automobile or public restroom as a dressing room within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1960, § 16-14; P.G. Ord. No. 3, § 1; P.G. Ord. No. 4-A, § 1; Code 1983, § 12-13)  
Sec. 54-8. - Sale or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Drug paraphernalia means any equipment, product or material of any kind which is primarily intended or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, concealing, producing, processing, preparing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance, possession of which is unlawful under F.S. ch. 893. It includes items primarily intended or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, hashish oil, PCP or amphetamines into the human body, such as: 
(1)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls. 
(2)  Water pipes. 
(3)  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
(4)  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
(5)  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
(6)  Miniature spoons with level capacities of one-tenth cubic centimeter or less. 
(7)  Chamber pipes. 
(8)  Carburetor pipes. 
(9)  Electric pipes. 
(10)  Air driven pipes. 
(11)  Chillums. 
(12)  Bongs. 
(13)  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(14)  Wired cigarette papers. 
(15)  Cocaine freebase kits. 
(16)  Vitamin grinders. 
(17)  Magic bullets, meaning small glass or plastic ampules with a cap or top having an opening through to the ampule. The cap or top is equipped with a manual stopper to seal the ampule to prevent spillage. 
(b)  Matters considered in determination of material constituting drug paraphernalia. In determining whether an item constitutes drug paraphernalia, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following may be considered: 
(1)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the item concerning its use. 
(2)  Descriptive materials accompanying the item which explain or depict its use. 
(3)  National and local advertising concerning its use. 
(4)  The manner in which the item is displayed for sale. 
(5)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the item in the community. 
(6)  The availability of accompanying products such as tobacco, vitamins, or snuff. 
(7)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ration of sales of the item to the total sales of the accompanying products. 
(8)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(c)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person authorized by local, state or federal law to manufacture, possess, or distribute such items; or 
(2)  Any item that is traditionally intended for use with tobacco products, including any pipe, paper or accessory. 
(d)  Unlawful sale. It is unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, or possess with the intent to sell drug paraphernalia. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall, upon conviction, be penalized as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1983, § 12-16; Ord. No. 90-25, § 1, 9-18-90) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Drug paraphernalia, F.S. § 893.145 et seq.  
Sec. 54-9. - Ordinances regulating firearms and ammunitions. 
As established by F.S. § 790.33, including amendments thereto enacted by Laws of Florida Chapter 2011-109, except as expressly provided by the Florida Constitution or by general law, the Florida Legislature is occupying the whole field of regulation of firearms and ammunitions, including the purchase, sale, transfer, taxation, manufacture, ownership, possession, storage, and transportation thereof, to the exclusion of all existing and future county, city, town, or municipal ordinances are any administrative regulations or rules adopted by local or state government relating thereto. Accordingly, all ordinances, regulations, and rules set forth in or contemplated by this Code which in any manner regulate firearms or ammunitions to the extent that the subject matter thereof has been properly occupied by, reserved to, or preempted by the Florida Legislature (i) are hereby declared to be null and void; and (ii) shall not be interpreted, construed, implemented, enforced or the like in any manner so as to conflict with, be inconsistent with, or violate F.S. § 790.33, including any subsequent amendments thereto. 
The city acknowledges that the whole field of regulation of firearms and ammunitions, including any components thereof, are being occupied by the Florida Legislature and that, except as expressly provided by the Florida Constitution or by general law, the city is preempted from adopting, enacting, implementing, or enforcing any ordinances, regulations, and rules pertaining thereto to the extent that the subject matter thereof has been preempted by the Florida Legislature. Accordingly, as a rule of construction and interpretation applicable to all provisions of this Code, it is hereby directed that no provision of this Code shall be deemed or interpreted in any manner to violate state law, including F.S. § 790.33; rather, the provisions of this Code shall be interpreted and constructed in a manner so as to not cause or result in a violation of state law, including F.S. § 790.33. 
(Ord. No. 11-29, § 4, 9-27-11)  
Sec. 54-10. - No regulation of firearms or ammunitions. 
No provisions in this article are intended to be, nor shall any provision of this article be in any manner interpreted or construed to be, a regulation of firearms or ammunitions in violation of F.S. § 790.33, including all subsequent amendments thereto. Notwithstanding any term or provision of this article which might appear or suggest otherwise, it is hereby expressly acknowledged that the Florida Legislature is occupying the whole field of regulation of firearms and ammunitions, including the purchase, sale, transfer, taxation, manufacture, ownership, possession, storage, and transportation thereof, to the exclusion of all existing and future county, city, town, or municipal ordinances or any administrative regulations or rules adopted by local or state governments relating thereto and, correspondingly, no provision of this article shall apply to firearms and ammunitions. 
(Ord. No. 11-29, § 5, 9-27-11)  
Chapter 58 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, adopted June 12, 2007, amended ch. 58, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, ch. 58 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
ARTICLE I. - RECREATION 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
Adult means an individual over the age of 18 years. 
Employee is an individual, who is occupying a regular or full-time authorized position with the City of St. Pete Beach. 
Non-resident rates means rates applying to any individual residing outside the city limits of the City of St. Pete Beach. 
Facilities punch card means a multiple admission pass at a reduced fee for use of the gym, arts studio and fitness room. Punch cards are good for one year from the date of purchase. 
Family means one or more adults who live in the same household on a permanent, fulltime basis, and their children who live in the same household. 
Non-resident partnership means a non-resident member of a group or organization that enters into an agreement with the City of St. Pete Beach. 
Non-resident pool card fee means rates applying to any individual residing outside the city limits of the City of St. Pete Beach that is not entered into a partnership agreement with the City of St. Pete Beach. 
Pool punch card means a multiple admission pass at a reduced fee. Punch cards are good for one year from the date of purchase. 
Pool pass means a card issued by the city at a special fee that is used to participate in open pool swim for a period of six consecutive months or one year from the date of purchase with no additional daily fee. 
Pre-K child means a child who is at least five years of age at the time of registration for the programs, as shown on his or her birth certificate. 
Resident partnership means a resident member of a group or organization that enters into an agreement with the City of St. Pete Beach. 
Resident means a person or the minor children of a person who owns or leases real property within the city limits or who maintains either a voting residence or bona fide occupancy within the city limits of St. Pete Beach. 
Senior means an individual 55 years of age or older. 
Youth means any individual between three and 17 years of age. 
(Code 1983, § 14-1; Ord. No. 89-16, § 1, 8-1-89; Ord. No. 90-9, § 1, 5-1-90; Ord. No. 95-22, § 1, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 97-32, § 1, 12-2-97; Ord. No. 98-7, § 1, 2-17-98; Ord. No. 03-20, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 07-45, § 1, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 08-30, § 1, 8-12-08; Ord. No. 09-13, § 1, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 09-23, § 1, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 2010-33, 10-12-10) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-2. - Adoption of rules. 
Rules and regulations covering use of city recreation services and facilities shall be adopted by resolution of the city commission, and upon adoption the rules and regulations and amendments thereto shall govern the use of city recreational facilities and services. 
(Code 1960, § 16A-4; Ord. No. 401, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 402, § 3; Ord. No. 80-33, § 2; Ord. No. 81-63, § 1; Ord. No. 82-27, § 1; Code 1983, § 14-6(a); Ord. No. 84-9, § 1, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 84-40, § 2, 9-5-84; Ord. No. 85-10, § 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 86-15, § 2, 6-3-86; Ord. No. 88-41, § 1, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 89-16, § 1, 8-1-89; Ord. No. 90-9, § 1, 5-1-90; Ord. No. 92-1, § 1, 1-21-92; Ord. No. 03-20, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 58-3. - Fees and memberships. 
(a)  Tax is included in all recreation fees; excluding rentals and memberships. 
(b)  Two proofs of residency are required for the purchase of a pool pass and it shall be valid for one year from the date of purchase. 
(c)  A fee shall be assessed on each returned check, regardless of the reason for the return and all related memberships and rights and privileges thereto shall be suspended until reimbursement is received. Reimbursement for returned checks and fees shall be made with cash or money order. Return of a second check shall result in a "cash only" status on all related memberships for a period of one year. 
(d)  All daily visitors shall sign in at the front desk and pay a visitors' fee in addition to any other program cost or fee for the use of facilities or attendance of classes. 
(e)  Fees charged for classes offered by contract instructors are refundable on a prorated basis when requested in writing during the time period the class is offered. 
(f)  Fees shall be charged for the following: 
(1)  Non resident pool card fee. 
(2)  Pool pass. 
a.  Youth/senior. 
b.  Adult. 
c.  Family (four members). 
d.  Per additional family members. 
(3)  Daily pool admission fee without pool pass. 
(4)  Camp programs. Children who attend or have completed kindergarten through completed 5th grade are eligible, for a minimum eight-hour per day, per person. 
The city manager or his/her designee shall adjust the fees for resident parents or guardians of the child participating, who prove financial hardship in accordance with the criteria established by the commission for granting such adjustments. 
(5)  Instructor's fees. City will collect the agreed upon fees from participants. The city will provide the instructor a percentage of fees collected within a range agreed upon at the signing of their individual contracts. The percentage ranges will vary between ten and 30 percent. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Sports leagues. 
a.  Adult sport leagues, per team, per season. 
b.  Children's sport leagues, per person, per season. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Staff programs. Fees shall be established for programs conducted by city recreation staff to cover the costs associated with the program. 
(Code 1960, § 16A-2; Ord. No. 402, § 1; Ord. No. 80-83, § 1; Ord. No. 81-31, § 1; Code 1983, § 14-4; Ord. No. 83-42, § 1, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 84-40, § 1, 9-5-84; Ord. No. 85-10, § 1, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 86-15, § 1, 6-3-86; Ord. No. 86-53, § 1, 11-18-86; Ord. No. 87-10, §§ 1, 2, 4-7-87; Ord. No. 87-31, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-87; Ord. No. 88-20, § 1, 5-3-88; Ord. No. 89-16, § 1, 8-1-89; Ord. No. 90-9, § 1, 5-1-90; Ord. No. 91-34, § 1, 11-5-91; Ord. No. 92-1, § 1, 1-21-92; Ord. No. 95-22, § 2, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 97-10, § 1, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 97-32, § 1, 12-2-97; Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 6-1-99; Ord. No. 02-06, § 1, 2-5-02; Ord. No. 03-03, § 1, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 03-20, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 07-45, §§ 2, 3, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 08-30, §§ 2, 3, 8-12-08; Ord. No. 09-09, § 3, 6-11-09; Ord. No. 09-13, § 2, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 12-17, § 1, 10-23-12; Ord. No. 13-28, § 1, 12-10-13) 
State Law reference— User charges authorized, F.S. § 166.201.  
Sec. 58-4. - Fees for city employees. 
Employees of the city shall pay resident recreation or play card fees for the use of the city's park and recreational facilities. 
(Code 1960, § 16A-5; Ord. No. 83-16, § 1; Code 1983, § 14-7; Ord. No. 97-32, § 1, 12-2-97; Ord. No. 03-20, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07) 
State Law reference— User fees authorized, F.S. § 166.201.  
Sec. 58-5. - Rental fees. 
(a)  Rental fees for city-owned facilities shall be as approved by the city commission and provided in Appendix "A" to this Code. 
(1)  A refundable deposit shall be required for applicable facilities rentals. 
(2)  A non-refundable reservation fee shall be required for pool rentals, which shall be applied to the total rental fee. 
(3)  A contractual clean up fee will be added to applicable rentals. 
(4)  Room rental structure for the entire Community Center is in set time block intervals. (Includes: courtyard, Raymond room, balcony room, Boca Ciega room, outdoor patio, bistro tables/chairs, kitchen, lobby, folding tables/chairs, staff on duty, cleaning fee, parking lot and applicable taxes.) 
(5)  Fee structure cost for Community Center for Friday/Saturday/Sunday. 
(6)  Room rental structure hourly charge for individual rooms Monday through Thursday. 
(7)  City manager is authorized to temporarily adjust rates for unique circumstances in order to maximize revenue opportunities. 
(b)  Nonprofit corporations or charitable organizations. Nonprofit corporations or charitable organizations recognized by the city may rent city facilities for the resident rate without state tax. To be recognized by the city, an application must be filed with the city manager, and the applicant shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The non-profit organization must have a current active registration with the State of Florida; 
(2)  The business address of the corporation must be listed as a being within the city boundaries of the City of St. Pete Beach; 
(c)  Any time city property is approved for private use by any person or group, and such use involves significant risk of loss to the city, the person or group shall be required to provide satisfactory evidence of liability insurance, naming the city as additional insured. Significant risk shall include any use at which alcoholic beverages may be consumed or any use or activity deemed a significant risk by the city manager. Without limiting the categories of significant risk activities, the following are illustrations of such activities: street fairs, road races on public streets, and animal shows/animal rides and mechanical or inflatable equipment, such as "moonwalks". 
(d)  St. Pete Beach civic associations shall be exempted from the payment of rental fees. 
(e)  The resident hourly and time block room rental fees will be ten percent less than the standard fee schedule. 
(f)  The non-resident hourly rate of the pool rentals shall be 25 percent more than the resident rate. 
(g)  The hourly rate for the pool during peak hours (city recognized holidays) shall be 25 percent higher than the normal hourly rate. 
(Code 1960, § 16A-4; Ord. No. 401, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 402, § 3; Ord. No. 80-33, § 2; Ord. No. 81-63, § 1; Ord. No. 82-27, § 1; Code 1983, § 14-6(b), (c); Ord. No. 84-9, § 1, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 84-40, § 2, 9-5-84; Ord. No. 85-10, § 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 86-15, § 2, 6-3-86; Ord. No. 88-41, § 1, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 89-16, § 1, 8-1-89; Ord. No. 90-9, § 1, 5-1-90; Ord. No. 92-1, § 1, 1-21-92; Ord. No. 97-32, § 1, 12-2-97; Ord. No. 98-23, § 1, 5-19-98; Ord. No. 99-7, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 99-31, § 1, 5-18-99; Ord. No. 01-08, § 1, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 01-44, § 1, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 03-20, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 07-45, § 4, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 08-30, § 4, 8-12-08; Ord. No. 09-18, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 2010-33, 10-12-10)  
Secs. 58-6—58-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY PARKS AND FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 58-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department: City of St. Pete Beach Public Services Department; 
Park property: Includes all areas, buildings, locations and facilities operated and maintained by the department; 
Parking area: Any designated part of any park or special area contiguous thereto that may be set apart for the standing or stationing of any vehicles; 
City parks and facilities: Parks, playgrounds, recreation fields, buildings, piers, shorelines and beaches therein and all public service facilities located on or in grounds, waters, buildings and structures in Pinellas County which are under the control or assigned for upkeep, maintenance or operation by the City of St Pete Beach Public Services Department; 
Person: Any individual regardless of age or sex, or any corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, club or society, or any association of persons, or any agent or employee thereof; and 
Vehicle: Any wheeled conveyance (except a baby carriage or wheelchair) for the transportation of persons or materials, whether motorized or not. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 2007-45, § 5, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 08-30, § 5, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 58-21. - Skateboards and motorized vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall use or operate skateboards on or within any area of city parks or recreational facilities, unless it is a facility designed, constructed and maintained by the city for that specific purpose. 
(b)  No motorized vehicles of any kind, other than personal mobility devices as defined by state law, shall be operated on or in any city parks except in areas that are designated as parking areas. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized vehicle on or in designated parking areas in city parks in a careless or reckless manner and without due regard for the safety of persons who or property which may also be located on the designated parking areas. 
(d)  All recreational facilities affected by this section shall be posted by the city, with a notice informing persons that skateboarding is prohibited and that use of motorized vehicles, except in designated parking areas, is prohibited. Further, the notice shall provide that all violators will be prosecuted. 
(Code 1960, § 16A-1.5; Ord. No. 315, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 378, § 1; Code 1983, § 14-3; Ord. No. 90-9, § 1, 5-1-90; Ord. No. 01-18, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 58-22. - Use of vehicles. 
No person, except in emergencies, shall change any parts, repair, wash, grease or perform other maintenance on a vehicle within any park property. No private vehicle shall be allowed to park on park property or at a department administered facility or park parking lot between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless an approved activity is scheduled during that time. Violators shall be subject to a $25.00 fine for each two-hour period such violation occurs. Unattended vehicles left on park property for more than 24 hours without specific written permission from the city manager, or his or her designee, shall be towed at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 58-23. - Vending in city parks. 
No person, persons, organization or firm, other than the department or concessionaires acting, by and under the authority of the City of St Pete Beach, shall expose or offer for sale, rent or trade any article or thing, or station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any article or merchandise within any city park. Nothing contained herein shall restrict freedom of speech exercised by any person without the use of tables, chairs, or signs erected or placed upon the ground, or other objects, stands, carts, vehicles or similar items. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 58-24. - Camping. 
(a)  No person shall set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelters, or any special vehicle to be used, or that could be used for such purpose (such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon, or the like) for the purpose of overnight camping within any city park, except within such areas, if any, as may have been provided for such use. 
(b)  Camping on park grounds is prohibited except at such times and places as may be designated by the city manager, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 58-25. - Domestic animals. 
(a)  All dogs within city parks shall at all times be restrained and on adequate leashes not greater than eight feet in length. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person owning or having custody or control of any dog on city property to fail to remove immediately the dog's excrement therefrom. 
(c)  All pets are excluded from swimming areas and all sand beaches and beach accesses except for that area that lies from the easterly extension of the southernmost ROW line of 1 st Avenue northward to the easterly extension of the southernmost ROW line of 3 rd Avenue and eastward of Pass-a-Grille Way and is designated as a "dog beach". 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to trained service animals used by visually or mobility impaired persons, to dogs used by police officers for law enforcement or tracking purposes, or to dogs while being trained in a city authorized dog training program. 
(e)  For parks that have a designated fences area known as dog parks the following rules and regulations apply: 
(1)  Owners are legally responsible for their dogs and injuries caused by them. 
(2)  Dogs must be properly licensed and wear ID tags at all times. 
(3)  Owners must clean up after their dogs and immediately fill any holes their dogs dig. 
(4)  Dogs showing aggression towards people, as determined by police department personnel, will be removed from the premises. 
(5)  Dogs that bark persistently are a nuisance and will be removed from the premises. 
(6)  Dogs using the park must be at least four months old. 
(7)  Dogs must never be left unattended. 
(8)  Children must be under constant supervision. 
(9)  Dogs "in heat" will not be allowed inside the park. 
(10)  Dogs must remain leashed at all times when they are outside of the park. 
(11)  Dogs must be leashed before entering and leaving the park. 
(12)  Dogs off their leash are limited to two dogs per person inside the park. 
(13)  Rawhide and food not allowed inside the dog park. 
(14)  Dogs are the only type animals permitted in the park. 
(15)  Dogs must be under voice command at all times. 
(16)  Violators will be subject to removal from the park and suspension of park privileges. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 11-13, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 12-05, § 2, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 13-15, § 1, 7-9-13; Ord. No. 15-12, § 3, 7-28-15; Ord. No. 2016-01, § 2, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 58-26. - Prohibited activities in city parks. 
Except for activities of the city, or a governmental agency within the scope of its governmental authority, it shall be unlawful for any person to do any one or more of the following in a park owned or controlled by the city: 
(1)  Sleep at any time during the hours from sunset to sunrise of the following day; 
(2)  Construct any hut, shanty, or other shelter, except by special permit issued by the department in association with a special event; 
(3)  Discharge or deposit human wastes, except in toilet facilities provided by the city; 
(4)  Drive, putt or otherwise hit golf balls; 
(5)  Sleep or otherwise be, or remain in any bushes, shrubs, or other foliage at any time; or 
(6)  Use public restrooms to shave and or shower or bathe. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 58-27. - Picnic areas and use. 
(a)  No person shall cook within any park or facility in any area not specifically designated for the same. 
(b)  No person shall build, light or cause to be lighted any fire upon the ground or beach or other object in any area except in an approved grill, stove, fireplace or other suitable container, nor shall any person starting a fire leave the area without extinguishing the fire. Each person shall ensure that any fire ignited or attended by said person is completely extinguished before leaving any city park or facility, and that all trash such as boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If there are no such trash receptacles available, then refuse shall be carried away from the area to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(c)  No person shall use a grill or other device in such a manner as to burn, char, mar or blemish any bench, table or other object of city park or facility property. No person shall leave any fires or coals unattended at any time. 
(d)  The city manager, or his or her designee, shall regulate activities in picnic areas when necessary to prevent congestion and overcrowding, to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. If the facilities are crowded, persons holding picnics in any picnic area, building or structure shall not use the same to the exclusion of others for an unreasonable time, given the conditions at the time. Use of the individual fireplaces, tables and benches, shall be on a "first come, first served" basis. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 58-28. - Resident preference for programs and services. 
City residents and employees shall be given preference in recreational programming, parks, and services. For purposes of this section, preference shall include favorable rate structures and "resident-first" policies for programming and scheduling. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 58-29. - Advertising, publicity and signs. 
(a)  No person shall use city park drives or parkways, or enter any city park or recreation area, for the purpose of announcing, displaying, advertising or calling attention to any person, political party, religious institution, or meetings or assemblies thereof, or for the purpose of demonstrating, advertising or calling attention to any article or service for sale or hire, nor shall any signs, slogans, loud speakers or advertising display of any nature, including those placed upon a vehicle, be used for such purposes, except during events or activities approved by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(b)  No person shall display, distribute, post or fix any banner, sign, handbill, pamphlet, circular, placard, or any other printed matter containing advertising, within any city park or facility, except where specifically authorized by the department. 
(c)  No person shall drive, park or station on any park road, parkway, or parking lot any vehicle displaying a sign or notice that it is for sale or exchange, or otherwise displaying any advertising. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 07-45, § 6, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 08-30, § 6, 8-12-08)  
Sec. 58-30. - Proper use of facilities. 
Within any city park or facility, no person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  No person over the age of six shall occupy or enter any rest room, dressing room, bathhouse or pavilions or other structures thereof which are reserved or designated for the exclusive use of the opposite sex; 
(2)  No person shall loiter in or around any restroom, dressing room or bathhouse; 
(3)  No person or group shall possess, consume or serve any alcoholic or intoxicating beverages in any park or facility therein, unless there has been specific prior written authorization by the city manager; 
(4)  No person shall dress or undress except in such bathhouses or structures as may be provided and maintained for the same, and no person shall dress or undress in any vehicle, toilet, or restroom; 
(5)  No person shall enter or remain upon city park or facility property at any time other than during officially posted hours of operation except by special permission of the city manager, or his or her designee; and 
(6)  No person shall remain upon city park or facility property after a command to leave by any law enforcement officer or other city official. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 58-31. - Park hours. 
Except for unusual and unforeseeable emergencies, all park areas are to be open to the public every day of the year during the hours of daylight. The operating hours for each individual park shall be established and/or modified by the city manager, or his or her designee, and shall be posted therein for public information. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Chapter 62 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; fire and going out of business sales, § 26-66 et seq.; secondhand goods dealers, § 26-171 et seq.; distribution of handbills restricted, § 46-1; noise regulations, § 46-131 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 62-1—62-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL SOLICITATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Occupational license tax, § 78-91 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public lands means any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, all waterways and sovereign lands as designated by the state or the United States government. 
Soliciting, peddling or canvassing and any term derived from such term includes any act which directs attention to any business, mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of promoting, either directly or indirectly, the interests thereof by sales. 
(Code 1983, § 15-16; Ord. No. 84-13, § 1, 3-6-84) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-27. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply when solicitation is conducted on an appointment basis, with a time for such appointment set either by telephone or through the United States mail or by other than door-to-door solicitation and sale. 
(Code 1983, § 15-21; Ord. No. 84-13, § 2, 3-6-84)  
Sec. 62-28. - Appeals from decisions of city official. 
The appropriate board of authority shall be empowered to hear appeals from any person aggrieved or by an city officer affected by any decision of the city official, where it is alleged there is any error in any order, requirement, decision or determination by the administrator in enforcing the solicitation provisions. 
(Code 1983, § 15-22; Ord. No. 84-13, § 2, 3-6-84)  
Secs. 62-29—62-56. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 62-57. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, canvass, or otherwise take orders for the sale of merchandise, goods, services or property of any kind or character within the city without first obtaining a solicitation permit from the department of planning and development. A separate permit shall be required for each person represented. Solicitation may be conducted solely for permitted uses. 
(Code 1983, § 15-17; Ord. No. 84-13, § 2, 3-6-84)  
Sec. 62-58. - Fee. 
The fee for the solicitation permit shall be yearly, per individual, and shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to this Code. The permit shall be valid for the same period as the occupational license issued to the person for whom or business for which the individual solicits. 
(Code 1983, § 15-20; Ord. No. 84-13, § 2, 3-6-84)  
Sec. 62-59. - Application; qualifications; contents. 
(a)  A solicitation permit may be obtained by written application of the person desiring to solicit. Such applicant shall be a legal adult or shall have obtained a work permit from a school. The solicitation permit shall contain the following information and shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant: 
(1)  Full name of applicant. 
(2)  The name of the business or property which the applicant is representing. 
(3)  Expiration date of the permit. 
(4)  A recent photograph of the applicant. 
(b)  For solicitation along the sand beach areas of the Gulf of Mexico, the permit shall be issued only after the property owner represented has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director of planning and development that the sandy beach portion of the property is owned by the upland property owner. 
(Code 1983, § 15-18(a), (b); Ord. No. 84-13, § 2, 3-6-84)  
Sec. 62-60. - Issuance. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any of the sections of this article, the licensing official shall have authority to issue a permit which would allow the holder thereof to solicit, canvass or otherwise take orders for the sale of merchandise, goods or property of any kind or character, under the terms and conditions set forth in the permit. 
(b)  The licensing official, after making his determination, shall notify the applicant and if the application has been granted, a written permit shall be issued. The permit may be in any form determined appropriate by the licensing official. 
(Code 1983, § 15-24(b), (d); Ord. No. 84-13, § 4, 3-6-84; Ord. No. 85-49, § 1, 9-17-85)  
Sec. 62-61. - Display required. 
Any person engaged in solicitation activities described in this article shall prominently display, upon his person at all times that he is engaged in solicitation within the city, the permit issued to him by the department of planning and development authorizing him to conduct commercial solicitations. 
(Code 1983, § 15-19(a); Ord. No. 84-13, § 2, 3-6-84)  
Sec. 62-62. - Termination for violation. 
If the holder of a solicitation permit violates the regulations and activities authorized by the solicitation permit described in this division, which in turn results in three convictions in court or payment of a fine for violation of any of the terms of this article, the permit shall be terminated and shall only be reinstated on the approval of the appropriate board of authority. Payment of a fine as referenced in this section shall be prima facie evidence of admission of guilt. 
(Code 1983, § 15-18(c); Ord. No. 84-13, § 2, 3-6-84)  
Sec. 62-63. - Hours sales permitted. 
All solicitation permits issued for commercial house-to-house sales and solicitations at residences or other private premises shall have printed the hours during which such sales are permitted, pursuant to section 62-94. 
(Code 1983, § 15-19(b); Ord. No. 84-13, § 2, 3-6-84) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 74.  
Sec. 62-64. - Expiration. 
Permits for solicitation, canvassing or order taking, when issued by the licensing official, shall only be valid for the date and time and place specifically set forth in the permit. 
(Code 1983, § 15-24(e); Ord. No. 84-13, § 4, 3-6-84; Ord. No. 85-49, § 1, 9-17-85)  
Secs. 62-65—62-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 62-91. - Solicitation setback line. 
There is established a city solicitation setback line, as provided by the official solicitation setback line map, such map being a part of Ordinance No. 84-13. The line shall be established 40 feet landward of the mean high-water line. The map and all the notations, references, and other information shown thereon, being fully described, is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 15-23; Ord. No. 84-13, § 3, 3-6-84)  
Sec. 62-92. - Prohibited areas designated. 
No person shall solicit, canvass or otherwise take orders for the sale of merchandise, goods, or property of any kind or character in the following areas situated within the city: 
(1)  All of the sand beach areas between the Gulf of Mexico and the city setback line. 
(2)  All publicly owned lands, including park and beach lands. 
(3)  All streets, avenues, alleys and other public thoroughfares lying south of 31st Avenue. 
(4)  Gulf Boulevard, from 31st Avenue through 75th Avenue. 
(5)  75th Avenue from Gulf Boulevard to St. Pete Beach Causeway Bridgehead. 
(6)  Corey Avenue, from Gulf Boulevard to eastern end of Corey Avenue. 
(7)  Blind Pass Road, from Blind Pass Bridgehead through 73rd Avenue. 
(8)  Eighth Avenue, from Pass-A-Grille Way to Gulf Way. 
(9)  Beach Plaza, from 75th Avenue to 67th Avenue. 
(10)  Sunset Avenue, from 75th Avenue to 67th Avenue. 
(11)  67th, 68th, 69th, 70th and 71st Avenues between Beach Plaza and Sunset Avenue. 
(Code 1983, § 15-24(a); Ord. No. 84-13, § 4, 3-6-84; Ord. No. 85-49, § 1, 9-17-85)  
Sec. 62-93. - Specific restrictions on solicitation on sand beach areas. 
(a)  There may be no more than two permitted solicitors on a single parcel of sand beach property at any one time. 
(b)  Except for boat and beach equipment rentals, solicitation shall be oral, with no display of wares. 
(c)  Signs shall be regulated as provided in chapter 122. 
(d)  Solicitation shall be confined to privately owned property, and solicitation shall not occur upon the public beaches. At all times a solicitor shall be required to wear his city-issued solicitor's card on the outside of his clothing. 
(e)  The establishment of a solicitation line on individual properties shall be through a survey by a licensed surveyor. The solicitation line shall be marked at each boundary line of the property, and at intermediate points if required by the director of planning and development, by means of a device as approved by the city manager or his authorized designee. The property owner shall bear the expense for establishment of the location of the solicitation line and the maintenance of the marking devices. If the property owner fails or refuses to provide a survey establishing the location of the solicitation line after written request by the city, further solicitation on the property shall be prohibited until the survey is provided to the city. 
(f)  The appropriate board of authority shall be empowered to grant variances to the city solicitation setback line where an upland owner feels that such line as established is unduly restrictive or prevents legitimate use of his property. However, the appropriate board of authority shall grant no variances to this section which would allow the solicitor to locate on public beach land. 
(g)  The business or property owner shall be responsible for the actions of solicitors employed by or representing him. The business or property owner shall be responsible for compliance with this article by solicitors employed by or representing him, in addition to the citation to be issued to the solicitor. 
(Code 1983, § 15-26; Ord. No. 84-13, § 4, 3-6-84; Ord. No. 87-29, § 1, 8-17-87)  
Sec. 62-94. - Permitted hours for solicitation. 
(a)  House-to-house solicitation. All persons engaged in commercial house-to-house sales and solicitations within the city shall be required to conduct their business between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Such sales and solicitations shall be prohibited before and after such hours, and activities subject to this section shall be prohibited on Sundays and legal holidays. 
(b)  Other. All persons engaged in commercial solicitation other than house-to-house, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, shall be required to conduct their business between sunrise and sunset. 
(Code 1983, § 15-25; Ord. No. 84-13, § 4, 3-6-84)  
Secs. 62-95—62-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-121. - County ordinance adopted. 
Pinellas County Code § 42-266 et seq. is ratified and adopted by reference as if set out at length in this Code. Prior to the issuance of a permit under this article, the applicant shall fully comply with provisions of the county ordinance. 
(Code 1960, § 21-3(a); P.G. Ord. No. 65, § 1; Ord. No. 319, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 375, § 1; Code 1983, § 15-31)  
Secs. 62-122—62-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 62-151. - Required, conditions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money, funds, gratuities or subscriptions for oneself or for any charitable, beneficent, religious, relief, rescue or similar organization, magazine or publication or any such organization, association, corporation or society within the corporate limits without first procuring a written permit from the city licensing official or after the expiration of any permit issued as provided in this division. The permittee shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Permits for the activities regulated by the section shall allow such activities to be conducted only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to sunset as published in a newspaper of general circulation in Pinellas County. 
(2)  The activities regulated in this article shall be prohibited in all districts zoned residential and at all residences within the city on Sundays and legal holidays, and no permit shall be issued to allow such activities on such days. The restriction provided by this subsection shall not prohibit such activities at other locations within the city. 
(3)  Any permit issued shall clearly state the date when such activity is permitted, the location where the acts are permitted, and any other additional information necessary to advise the public that the permittee is in full compliance with this article. 
(Code 1960, § 21-3; P.G. Ord. No. 65, § 1; Ord. No. 319, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 375, § 1; Code 1983, § 15-41; Ord. No. 87-35, § 1, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 62-152. - Application. 
Any duly recognized agent or representative of an organization, corporation, association or society desiring to engage in the activities set forth in section 62-151 shall file with the city licensing official a permit application, on forms provided by the city licensing official, containing the following information: 
(1)  The name, business or residence address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Whether the person registering is a natural person, partnership, corporation or business entity and, if a partnership, corporation or business entity, its mailing address, business location, telephone number, and name of the individual in charge of the applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the person registering, the charitable purpose for which the funds are to be solicited, and an explanation of the intended use of the funds toward that purpose. 
(4)  The names of all individuals authorized to disburse the proceeds of the solicitation. 
(5)  The name, mailing address and telephone number of all individuals who will be in direct charge or control of the solicitation of funds. 
(6)  The time period within which the solicitation of funds is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of solicitation and its projected conclusion. 
(7)  A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation of funds is to be accomplished. 
(8)  The name of any officer, director, trustee, partner, or any current agent or employee engaged in solicitation of funds who has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past seven years, and the nature of the offense, the state where the conviction occurred and the year of such conviction. 
(9)  An explanation of the reasons, if the person registering is unable to provide any of the information required in this section, why such information is not available. 
(Code 1960, § 21-4; P.G. Ord. No. 65, § 2; Ord. No. 319, § 3; Code 1983, § 15-42; Ord. No. 87-35, § 2, 9-15-87)  
Sec. 62-153. - Issuance or denial. 
After a review of the application for the permit required by this division to determine its compliance with section 62-152 and within ten working days of the receipt of the application, the city licensing official shall either issue a permit, as provided in section 62-154, or notify the applicant that the application does not comply with the requirements of section 62-152 and specifically pointing out what information or explanation has not been furnished that is required before a permit can be issued. 
(Code 1983, § 15-44; Ord. No. 87-35, § 3, 9-15-87)  
Sec. 62-154. - Permit card; display. 
It shall be the duty of the city licensing official, when a permit required under this division is granted, to deliver to the recipient a card signifying the issuance of such permit, which card shall be carried at all times while soliciting any funds, gratuities or subscriptions designated in this article. The solicitor shall wear or display such permit on the outside of the coat, lapel or jacket he is wearing in a pin-type holder or other appropriate frame. Every permit issued by the city licensing official shall expire at the termination of the solicitation period specified in the application or one year from the date of issuance, whichever is less. 
(Code 1960, § 21-5; P.G. Ord. No. 65, § 3; Ord. No. 319, § 3; Code 1983, § 15-43; Ord. No. 87-35, § 4, 9-15-87)  
Secs. 62-155—62-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SOLICITATION OF OPINIONS OR VIEWS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 62-181—62-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 62-211. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit to express opinions, views or beliefs within the corporate limits without first procuring a written permit from the city licensing official or after the expiration of any permit issued as provided in this division. 
(Code 1983, § 15-45; Ord. No. 87-35, § 5, 9-15-87)  
Sec. 62-212. - Application. 
Any duly recognized agent or representative of an organization, corporation, association or society desiring to engage in the activities specified in section 62-211 shall file with the city licensing official a permit application, on forms provided by the city licensing official, containing the following information: 
(1)  The name, business or residence address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Whether the person registering is a natural person, partnership, corporation, or business entity and, if a partnership, corporation or business entity, its mailing address, business location, telephone number, and name of the individual in charge of the applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the person registering, the time period within which the solicitation is to occur, giving the date of the beginning of solicitation and its projected conclusion. 
(4)  The name of any officer, director, trustee, partner or any agent or employee engaging in solicitation who has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past seven years, and the nature of the offense, the state where the conviction occurred, and the year of such conviction. 
(5)  An explanation of the reasons, if the person registering is unable to provide any of the information required in this section, why such information is not available. 
(Code 1983, § 15-46; Ord. No. 87-35, § 6, 9-15-87)  
Sec. 62-213. - Conditions. 
(a)  Permits for the activities regulated by this article shall allow such activities to be conducted only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(b)  The activities regulated in this article shall be prohibited in all districts zoned residential and at all residences within the city on Sundays and legal holidays, and no permit shall be issued to allow such activity on such days. The restriction provided by this subsection shall not prohibit such activities at other locations within the city. 
(c)  Any permit issued shall clearly state when such activity is permitted, the location where the activities are permitted, and any other additional information necessary to advise the public that the permittee is in full compliance with this article. 
(Code 1983, § 15-45(1)—(3); Ord. No. 87-35, § 5, 9-15-87)  
Sec. 62-214. - Issuance or denial. 
After a review of the permit application to determine its compliance with section 62-212 and within ten working days of the receipt of the permit application, the city licensing official shall either issue a permit, as provided in this division, or notify the applicant that the permit application does not comply with the requirements of this article and specifically point out what information or explanation has not been furnished that is required before a permit can be issued. 
(Code 1983, § 15-47; Ord. No. 87-35, § 7, 9-15-87)  
Chapter 66 - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-26 et seq.; personnel board/personnel review board, § 22-171 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; local government retirement system act, F.S. § 112.60 et seq.; municipal social security coverage, F.S. § 650.05. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 66-1—66-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 66-26. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions with interest at the rate of five percent per annum compounded annually as of October 1 each year that the contributions are in the fund on all contributions retroactive to the date when contributions began. For those members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the system, any payment representing the amount attributable to member contributions based on the applicable member contribution rate, and any payment representing interest and any required actuarially calculated payments for the purchase of such credited service, shall be included in accumulated contributions, without the crediting of interest of five percent per annum. 
Actuarial equivalent means a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon the RP 2000 Combined Healthy Unisex Mortality Table and an interest rate equal to the investment return assumption set forth in the last actuarial valuation report approved by the board. This definition may only be amended by the city pursuant to the recommendation of the board using the assumptions adopted by the board with the advice of the plan's actuary, such that actuarial assumptions are not subject to city discretion. 
Average final compensation means 1/12 of the average salary of the five best years of the last ten years of credited service prior to retirement, termination, or death, or the career average as a full-time general employee, whichever is greater. A year shall be 12 consecutive months. 
Beneficiary means the person entitled to receive benefits under this article at the death of a member who has been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect or if no person so designated is living at the time of death of the member, the beneficiary shall be the estate of the member. 
Board means the board of trustees, which shall administer and manage the system provided in this article and serve as trustees of the fund. 
City means City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. 
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. 
Credited service means the total number of years and fractional parts of years of service as a general employee and member contributions to the plan from the date when contributions were first required, omitting intervening years or completed months when such member was not employed by the city as a general employee. A member may voluntarily leave his accumulated contributions in the fund for a period of five years after leaving the employ of the city pending the possibility of being reemployed as a general employee, without losing credit for the time that he was a member of the system. If a non-vested member is not reemployed as a general employee with the City of St. Pete Beach within five years, his accumulated contributions, if $1,000.00 or less, will be returned. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed within five years, his accumulated contributions, if more than $1,000.00, will be returned only upon the written request of the member and upon completion of a written election to receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount on forms designated by the board. If a vested member does not remain employed for a period of three years after reemployment within five years, his accumulated contributions will be returned only upon his written request. However, the credited service shall not be deemed to be interrupted by and a member shall receive credited service for periods during which the member is on an authorized leave of absence for a period not to exceed one year, but only if the member deposits into the fund, within 90 days after his return, the same sum that he would have contributed if he had been a general employee during his absence, plus an amount of interest equal to the actuarial valuation interest rate assumption in effect on the date of redeposit, plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of the periods of credited service for authorized leave time. 
Beginning January 1, 2009, to the extent required by section 414(u)(12) of the code, an individual receiving differential wage payments (as defined under section 3401(h)(2) of the code) from an employer shall be treated as employed by that employer, and the differential wage payment shall be treated as compensation for purposes of applying the limits on annual additions under section 415(c) of the code. This provision shall be applied to all similarly situated individuals in a reasonably equivalent manner. 
Leave conversions of unused accrued paid time off shall not be permitted to be applied toward the accrual of credited service either during each plan year of a member's employment with the city or in the plan year in which the member terminates employment. 
Fund means the trust fund established in this article as part of the system. 
General employee means any actively employed person in the regular full-time service of the city, including those in their initial probationary employment period, but excluding certified police officers and certified firefighters employed by the city. 
Member means an actively employed general employee who fulfills the prescribed participation requirements. Benefit improvements which, in the past, have been provided for by amendments to the system adopted by city ordinance, and any benefit improvements which might be made in the future shall apply prospectively and shall not apply to members who terminate employment or who retire prior to the effective date of any ordinance adopting such benefit improvements, unless such ordinance specifically provides to the contrary. 
Plan year means the 12-month period beginning October 1 and ending September 30 of the following year. 
Retiree means a member who has entered retirement status. 
Retirement means a member's separation from city employment with eligibility for immediate receipt of benefits under the system. 
Salary, for credited service prior to October 1, 2012, shall mean basic earnings received by an employee as compensation for services to the city as a general employee, excluding overtime, standby time, call-back bonus pay, accrued sick leave, sick leave award time, holiday bonus pay, accrued vacation pay and other bonuses and including tax deferred, tax sheltered and tax exempt items of income derived from elective employee payroll deductions or salary reductions. Salary shall also include bonus or premium pay received by a member when working temporarily in a higher pay grade. Compensation in excess of limitations set forth in section 401(a)(17) of the code as of the first day of the plan year shall be disregarded for any purpose, including employee contributions or any benefit calculations. The annual compensation of each member taken into account in determining benefits or employee contributions for any plan year beginning on or after January 1, 2002, may not exceed $200,000.00, as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with code section 401(a)(17)(B). Compensation means compensation during the fiscal year. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. If the determination period consists of fewer than 12 months, the annual compensation limit is an amount equal to the otherwise applicable annual compensation limit multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the short determination period, and the denominator of which is 12. If the compensation for any prior determination period is taken into account in determining a member's contributions or benefits for the current plan year, the compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the applicable annual compensation limit in effect for that prior period. The limitation on compensation for an "eligible employee" shall not be less than the amount which was allowed to be taken into account under this article as in effect on July 1, 1993. "Eligible employee" is an individual who was a member before the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995. Effective October 1, 2012, salary shall be defined in accordance with the provisions of section 66-116. 
Spouse means the member's or retiree's spouse under applicable law at the time benefits become payable. 
System means the city general employees' retirement system as contained in this article and all amendments thereto. 
(b)  Masculine gender. The masculine gender, where used herein, unless the context specifically requires otherwise, shall include both the feminine and masculine genders. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-31; Ord. No. 92-22, § 1, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 95-10, §§ 1, 2, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 06-26, § 1, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-25, § 1, 9-27-12; Ord. No. 19-10, § 1, 7-23-19) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-27. - Membership. 
(a)  Conditions of eligibility. Conditions of eligibility of members in the general employees' retirement system shall be as follows: 
(1)  All members of the system on September 2, 1992 shall continue participating under this article. Beginning October 1, 1992, all current and future new general employees shall become members of this system as a condition of employment unless they are employed as the city manager or as "department directors," as defined in the City [of] St. Pete Beach Personnel Rules and Regulations Manual, and they elect not to participate, pursuant to subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Notwithstanding paragraph (1) above, employees in positions characterized as "department directors" may, upon employment, notify the board and the city, in writing, of their election to not be a member of the system. This election is an irrevocable, one-time election. Current employees of the city are not eligible for the opt-out provided for herein. In the event of any such election, they shall be barred from future membership in the system, and they shall become eligible for the city's deferred compensation plan under Internal Revenue Code section 457(b). Contributions to the plan in accordance with section 66-69 shall not be required, they shall not be eligible to be elected as a member trustee on the board or vote for a member trustee, and they shall not be eligible for any other benefits from the plan. 
(3)  Notwithstanding paragraph (1) above, employees in positions classified in the St. Pete Beach Personnel Rules and Regulations Manual as "managerial," "administrative," "professional," or "supervisory" (commonly referred to as "MAPS employees") may, upon employment, notify the board and the city, in writing of their election to opt out of participation in this plan. Current employees of the city are not eligible for the opt-out provided for herein. In the event of any such election, he shall be barred from future membership in the system. Contributions to the plan in accordance with section 66-69 shall not be required, he shall not be eligible to be elected as a member trustee on the board or vote for a member trustee, and he shall not be eligible for any other benefits from the plan. 
a.  MAPS employees who are active participants in this plan and who elect to opt out of this plan shall have the opportunity to make an irrevocable, one-time election to transfer assets into the city's money purchase plan. Such an election will result in any accumulated employee and employer contributions (for which it shall be assumed that there was an employer contribution equal to ten percent of each participant's compensation for each year of participation, prorated based on the number of months of actual participation, and on which no earnings, gains or losses shall be applied) made after employment and prior to opting out being transferred to that money purchase plan upon completion by the employee of the necessary administrative forms. In no event will the total amount transferred for any member opting out of the system be in excess of the actuarially determined amount that would result in any additional cost to the system. Money purchase plan participants shall be 100 percent vested in all such transferred amounts unless otherwise provided in the recipient plan, and notwithstanding anything in the system to the contrary, such participants shall have no further rights to any benefits under this plan. 
b.  Any and all elections under this section shall be effective on the first of the month following the date of the election. 
c.  Failure to make an election shall be treated as a deemed election to continue participating in the system and to keep such assets in the system. Any MAPS employees who elect to transfer into the money purchase plan, but who do not elect to transfer plan assets into the money purchase plan shall continue to earn service credit under the system for vesting purposes, but shall not earn additional service credit for benefit accrual purposes. 
d.  Former MAPS employees who are retired are not eligible to make this election. MAPS employees who are participating in the DROP as of the effective date of this section are treated as retirees under this plan, which means that such individuals are not entitled to elect to transfer funds into the money purchase pension plan. 
(b)  Designation of beneficiary. Each general employee shall complete a form prescribed by the board designating a beneficiary or beneficiaries. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-32; Ord. No. 92-22, § 2, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 95-10, § 3, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 97-33, § 1, 12-16-97; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 05-17, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 19-10, § 2, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 66-28. - Qualification of system. 
It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified public pension plan under the applicable provisions of the Code for a qualified plan under Code Section 401(a) and a governmental plan under Code Section 414(d), as in effect on the effective date or amended under this article. Any modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of the Code, as in effect on the effective date or amended under this article, or any other applicable provisions of the U.S. federal tax law, as in effect on the effective date or amended or adopted under this article, and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-48(c); Ord. No. 92-22, § 18, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 95-10, § 11, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-29. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a)  This article establishing the system and fund and subsequent ordinances pertaining to the system and fund may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part, provided that if this article or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefitting under this article, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby, except to the extent that the assets of the fund may be determined to be inadequate. 
(b)  If this article shall be repealed or if contributions to the system are discontinued or if there is a transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. ch. 121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with this article, for the sole benefit of the members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one of the options provided for in this article who are designated by any of such members. In the event of repeal, discontinuance of contributions, or transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there shall be full vesting (100 percent) of benefits accrued to the date of repeal, and the assets of the system shall be allocated in an equitable manner to provide benefits on a proportionate basis to the persons so entitled in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
(c)  The following shall be the order of priority for purposes of allocating the assets of the system as of the date of repeal of this article, or if contributions to the system are discontinued with the date of such discontinuation being determined by the board: 
(1)  Apportionment shall first be made in respect of each retiree receiving a retirement or disability benefit under this article on such date, each person receiving a benefit on such date on account of a retired or disabled (but since deceased) member, and each member who has, by such date, become eligible for normal retirement but has not yet retired, an amount which is the actuarial equivalent of such benefit, based upon the actuarial assumptions in use for the purposes of the most recent actuarial valuation, provided that, if such asset value shall be less than the aggregate of such amounts, such amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such asset value. 
(2)  If there shall be any asset value remaining after the apportionment under subsection (c)(1) of this section, apportionment shall next be made in respect of each member in the service of the city on such date who is vested and who is not entitled to an apportionment under subsection (c)(1) of this section, in the amount required to provide the actuarial equivalent of the vested portion of the accrued normal retirement benefits (but not less than accumulated contributions), based on the credited service and average final compensation as of such date, and each vested former member then entitled to a deferred benefit who has not, by such date, begun receiving benefit payments, in the amount required to provide the actuarial equivalent of the vested portion of the accrued normal retirement benefit (but not less than accumulated contributions), provided that, if such remaining asset value shall be less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned under this article, such latter amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(3)  If there shall be any asset value after the apportionments under subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section, apportionment shall be made in respect of each member in the service of the city on such date who is not entitled to an apportionment under subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section in the amount equal to member's accumulated contributions, provided that, if such remaining asset value shall be less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned under this article, such latter amount shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(4)  If there shall be any asset value remaining after the apportionments under subsections (c)(1), (2) and (3) of this section, apportionment shall lastly be made in respect of each member included in subsection (c)(3) of this section to the extent of the actuarial equivalent of the non-vested accrued normal retirement benefit, less the amount apportioned in subsection (c)(3) of this section, based on the credited service and average final compensation as of such date, provided that, if such remaining asset value shall be less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned under this article, such amounts shall be reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(5)  If there shall be asset value remaining after the full apportionment specified in subsections (c)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section, such excess shall be returned to the city, less return of the state's contributions to the state, provided that, if the excess is less than the total contributions made by the city and the state to the date of termination, such excess shall be divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the city and the state. 
The allocation of the fund provided for in this subsection may, as decided by the board, be carried out through the purchase of insurance company contracts to provide the benefits determined in accordance with this subsection. The fund may be distributed in one sum to the persons entitled to the benefits or the distribution may be carried out in such other equitable manner as the board may direct. The fund may be continued in existence for purposes of subsequent distributions. 
If, at any time during the first ten years after the effective date of the article originally establishing this system, the system shall be terminated or the full current costs of the system shall not have been met, anything in the system to the contrary notwithstanding, city contributions which may be used for the benefit of any one of the 25 highest paid members on the effective date, whose anticipated annual retirement allowance provided by the city's contributions at the member's normal retirement date would exceed $1,500.00, shall not exceed the greater of either (i) $20,000.00, or (ii) an amount computed by multiplying the smaller of $10,000.00 or 20 percent of such member's average final compensation during his last five years of service by the number of years of service since the effective date. If it shall be determined by statute, court decision, ruling by the commissioner of internal revenue or otherwise that the provisions of this paragraph are not then necessary to qualify the system under the Code, this paragraph shall be ineffective without the necessity of further amendment of this article. 
(d)  After all the vested and accrued benefits provided under this article have been paid and after all other liabilities have been satisfied, then and only then shall any remaining funds revert to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-49; Ord. No. 92-22, § 19, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-30. - No reduction of accrued benefits. 
No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the city commission which shall have the effect of reducing the then vested accrued benefits of members or a member's beneficiaries under this article. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-48(b); Ord. No. 92-22, § 18, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 95-10, § 11, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-31. - Interest of members in system. 
Under this article, all assets of the fund are held in trust, and at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system with respect to members and their spouses or beneficiaries shall any part of the corpus or income of the pension fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-48(a); Ord. No. 92-22, § 18, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 95-10, § 11, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-32. - Domestic relations orders; retiree directed payments; exemption from execution and nonassignability. 
(a)  Domestic relations orders. 
(1)  Prior to the entry of any domestic relations order which affects or purports to affect the system's responsibility in connection with the payment of benefits of a retiree, the member or retiree shall submit the proposed order to the board for review to determine whether the system may legally honor the order. 
(2)  If a domestic relations order is not submitted to the board for review prior to entry of the order, and the system is ordered to take action that it may not legally take, and the system expends administrative or legal fees in resolving the matter, the member or retiree who submits such an order will be required to reimburse the system for its expenses in connection with the order. 
(b)  Retiree directed payments. The board may, upon written request by a retiree or by a dependent, when authorized by a retiree or the retiree's beneficiary, authorize the system to withhold from the monthly retirement payment those funds that are necessary to pay for the benefits being received through the city, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the city, to make payment to insurance companies for insurance premiums and to make any payments for child support or alimony. 
(c)  Exemption from execution, non-assignability. Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, annuities, or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under this article and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this article are exempted from any state, county or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-50; Ord. No. 92-22, § 20, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, adopted September 28, 2010, changed the title of section 66-32 from "Exemption from execution and nonassignability" to "Domestic relations orders; retiree directed payments; exemption from execution and nonassignability."  
Sec. 66-33. - Pension validity. 
The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall have been granted under any prior or existing law or which shall be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or correct the pension amount of any person granted a pension under prior or existing law or any person hereafter granted a pension under this article if the pension is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason and to reclassify any person who has under any prior or existing law been or who shall under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments or underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-50.1; Ord. No. 92-22, § 21, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-34. - Benefit freeze and maximum benefit. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided in subsection (d) below, and notwithstanding any other provision of the system, the accrued benefits of all active members shall be frozen on September 30, 2012, and such members shall thereafter accrue benefits in accordance with section 66-116. Such members shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit with no reduction upon termination of employment and attaining age 55 or upon completion of 25 years of credited service. Such members who attain age 50 with ten years of credited service shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit reduced by three percent for each year prior to the member's earliest applicable normal retirement date. 
(b)  The benefits of members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on September 30, 2012 shall be payable in two parts: 
(1)  The frozen accrued benefit based credited service, average final compensation and the provisions of the system in effect on September 30, 2012; and 
(2)  The benefit based on credited service, average final compensation and the provisions of the system in effect on and after October 1, 2012. 
(c)  Effective October 1, 2012, the maximum combined benefit under the system shall be 75 percent of average final compensation. Provided, if a member's accrued benefit as of October 1, 2012 is 75 percent or more of average final compensation, the benefit percentage may not be reduced. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the system, the benefits of members who have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service as of September 30, 2012 shall not be frozen, and such members shall continue to accrue benefits in accordance with the provisions of the system in effect on September 30, 2012 for as long as they are employed in a position covered by the system. 
(Ord. No. 12-25, § 2, 9-27-12)  
Sec. 66-35. - Use of forfeitures. 
Under this article, forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to reduce future city contributions. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-48(d); Ord. No. 92-22, § 18, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 95-10, § 11, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-36. - Indemnification. 
(a)  To the extent not covered by insurance contracts in force from time to time, the city shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless members of the board from all personal liability for damages and costs, including court costs and attorneys' fees, arising out of claims, suits, litigation, or threat of such, referred to in this section as "claims," against these individuals because of acts or circumstances connected with or arising out of their official duty as members of the board. The city reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to settle or not settle the claim at any time and to appeal or not to appeal from any adverse judgement or ruling and in either event will indemnify, defend and hold harmless any members of the board from the judgment, execution, or levy thereon. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to relieve any insurance company or other entity liable to defend the claim or liable for payment of the judgment or claim, from any liability, nor does this section waive any provision of law affording the city immunity from any suit, in whole or part, or waive any other substantive or procedural rights the city may have. 
(c)  This section shall not apply nor shall the city be responsible in any manner to defend or pay for claims arising out of acts or omissions of members of the board which constitute felonies or gross malfeasance or gross misfeasance in office. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-50.3; Ord. No. 92-22, § 23, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-37. - Prohibited transactions. 
Effective as of January 1, 1989, a board may not engage in a transaction prohibited by Code Section 503(b). 
(Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-38. - USERRA. 
Effective December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any other provision of this system, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service are governed by Code Section 414(u) and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, as amended. To the extent that the definition of "credited service" sets forth contribution requirements that are more favorable to the member than the minimum compliance requirements, the more favorable provisions shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-39. - Electronic forms. 
In those circumstances where a written election or consent is not required by the plan or the Code, an oral, electronic, or telephonic form in lieu of or in addition to a written form may be prescribed by the board. However, where applicable, the board shall comply with Treasury Regulations § 1.401(a)-21. 
(Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-40. - Missing benefit recipients. 
The system shall follow the procedures outlined in the IRS Employee Plans Compliance Resolution System (EPCRS) Program and other applicable IRS guidance to locate any missing individuals to whom a full unreduced benefit payment is due and if, at the conclusion of such efforts, the individual cannot be located, the existing procedure of cancelling payments otherwise due (provided that, if the individual is later located, the benefits due shall be paid) will apply. 
(Ord. No. 19-10, § 3, 7-23-19)  
Secs. 60-41—66-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 66-66. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  The sole and exclusive administration of and responsibility for the proper operation of the system and for making effective the provisions of this article is hereby vested in a board of trustees. The board shall be designated as the plan administrator for the system. The board shall consist of five persons as follows: 
(1)  Two legal residents of the city and who shall be appointed by the city commission at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election, or at the first regularly scheduled meeting after the city commission meeting where newly elected commissioners are sworn into office, whichever is later. 
(2)  Two employee members to be elected as provided in this section; and 
(3)  One public member who is nominated by the board and appointed by the city commission. 
(b)  The regular term of office of each elected or appointed trustee shall be two years. The two trustees appointed by the city commission shall have staggered terms expiring in alternate years. Each member trustee may succeed himself if reelected as provided in this section. 
(c)  Elective employee trustees shall be elected by vote of all members of the respective departments which come within the purview of this article at places designated by the board, of which all qualified members entitled to vote shall be notified in person or by written notice ten days in advance of the election. The two employee members who receive the highest number of votes for office shall be declared elected and shall take office immediately upon commencement of the term of office for which elected or as soon thereafter as he shall qualify therefor. An election shall be held not more than 30 days and not less than ten days prior to the commencement of the term for which a trustee is to be elected. The board shall establish and administer the nominating and election procedure for each election, and the board shall elect from among its members a chairman, and secretary. 
(d)  If a vacancy occurs in the office of trustee, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the office was previously filled. 
(e)  The trustees shall serve without compensation, but they may be reimbursed from the fund for all necessary expenses which they may actually expend through service on the board. 
(f)  Each trustee shall, within ten days after his appointment or election, take an oath of office before the city clerk that he will diligently and honestly administer the affairs of the board, and that he will not knowingly violate or willingly permit to be violated any provisions of the law applicable to the system. Such oath shall be subscribed to by the trustee making it and shall be certified by the clerk and filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(g)  Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on the board. Three affirmative votes shall be necessary for any decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. A trustee shall have the right to abstain from voting as the result of a conflict of interest, provided that trustee complies with F.S. § 112.3143. 
(h)  The board shall engage such actuarial, accounting, legal, and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the system shall be paid from the fund at such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. In the event the board chooses to use the city's legal counsel, actuary or other professional, technical or other advisors, it shall do so only under terms and conditions acceptable to the board. 
(i)  The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include but not necessarily be limited to: 
(1)  Construe the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
(2)  Determine all questions relating to eligibility and membership. 
(3)  Determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits under this article. 
(4)  Establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit applications and all matters required to administer the system. 
(5)  Distribute to members, at regular intervals, information concerning the system. 
(6)  Receive and process all applications for benefits. 
(7)  Authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund and notify the disbursing agent, in writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the system and fund. 
(8)  Have performed actuarial studies and valuations, at least as often as required by law, and make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the system. 
(9)  Perform such other duties as are required to prudently administer the system. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-33; Ord. No. 92-22, § 3, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 00-02, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 04-08, §§ 1, 2, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 19-10, § 4, 7-23-19) 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions, ch. 22.  
Sec. 66-67. - Finances and fund management; establishment and operation of fund. 
(a)  As part of the system, there exists the fund, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the system. 
(b)  The actual custody and supervision of the fund and assets thereof shall be vested in the board. Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent, but only upon written authorization from the board. 
(c)  All funds of the general employees' retirement system may be deposited by the board with the city finance director, acting in a ministerial capacity only, who shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as he is liable for the safekeeping of funds for the city. However, any funds so deposited with the finance director shall be kept in a separate fund by the finance director or clearly identified as such funds of the general employees' retirement system. The board shall deposit the funds of the general employees' retirement system in a qualified public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which depository with regard to such funds shall conform to and be bound by all of the provisions of F.S. ch. 280. In order to fulfill its investment responsibilities as set forth in this section, the board may retain the services of a custodian bank, an investment advisor registered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 or otherwise exempt from such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination of these, for the purposes of investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall have discretion, subject to any guidelines as prescribed by the board, in the investment of all fund assets. 
(d)  All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the fund, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate current accounts and entries regarding the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and aggregate account basis; 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements; 
(3)  Benefit payments; 
(4)  Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the city; 
(5)  All interest, dividends and gains or losses, whatsoever; and 
(6)  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(e)  An audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year of the system showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(f)  The board shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1)  The board shall be vested with full legal title to the fund, subject, however, and in any event to the authority and power of the city commission to amend or terminate this fund, provided that no amendment or fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this system, unless otherwise provided herein. All contributions from time to time paid into the fund and the income thereof, without distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its agent in the fund, and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any portion of the fund. 
(2)  All monies paid into or held in the fund shall be invested and reinvested by the board, and the investment of all or any part of such funds shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Annuity and life insurance contracts with life insurance companies in amounts sufficient to provide, in whole or in part, the benefits to which all of the members shall be entitled under the provisions of this system and pay the initial and subsequent premium thereon. 
b.  Time or savings accounts of a national bank, a state bank insured by the bank insurance fund or a savings/building and loan association insured by the Savings Association Insurance Fund which is administered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or a state or federal chartered credit union whose share accounts are insured by the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund. 
c.  Obligations of the United States or obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the government of the United States or by an agency of the government of the United States. 
d.  Bonds issued by the State of Israel. 
e.  Stocks, commingled funds, mutual funds and bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, provided that: 
1.  Except as provided in subsection 2., all individually held securities and all securities in a commingled or mutual fund must be issued or guaranteed by a corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized territory of the United States, or the District of Columbia. 
2.  Up to 25 percent of the assets of the fund at market value may be invested in foreign securities. 
3.  The board shall not invest more than five percent of its assets in the common stock, capital stock or convertible securities of any one issuing company, nor shall the aggregate investment in any one issuing company exceed five percent of the outstanding capital stock of that company; nor shall the aggregate of its investments in common stock, capital stock, international equity securities and convertible securities at market exceed 75 percent of the assets of the fund. 
f.  Real estate, provided the board shall not invest more than 15 percent at market in real property or real estate, including investment in real estate investment trusts (REITS). 
(3)  At least once every three years, and more often as determined by the board, the board shall retain a professionally qualified independent consultant to evaluate the performance of all current investment managers and make recommendations regarding the retention of all such investment managers. These recommendations shall be considered by the board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(4)  The board may retain in cash or cash equivalents and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the system. 
(5)  Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as provided in this section nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to his own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(6)  The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct or it may retain them unregistered and in form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the fund. 
(7)  The board is empowered but is not required to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other investments comprising the fund which it may deem to be to the best interest of the fund to exercise. 
(8)  The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to secure any order of court for the exercise of any power contained in this section. 
(9)  Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required to perform, either under the terms of this article or under the general law applicable to it as trustee under this article, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the city, or any other entity of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(10)  Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member, retiree or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by the board in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the member, retiree or beneficiary was entitled, shall be paid. Overpayments shall be charged against payments next succeeding the correction or collected in another manner if prudent. Underpayments shall be made up from the fund in a prudent manner. 
(11)  The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the payments and benefits provided for in this article. 
(12)  In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary party, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be conclusive upon all persons. 
(13)  Any of the powers and functions reposed in the board under this section may be performed or carried out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times maintains continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent, and provided, further, that legal title to the fund shall always remain in the board. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-34; Ord. No. 92-22, § 4, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 93-26, § 1, 9-21-93; Ord. No. 95-10, § 4, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 96-35, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 05-25, § 1, 8-23-05; Ord. No. 07-13, § 1, 5-22-07; Ord. No. 07-47, § 1, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-68. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, adopted November 18, 2003, repealed § 66-68, which pertained to board attorney and professionals. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 66-69. - Contributions. 
(a)  Member contributions. Contributions by members of the general employees' retirement system shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Amount. Every member of the system who has attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on September 30, 2012 shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of seven and six-tenths percent of his salary. Members who are employed on September 30, 2012 but have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date, and members hired on or after October 1, 2012, shall be required to make contributions to the fund in accordance with section 66-116. Member contributions withheld by the city on behalf of the member shall be deposited with the board at least monthly. The contributions made by each member to the fund shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to section 414(h) of the code. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the member's gross income for federal income tax purposes. For all other purposes of the system, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
(2)  Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
(b)  City contributions. So long as this system is in effect, the city shall make quarterly contributions to the trust fund in an amount equal to the difference in each year, between the total aggregate member contributions for the year and the total cost for the year, as shown by the most recent actuarial valuation of the system. The total cost for any year shall be defined as the total normal cost plus the additional amount sufficient to amortize the unfunded past service liability as provided in part VII of F.S. ch. 112. 
(c)  Other. Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the fund, but such deposits must be accounted for separately and kept on a segregated bookkeeping basis. Funds arising from these sources may be used only for additional benefits for members, as determined by the board, and may not be used to reduce what would have otherwise been required city contributions. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-35; Ord. No. 92-22, § 5, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 98-53, § 1, 9-15-98; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-25, § 3, 9-27-12)  
Sec. 66-70. - Roster of retirees. 
The secretary of the board shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under this article, in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the pension shall cease to be paid. Additionally, the secretary shall keep a record of all members in such a manner as to show the name, address, date of employment and date such employment is terminated. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-43; Ord. No. 92-22, § 13, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Secs. 66-71—66-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 66-101. - Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(a)  Normal retirement age and date. Under this article, a member's normal retirement date for members who retired, entered the DROP or terminated employment with the right to a deferred vested benefit prior to October 1, 2012; and members who are employed on September 30, 2012 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be the earlier of the attainment of age 55 years, regardless of years of credited service, or the completion of 25 years of credited service, regardless of age. Each member shall become 100 percent vested in his accrued benefit at normal retirement age. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date the member retires from the city after attaining normal retirement age. 
Normal retirement under the system is retirement from employment with the city on or after the normal retirement age and date. The normal retirement date for members who are employed on September 30, 2012 but have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date, and members hired on or after October 1, 2012, shall be as provided in section 66-116; provided, members who are employed on September 30, 2012 but have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit through September 30, 2012 upon attaining age 55 or 25 years of credited service, and terminating city employment. Each member shall become 100 percent vested in his accrued benefit at normal retirement age. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date the member retires from the city after attaining normal retirement age. 
(b)  Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring under this article on or after his normal retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following his retirement date and be continued thereafter during member's lifetime, ceasing upon death, but with 120 monthly payments guaranteed in any event. The monthly retirement benefit for credited service earned prior to October 1, 2012 shall equal two and one-quarter percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service. In addition, all members retiring at early or normal retirement shall receive an additional $75.00 per month, unreduced for early retirement. The normal retirement benefit for credited service on and after October 1, 2012 shall be as provided in section 66-116. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, the normal retirement benefit of a member who is employed on September 30, 2012 and has attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall equal 2.25 percent of average final compensation for all years of credited service. 
(c)  Early retirement date. A member may retire on his early retirement date, which shall be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the attainment of age 50 and the completion of ten years of credited service. Early retirement under the system is retirement from employment with the city on or after the early retirement date and prior to the normal retirement date. Effective October 1, 2012, there shall be no early retirement date or early retirement benefit; provided, members who are employed on September 30, 2012 but have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit through September 30, 2012 with the reduction provided in subsection (d)(2) below, upon attaining age 50 with ten years of credited service and terminating city employment. 
(d)  Early retirement benefit. A member retiring under this article on his early retirement date may receive either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit payable in the same form as for normal retirement as follows: 
(1)  A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on what would have been his normal retirement date had he remained a general employee and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement on his normal retirement date except that credited service and average final compensation shall be determined as of his early retirement date; or 
(2)  An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on his early retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The benefit payable shall be as determined in subsection (d)(1) of this section, reduced by 1/15 for each year by which the commencement of benefits precedes the member's normal retirement date. 
(e)  Cost-of-living adjustment. The monthly amount payable based on credited service prior to October 1, 2012 to a member and his joint pensioner or beneficiary, if applicable, who retires on or after such member's normal or early retirement date, not including terminated vested persons or disability retirees, shall be subject to an annual cost-of-living adjustment commencing on the first October 1 following ten complete years of receiving retirement income payments. The cost-of-living adjustment shall be three percent of the previous years' benefit amount. There shall be no cost of living adjustment applied to benefits based on credited service on or after October 1, 2012; provided, members who are employed on September 30, 2012 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall continue to be eligible for the cost of living adjustment provided in this subsection applied to benefits based on all periods of credited service. 
(f)  Required distribution date. The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-36; Ord. No. 92-22, § 6, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 95-10, § 5, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 98-53, § 2, 9-15-98; Ord. No. 99-29, § 1, 5-18-99; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-25, § 4, 9-27-12; Ord. No. 19-10, § 5, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 66-102. - Preretirement death. 
Under this article, the beneficiary of any deceased member shall be entitled to an amount which is the actuarial equivalent of the value of the member's accrued benefit as of his date of death, payable over a term of not less than ten years, at the option of the beneficiary. The accrued benefit shall be based upon the average final compensation and credited service in effect on the date of death. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-37; Ord. No. 92-22, § 7, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 95-10, § 6, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-103. - Disability. 
(a)  Generally. Any member with ten years or more credited service who shall become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, because of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a general employee shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to two and one-quarter percent of his average final compensation multiplied by his total years of credited service. Subject to (a)(4) below, only active members of the system on the date the board determines entitlement to a disability benefit are eligible for disability benefits. 
(1)  Terminated persons, either vested or non-vested, are not eligible for disability benefits. 
(2)  If a member voluntarily terminates his employment, either before or after filing an application for disability benefits, he is not eligible for disability benefits. 
(3)  If a member is terminated by the city for any reason other than for medical reasons, either before or after he files an application for disability benefits, he is not eligible for disability benefits. 
(4)  The only exception to (1) above is: 
a.  If the member is terminated by the city for medical reasons and he has already applied for disability benefits before the medical termination, or; 
b.  If the member is terminated by the city for medical reasons and he applies within 30 days after the medical termination date. 
If either (4)a., or (4)b. above applies, the member's application will be processed and fully considered by the board. 
(b)  Conditions disqualifying disability benefits. Each member who is claiming disability benefits shall establish, to the satisfaction of the board, that such disability was not occasioned primarily by: 
(1)  Excessive or habitual use of any drugs, intoxicants or narcotics. 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots or civil insurrections. 
(3)  Injury or disease sustained while committing a crime. 
(4)  Injury or disease sustained while serving in any branch of the armed forces. 
(5)  Injury or disease sustained after his employment as a general employee with the city shall have terminated. 
(6)  Willful, wanton conduct or gross negligence of the member. 
(7)  Injury or disease sustained by the member while working for anyone other than the city and arising out of such employment. 
(8)  For general employees who become members of the system on or after January 1, 1995, a condition preexisting the general employee's membership in the system. Such members shall not be entitled to a disability pension, whether in line of duty or not in line of duty, because of or due to the aggravation of a specific injury, impairment or other medical condition preexisting at the time of membership in the system, provided that such preexisting condition and its relationship to a later injury, impairment or other medical condition be established by competent substantial evidence. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to preclude a disability pension to a member who, after membership in the system, suffers an injury, impairment or other medical condition different from some other injury, impairment, or other medical condition existing at or prior to membership. 
(c)  Physical examination requirement. 
(1)  A member shall not become eligible for disability benefits until and unless he undergoes a physical examination by a qualified physician or surgeon, who shall be selected by the board for that purpose. The board shall not select the member's treating physician or surgeon for this purpose except in an unusual case where the board determines that it would be reasonable to do so. 
(2)  Any retiree receiving disability benefits under this article may be required by the board to submit sworn statements of his condition accompanied by a physician's statement (provided at the retiree's expense) to the board annually and may be required by the board to undergo additional periodic re-examinations by a qualified physician or physicians or surgeon or surgeons who shall be selected by the board, to determine if such disability has ceased to exist. If the board finds that the retiree is no longer permanently and totally disabled to the extent that he is unable to render useful and efficient service as a general employee, the board shall recommend to the city that the retiree be returned to performance of duty as a general employee, and the retiree so returned shall enjoy the same rights that he had at the time he was placed upon pension. If the retiree so ordered to return shall refuse to comply with the order within 30 days from the issuance thereof, he shall forfeit the right to his pension. 
(3)  The cost of the physical examination and reexamination of the member claiming or the retiree receiving disability benefits shall be borne by the fund. All other reasonable costs as determined by the board incident to the physical examination, such as but not limited to transportation, meals and hotel accommodations, shall be borne by the fund. 
(4)  If the retiree recovers from disability and reenters the service of the city as a general employee, his service will be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month for which he received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date he reentered the service of the city will not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the system. 
(5)  The board shall have the power and authority to make the final decisions regarding all disability claims. 
(d)  Disability payments. The monthly benefit to which a member is entitled for the member's disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date the board determined such entitlement and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the first payment. The last payment will be: 
(1)  If the retiree recovers from the disability, the payment due next preceding the date of such recovery; or 
(2)  If the retiree dies without recovering from disability the payment due next preceding his death. 
Provided, however, the disability retiree may select, at any time prior to the date on which benefit payments begin, an optional form of benefit payment as described in subsection 66-105(a)(1) or (a)(2), which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of benefit. 
(e)  Workers' compensation. When a member is receiving a disability pension and workers' compensation benefits pursuant to F.S. ch. 440 for the same disability and the total monthly benefits received from both exceed 100 percent of the member's final monthly salary, excluding overtime, the disability pension benefit shall be reduced so that the total monthly amount received by the member does not exceed 100 percent of such salary. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-38; Ord. No. 92-22, § 8, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 95-10, § 7, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 98-53, § 3, 9-15-98; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 19-10, § 6, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 66-104. - Vesting. 
(a)  If a member terminates his employment as a general employee, either voluntarily or by discharge, and is not eligible for any retirement benefits under this system, the member shall be entitled to a percentage of the pension benefit accrued to his date of termination according to the following vesting schedule: 
Years of 
Credited Service 	Vested 
Percentage 
Less than 1 	0 
1 	10 
2 	20 
3 	30 
4 	40 
5 	50 
6 	60 
7 	70 
8 	80 
9 	90 
10 or more years 	100 
 
(b)  The vested portion of the accrued benefit shall be payable for life commencing at the member's election of the early or normal retirement date, provided he survives until benefit payments actually begin and provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions from the fund upon termination. If such accumulated contributions are refunded, he shall forfeit all other entitlements under the system. However, the board may, in its sole discretion and according to uniform, nondiscriminatory guidelines, authorize an alternative form or method of payment provided actuarial equivalence is maintained. The benefit rate per year of service shall be the same as determined for early or normal retirement and shall depend upon the time of commencement of benefit payments. 
(c)  Member will be 100 percent vested in all benefits upon attainment of the plan's age and service requirements for the plan's normal retirement benefit; and 
(d)  A member will be 100 percent vested in all accrued benefits, to the extent funded, if the plan is terminated or experiences a complete discontinuance of employer contributions. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section 66-104, the provisions of this section shall apply to benefits accruing prior to October 1, 2012. Effective October 1, 2012, for benefits accruing on and after that date, vesting rights shall be as provided in section 66-116; provided, members who are employed on September 30, 2012 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be entitled to a vested benefit in accordance with this section 66-104. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-39; Ord. No. 92-22, § 9, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-25, § 5, 9-27-12)  
Sec. 66-105. - Optional forms of benefits. 
(a)  In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable for normal or early retirement as specified in this article, a member, upon written request to the board, may elect to receive a retirement income or benefit of equivalent actuarial value payable in accordance with one of the following options: 
(1)  A retirement income of a monthly amount payable to the retiree for his lifetime only. 
(2)  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the retiree during the lifetime of the retiree and following the death of the retiree, 100 percent, 75 percent, 66 2/3 percent or 50 percent of such monthly amount payable to a joint pensioner for his lifetime. Except where the retiree's joint pensioner is his spouse, the payments to the joint pensioner as a percentage of the payments to the retiree shall not exceed the applicable percentage provided for in the applicable table in the Treasury Regulations. (See Q & A-2 of 1.401(a)(9)-6) 
(3)  If a member retires prior to the time at which Social Security benefits are payable, he may elect to receive an increased retirement benefit until such time as Social Security benefits shall be assumed to commence and a reduced benefit thereafter in order to provide, to as great an extent as possible, a more level retirement allowance during the entire period of retirement. The amounts payable shall be as recommended by the actuaries for the system, based upon the Social Security law in effect at the time of the member's retirement. 
(b)  The member, upon electing any option of this section, will designate the joint pensioner or beneficiary to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the system in the event of the member's death, and will have the power to change such designation from time to time. Such designation will name a joint pensioner or one or more primary beneficiaries where applicable. If the member has elected an option with a joint pensioner or beneficiary and the member's retirement income benefits have commenced, the member may thereafter change his designated beneficiary at any time, but may only change his joint pensioner if the designated joint pensioner and the member were married at the time of member's retirement and are divorced subsequent thereto and the joint pensioner is alive at the time of the change. In the absence of proof of good health of the joint pensioner being replaced, the actuary will assume that the joint pensioner has deceased for purposes of calculating the new payment. 
(c)  The consent of a member's or retiree's joint pensioner or beneficiary to any such change shall not be required. The rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive benefits under the system shall thereupon cease. 
(d)  Upon change of a retiree's joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the amount of the retirement income payable to the retiree shall be actuarially determined to take into account the age and sex of the former joint pensioner, the new joint pensioner and the retiree. Any such member shall pay the actuarial recalculation expenses. Each request for a change will be made in writing on a form prepared by the board and on completion will be filed with the board. If no designated beneficiary survives the retiree, such benefits as are payable for the death of the retiree subsequent to his retirement shall be paid as provided in section 66-106. 
(e)  Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  If the member dies prior to his normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever occurs first, no retirement benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under section 66-102. 
(2)  If the designated beneficiary or joint pensioner dies before the member's retirement under the system, the option elected will be canceled automatically, and a retirement income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the member upon his retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the member prior to his retirement. 
(3)  If both the retiree and the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by member or retiree die before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period certain and life thereafter, made pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section, the board may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be paid in a lump sum and in accordance with section 66-106. 
(4)  If a member continues beyond his normal retirement date pursuant to subsection 66-101(a) and dies prior to his actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made or a retirement benefit will be paid under the option to a beneficiary designated by the member in the amount computed as if the member had retired under the option on the date on which his death occurred. 
(5)  The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(f)  A retiree may not change his retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his first retirement check. 
(g)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the board in its discretion may elect to make a lump-sum payment to a member or a member's beneficiary in the event that the total commuted value of the monthly income payments to be paid do not exceed $1,000.00. Any such payment made to any person pursuant to the power and discretion conferred upon the board by the preceding sentence shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to such member and shall not be subject to review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-40; Ord. No. 92-22, § 10, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 95-10, § 8, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 06-26, § 2, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-106. - Beneficiaries. 
(a)  Each member or retiree subject to this article may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, designate a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the event of his death. Each designation may be revoked or changed by such member or retiree by signing and filing with the board a new designation-of-beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefits under this system shall cease. 
(b)  If a deceased member or retiree failed to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection (a) of this section or if the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) named by the member or retiree predeceases the member or retiree, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the system with respect to such deceased member or retiree shall be paid to the estate of the member or retiree and the board, in discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(c)  Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-41; Ord. No. 92-22, § 11, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-107. - Claims procedures. 
(a)  The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written requests ("claims"), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person ("claimant"), including members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(b)  The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth in Florida Statutes. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-42; Ord. No. 92-22, § 12, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-108. - Maximum pension. 
(a)  Basic limitation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this system to the contrary, the member contributions paid to, and retirement benefits paid from, the system shall be limited to such extent as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of Code Section 415 for a qualified retirement plan. Before January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the limits specified in Code Section 415(b), subject to the applicable adjustments in that section. On and after January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the dollar amount specified in Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) ($160,000.00), subject to the applicable adjustments in Code Section 415(b) and subject to any additional limits that may be specified in this system. For purposes of this section, "limitation year" shall be the calendar year. 
(b)  Adjustments to basic limitation for form of benefit. If the form of benefit without regard to any benefit increase feature is not a straight life annuity, then the Code Section 415(b) limit applicable at the annuity starting date is reduced to an actuarially equivalent amount (determined using the assumptions specified in Treasury Regulation Section 1.415(b)-1(c)(2)(ii)) that takes into account the death benefits under the form of benefit. 
(c)  Benefits not taken into account. For purposes of this section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account in applying these limits: 
(1)  Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; 
(2)  Any other benefit not required under Section 415(b)(2) of the Code and Regulations thereunder to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of Code Section 415(b)(1). 
(d)  COLA effect. Effective on and after January 1, 2003, for purposes of applying the limits under Code Section 415(b) (the "limit"), the following will apply: 
(1)  A member's applicable limit will be applied to the member's annual benefit in the member's first calendar year of benefit payments without regard to any automatic cost of living adjustments; 
(2)  Thereafter, in any subsequent calendar year, a member's annual benefit, including any automatic cost of living increases, shall be tested under the then applicable benefit limit including any adjustment to the Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) dollar limit under Code Section 415(d), and the regulations thereunder; but 
(3)  In no event shall a member's benefit payable under the system in any calendar year be greater than the limit applicable at the annuity starting date, as increased in subsequent years pursuant to Code Section 415(d) and the regulations thereunder. 
Unless otherwise specified in the system, for purposes of applying the limits under Code Section 415(b), a member's applicable limit will be applied taking into consideration cost of living increases as required by Section 415(b) of the Code and applicable Treasury Regulations. 
(e)  Other adjustments in limitations. 
(1)  In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before age 62, the limit prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the provisions of Code Section 415(b) of the Code, so that such limit (as so reduced) equals an annual straight life benefit (when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a $160,000.00 annual benefit beginning at age 62. 
(2)  In the event the member's benefit is based on at least 15 years of credited service as a full-time employee of the fire or police department of the city, the adjustments provided for in subsection (e)(1) above shall not apply. 
(3)  The reductions provided for in subsection (e)(1) above shall not be applicable to disability benefits pursuant to section 66-103, or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 66-102. 
(4)  In the event the member's retirement benefit becomes payable after age 65, for purposes of determining whether this benefit meets the limit set forth in subsection (a) herein, such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the benefit beginning at age 65. This adjustment shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate. 
(f)  Less than ten tears of participation. The maximum retirement benefits payable under this section to any member who has completed less than ten years participation shall be the amount determined under subsection (a) of this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of participation and the denominator of which is ten. The reduction provided by this subsection cannot reduce the maximum benefit below ten percent of the limit determined without regard to this subsection. The reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be applicable to pre-retirement disability benefits paid pursuant to section 66-103 or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 66-102. 
(g)  Participation in other defined benefit plans. The limit of this section with respect to any member who at any time has been a member in any other defined benefit plan as defined in Code Section 414(j) maintained by the city shall apply as if the total benefits payable under all city defined benefit plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one plan. 
(h)  Ten thousand dollar limit; less than ten years of service. Notwithstanding anything in this section 66-108, the retirement benefit payable with respect to a member shall be deemed not to exceed the limit set forth in this subsection (h) of section 66-108 if the benefits payable, with respect to such member under this system and under all other qualified defined benefit pension plans to which the city contributes, do not exceed $10,000.00 for the applicable limitation year or for any prior limitation year, and the city has not any at time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan in which the member participated; provided, however, that if the member has completed less than ten years of credited service with the city, the limit under this subsection (h) of section 66-108 shall be a reduced limit equal to $10,000.00 multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of credited service and the denominator of which is ten. 
(i)  Reduction of benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or contributions to all plans, where required, shall be accomplished by first reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be determined by the board and the plan administrator of such other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures for defined contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be established by the board and the plan administrator for such other plans provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority pursuant to the agreement of the board and the plan administrator of all other plans covering such member. 
(j)  Service credit purchase limits. 
(1)  Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, if a member makes one or more contributions to purchase permissive service credit under the system, as allowed in sections 66-114 and 66-115, then the requirements of this section will be treated as met only if: 
a.  The requirements of Code Section 415(b) are met, determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all such contributions as an annual benefit for purposes of Code Section 415(b), or 
b.  The requirements of Code Section 415(c) are met, determined by treating all such contributions as annual additions for purposes of Code Section 415(c). 
c.  For purposes of applying subsection (j)(1)a., the system will not fail to meet the reduced limit under Code Section 415(b)(2)(C) solely by reason of this subsection c., and for purposes of applying subsection (j)(1)b. the system will not fail to meet the percentage limitation under Section 415(c)(1)(B) of the Code solely by reason of this subsection c. 
(2)  For purposes of this subsection the term "permissive service credit" means service credit: 
a.  Recognized by the system for purposes of calculating a member's benefit under the plan. 
b.  Which such member has not received under the plan, and 
c.  Which such member may receive only by making a voluntary additional contribution, in an amount determined under the system, which does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service credit. 
Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, such term may, if otherwise provided by the system, include service credit for periods for which there is no performance of service, and, notwithstanding clause (j)(2)b., may include service credited in order to provide an increased benefit for service credit which a member is receiving under the system. 
(3)  For purposes of applying the limits in this subsection (j), only and for no other purpose, the definition of compensation where applicable will be compensation actually paid or made available during a calendar year, except as noted below and as permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulations. Unless another definition of compensation that is permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulation, is specified by the system, compensation will be defined as wages within the meaning of Code Section 3401(a) and all other payments of compensation to an employee by an employer for which the employer is required to furnish the employee a written statement under Code Sections 6041(d), 6051(a)(3) and 6052 and will be determined without regard to any rules under Code Section 3401(a) that limit the remuneration included in wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services performed (such as the exception for agricultural labor in Code Section 3401(a)(2). 
a.  However, for calendar years beginning after December 31, 1997, compensation will also include amounts that would otherwise be included in compensation but for an election under Code Sections 125(a), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 402(k), or 457(b). For calendar years beginning after December 31, 2000, compensation will also include any elective amounts that are not includible in the gross income of the employee by reason of Code Section 132(f)(4). 
b.  For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2007, compensation for the calendar year will also include compensation paid by the later of two and one-half months after an employee's severance from employment or the end of the calendar year that includes the date of the employee's severance from employment if: 
1.  The payment is regular compensation for services during the employee's regular working hours, or compensation for services outside the employee's regular working hours (such as overtime or shift differential), commissions, bonuses or other similar payments, and, absent a severance from employment, the payments would have been paid to the employee while the employee continued in employment with the employer; or 
2.  The payment is for unused accrued bona fide sick, vacation or other leave that the employee would have been able to use if employment had continued. 
c.  Back pay, within the meaning of Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2(g)(8), shall be treated as compensation for the limitation year to which the back pay relates to the extent the back pay represents wages and compensation that would otherwise be included under this definition. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the board may modify a request by a member to make a contribution to the system if the amount of the contribution would exceed the limits provided in Code Section 415 by using the following methods: 
a.  If the law requires a lump sum payment for the purchase of service credit, the board may establish a periodic payment deduction plan for the member to avoid a contribution in excess of the limits under Code Sections 415(c) or 415(n). 
b.  If payment pursuant to subsection (j)(4)a. will not avoid a contribution in excess of the limits imposed by Code Section 415(c), the board may either reduce the member's contribution to an amount within the limits of that section or refuse the member's contribution. 
(k)  Additional limitation on pension benefits. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary: 
(1)  The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to a retiree who becomes a member of the system and who has not previously participated in such system, on or after January 1, 1980, shall not exceed 100 percent of his average final compensation. However, nothing contained in this section shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension increases attributable to cost-of-living increases or adjustments. 
(2)  No member of the system shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to social security benefits or federal benefits under Chapter 1223, Title 10, U.S. Code. 
(l)  Effect of direct rollover on 415(b) limit. If the plan accepts a direct rollover of an employee's or former employee's benefit from a defined contribution plan qualified under code section 401(a) which is maintained by the employer, any annuity resulting from the rollover amount that is determined using a more favorable actuarial basis than required under code section 417(e) shall be included in the annual benefit for purposes of the limit under code section 415(b). 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-45; Ord. No. 92-22, § 15, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 19-10, § 7, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 66-109. - Minimum distribution of benefits. 
(a)  General rules. 
(1)  Effective date. Effective as of January 1, 1989, the plan will pay all benefits in accordance with a good faith interpretation of the requirements of Code Section 401(a)(9) and the regulations in effect under that section, as applicable to a governmental plan within the meaning of Code Section 414(d). Effective on and after January 1, 2003, the plan is also subject to the specific provisions contained in this section. The provisions of this section will apply for purposes of determining required minimum distributions for calendar years beginning with the 2003 calendar year. 
(2)  Precedence. The requirements of this section will take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the plan. 
(3)  TEFRA Section 242(b)(2) elections. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section other than this subsection (a)(3), distributions may be made under a designation made before January 1, 1984, in accordance with Section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the plan that related to Section 242(b)(2) of TEFRA. 
(b)  Time and manner of distribution. 
(1)  Required beginning date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date which shall not be later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(2)  Death of member before distributions begin. If the member dies before distributions begin, the member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed no later than as follows: 
a.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by a date on or before December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age 70½, if later, as the surviving spouse elects. 
b.  If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then, distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
c.  If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
d.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this subsection (b)(2), other than subsection (b)(2)a., will apply as if the surviving spouse were the member. 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(2), distributions are considered to begin on the member's required beginning date or, if subsection (b)(2)d. applies, the date of distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member before the member's required beginning date (or to the member's surviving spouse before the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a.) the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. 
(3)  Death after distributions begin. If the member dies after the required distribution of benefits has begun, the remaining portion of the member's interest must be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution before the member's death. 
(4)  Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with this section. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code and Treasury regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual account described in Section 414(k) of the Code will be distributed in a manner satisfying the requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code and Treasury regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
(c)  Determination of amount to be distributed each year. 
(1)  General requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
a.  The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one year. 
b.  The member's entire interest must be distributed pursuant to section 66-101, section 66-102, section 66-104, or section 66-105 (as applicable) and in any event over a period equal to or less than the member's life or the lives of the member and a designated beneficiary, or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the member or of the member and a designated beneficiary. The life expectancy of the member, the member's spouse, or the member's beneficiary may not be recalculated after the initial determination for purposes of determining benefits. 
(2)  Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The amount that must be distributed on or before the member's required beginning date (or, if the member dies before distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under section 66-102) is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g., monthly. All of the member's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's required beginning date. 
(3)  Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues. 
(d)  General distribution rules. 
(1)  The amount of an annuity paid to a member's beneficiary may not exceed the maximum determined under the incidental death benefit requirement of Code Section 401(a)(9)(G), and effective for any annuity commencing on or after January 1, 2008, the minimum distribution incidental benefit rule under Treasury Regulation Section 1.401(a)(9)-6, Q&A-2. 
(2)  The death and disability benefits provided by the plan are limited by the incidental benefit rule set forth in Code Section 401(a)(9)(G) and Treasury Regulation Section 1.401-1(b)(1)(I) or any successor regulation thereto. As a result, the total death or disability benefits payable may not exceed 25 percent of the cost for all of the members' benefits received from the retirement system. 
(e)  Definitions. 
(1)  Designated beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the plan and is the designated beneficiary under Section 401(a)(9) of the Code and Section 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of the Treasury Regulations. 
(2)  Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin pursuant to section 66-102. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-47; Ord. No. 92-22, § 17, 9-15-92; Ord. No. 95-10, § 10, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 06-26, § 3, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-110. - Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions; elimination of mandatory distributions. 
(a)  Rollover distributions. 
(1)  General. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the system to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(2)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
a.  Direct rollover means a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
b.  Distributee includes an employee or former employee. It also includes the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse. Effective January 1, 2007, it further includes a non-spouse beneficiary who is a designated beneficiary as defined by Code Section 401(a)(9)(E). However, a non-spouse beneficiary may rollover the distribution only to an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity established for the purpose of receiving the distribution and the account or annuity will be treated as an "inherited" individual retirement account or annuity. 
c.  Eligible retirement plan means an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Code; an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of the Code; an annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the Code; effective January 1, 2002, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by an eligible employer described in Section 457(e)(1)(A) of the Code and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan; effective January 1, 2002, an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the Code; or a qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the Code; or effective January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA described in Section 408A of the Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. This definition shall also apply in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse. 
d.  Eligible rollover distribution means any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments, not less frequently than annually, made for the life or life expectancy of the distributee or the joint lives or joint life expectancies of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Section 401(a)(9) of the Code; and the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income. Effective January 1, 2002, any portion of any distribution which would be includible in gross income as after-tax employee contributions will be an eligible rollover distribution if the distribution is made to an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a); to an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b); to a qualified defined contribution plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible; or on or after January 1, 2007, to a qualified defined benefit plan described in Code Section 401(a) or to an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of the distribution that is includible in gross income and the portion of the distribution that is not so includible. 
(b)  Rollovers or transfers into the fund. On or after January 1, 2002, the system will accept, solely for the purpose of purchasing credited service as provided herein, permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans, member rollover cash contributions and/or direct cash rollovers of distributions made on or after January 1, 2002, as follows: 
(1)  Transfers and direct rollovers or member rollover contributions from other plans. The system will accept either a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a member contribution of an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code, from an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the Code or from an eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state. The system will also accept legally permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans. 
(2)  Member rollover contributions from IRAs. The system will accept a member rollover contribution of the portion of a distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or 408(b) of the Code that is eligible to be rolled over. 
(c)  Elimination of mandatory distributions. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, in the event this plan provides for a mandatory (involuntary) cash distribution from the plan not otherwise required by law, for an amount in excess of $1,000.00, such distribution shall be made from the plan only upon written request of the member and completion by the member of a written election on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-50.4; Ord. No. 93-26, § 2, 9-21-93; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 06-26, § 4, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-111. - Family and medical leave. 
Under this article, the fractional parts of the 24-month period ending each March 1 that a member is on leave without pay from the city pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) shall be added to his credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the fractional parts of the 24 months ending each March 1 for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of periods of credited service. 
(2)  The request for credited service for FMLA leave time for the 24-month period prior to each March 1 and payment of professional fees shall be made on or before March 31. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made on or before April 30 for the preceding 24-month period ending March 1 and shall be made in one lump-sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be issued. 
(4)  Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count toward vesting. 
(Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code 1983, § 16-50.5; Ord. No. 95-10, § 12, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-112. - Reemployment after retirement. 
(a)  Any retiree who is retired under this system may be reemployed by any public or private employer, and may receive compensation from that employment without limiting or restricting in any way the retirement benefits payable under this system. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, reemployment by the city shall be subject to the limitations set forth in this section. 
(b)  After normal retirement. Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system and who is reemployed as a general employee after that retirement and, by virtue of that reemployment, is eligible to participate in this system, shall upon being reemployed continue receipt of benefits if he is at least age 62, otherwise the system shall discontinue receipt of benefits until he reaches age 62. Upon reemployment, the retiree shall be deemed to be fully vested and the additional credited service accrued during the subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit amount attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be added to the benefit determined upon the initial retirement to determine the total benefit payable upon final retirement. Calculations of benefits upon retirement shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation, and credited service as of that date (not including any period of DROP participation) and the retirement benefit amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation, and credited service as of the date of subsequent retirement (based only on the subsequent employment period). The amount of any death or disability benefit received as a result of a subsequent period of employment shall be reduced by the amount of accrued benefit eligible to be paid for a prior period of employment. The optional form of benefit and any joint pensioner selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to change upon subsequent retirement except as otherwise provided herein, but the member may select a different optional form and joint pensioner applicable to the subsequent retirement benefit. 
(c)  Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system and who is reemployed by the city after that retirement and, by virtue of that reemployment is ineligible to participate in this system, shall, during the period of such reemployment, continue receipt of benefits previously earned if he is at least age 62, otherwise the system shall discontinue receipt of benefits until he reaches age 62. Former DROP participants shall begin receipt of benefits under these circumstances. 
(d)  After early or disability retirement. Any retiree who is retired under early or disability retirement pursuant to this system and who subsequently becomes an employee of the city in any capacity shall discontinue receipt of benefits from the system. If by virtue of that reemployment, the retiree is eligible to participate in this system, the retiree shall be deemed to be fully vested and the additional credited service accrued during the subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit amount attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be added to the benefit determined upon the initial retirement to determine the total benefit payable upon final retirement. Calculations of benefits upon retirement shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation, credited service and early retirement reduction factor as of that date and the retirement benefit amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation (based only on the subsequent employment period), and credited service as of the date of subsequent retirement. The amount of any death or disability benefit received as a result of a subsequent period of employment shall be reduced by the amount of accrued benefit eligible to be paid for a prior period of employment. The optional form of benefit and any joint pensioner selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to change upon subsequent retirement except as otherwise provided herein, but the member may select a different optional form and joint pensioner applicable to the subsequent retirement benefit. Retirement pursuant to an early retirement incentive program shall be deemed early retirement for purposes of this section if the member was permitted to retire prior to the customary retirement date provided for in the system at the time of retirement. 
(e)  Reemployment of terminated vested persons. Reemployed terminated vested persons shall not be subject to the provisions of this section until such time as they begin to actually receive benefits. Upon receipt of benefits, terminated vested persons shall be treated as normal or early retirees for purposes of applying the provisions of this section and their status as an early or normal retiree shall be determined by the date they elect to begin to receive their benefit. 
(f)  DROP participants. Retirees who were in the deferred retirement option plan shall, following termination of employment after DROP participation, have the options provided for in this section for reemployment. 
(Ord. No. 19-10, § 8, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 66-113. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section 66-113, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  DROP means the City of St. Pete Beach General Employees' Deferred Retirement Option Plan. 
(2)  DROP account means the account established for each DROP participant under subsection (c). 
(3)  Total return of the assets. For purposes of calculating earnings on a member's DROP account pursuant to subsection (c)(2)b.2., for each fiscal year quarter, the percentage increase (or decrease) in the interest and dividends earned on investments, including realized and unrealized gains (or losses), of the total plan assets. 
(b)  Participation. 
(1)  Eligibility to participate. In lieu of terminating his employment as a general employee, any member who is eligible for normal retirement under section 66-101(a), of the system may, prior to October 1, 2012, elect to defer receipt of such service retirement pension and to participate in the DROP. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the DROP shall be closed to new participants effective October 1, 2012, and no member may enter the DROP on or after that date; provided, a member who is employed on September 30, 2012 and has attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date may enter and participate in the DROP on or after October 1, 2012 in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Election to participate. A member's election to participate in the DROP must be made in writing in a time and manner determined by the board and shall be effective on the first day of the first calendar month which is at least 15 business days after it is received by the board. 
(3)  Period of participation. A member who elects to participate in the DROP under subsection (b)(2), shall participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed 60 months beginning at the time his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. An election to participate in the DROP shall constitute an irrevocable election to resign from the service of the city not later than the date provided for in the previous sentence. A member may participate only once. 
(4)  Termination of participation. 
a.  A member's participation in the DROP shall cease at the earlier of: 
1.  The end of his permissible period of participation in the DROP as determined under subsection (b)(3); or 
2.  Termination of his employment as a general employee. 
b.  Upon the member's termination of participation in the DROP, pursuant to subsection 1. above, all amounts provided for in this subsection (c)(2), including monthly benefits and investment earnings or losses or interest, as applicable, shall cease to be transferred from the system to his DROP account. Any amounts remaining in his DROP account shall be paid to him in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) when he terminates his employment as a general employee. 
c.  A member who terminates his participation in the DROP under subsection (b)(4) shall not be permitted to again become a participant in the DROP. 
(5)  Effect of DROP participation on the system. 
a.  A member's credited service and his accrued benefit under the system shall be determined on the date his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. The member shall not accrue any additional credited service or any additional benefits under the system (except for any additional benefits provided under any cost-of-living adjustment in the system) while he is a participant in the DROP. After a member commences participation, he shall not be permitted to again contribute to the system, nor shall he be eligible for disability, nor shall his estate or beneficiary be eligible for pre-retirement death benefits. 
b.  No amounts shall be paid to a member from the system while the member is a participant in the DROP. Unless otherwise specified in the system, if a member's participation in the DROP is terminated other than by terminating his employment as a general employee, no amounts shall be paid to him from the system until he terminates his employment as a general employee. Unless otherwise specified in the system, amounts transferred from the system to the member's DROP account shall be paid directly to the member only on the termination of his employment as a general employee. 
(c)  Funding. 
(1)  Establishment of DROP account. A DROP account shall be established for each member participating in the DROP. A member's DROP account shall consist of amounts transferred to the DROP under subsection (c)(2), and earnings or interest on those amounts. 
(2)  Transfers from retirement system. 
a.  As of the first day of each month of a member's period of participation in the DROP, the monthly retirement benefit he would have received under the system had he terminated his employment as a general employee and elected to receive monthly benefit payments thereunder shall be transferred to his DROP account, except as otherwise provided for in subsection (b)(4)b. A member's period of participation in the DROP shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b)(3) and (b)(4), but in no event shall it continue past the date he terminates his employment as a general employee. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(4)b., a member's DROP account under this subsection (c)(2) shall be debited or credited with either: 
1.  Interest at an effective rate of seven and one-half percent per annum compounded monthly determined on the last business day of the prior month's ending balance and credited to the member's DROP account as of such date (to be applicable to all current and future DROP participants); or 
2.  Earnings, to be credited or debited to the member's DROP account, determined as of the last business day of each fiscal year quarter and debited or credited as of such date, determined as follows: 
The average daily balance in a member's DROP account shall be credited or debited at a rate equal to the actual net rate of investment return realized by the system for that quarter. "Net investment return" for the purpose of this paragraph is the total return of the assets in which the member's DROP account is invested by the board net of brokerage commissions, transaction costs and management fees. 
For purposes of calculating earnings on a member's DROP account pursuant to this subsection (c)(2)b.2., brokerage commissions, transaction costs, and management fees shall be determined for each quarter by the investment consultant pursuant to contracts with fund managers as reported in the custodial statement. The investment consultant shall report these quarterly contractual fees to the board. The investment consultant shall also report the net investment return for each manager and the net investment return for the total plan assets. 
Upon electing participation in the DROP, the member shall elect to receive either interest or earnings on his account to be determined as provided above. The member may, in writing, elect to change his election only once during his DROP participation. An election to change must be made prior to the end of a quarter and shall be effective beginning the following quarter. 
c.  A member's DROP account shall only be credited or debited with earnings or interest and monthly benefits while the member is a participant in the DROP. A member's final DROP account value for distribution to the member upon termination of participation in the DROP shall be the value of the account at the end of the quarter immediately preceding termination of participation for participants electing the net plan return and at the end of the month immediately preceding termination of participation for participants electing the flat interest rate return, plus any monthly periodic additions made to the DROP account subsequent to the end of the previous quarter or month, as applicable, and prior to distribution. If a member is employed by the city as a general employee after participating in the DROP for the permissible period of DROP participation, then beginning with the member's first month of employment following the last month of the permissible period of DROP participation, the member's DROP account will no longer be credited or debited with earnings or interest, nor will monthly benefits be transferred to the DROP account. All such non-transferred amounts shall be forfeited and continue to be forfeited while the member is employed by the city as a general employee. A member employed by the city as a general employee after the permissible period of DROP participation will still not be eligible for disability benefits, nor shall his estate or beneficiary be eligible for pre-retirement death benefits, nor will he accrue additional credited service. 
(d)  Distribution of DROP accounts on termination of employment. 
(1)  Eligibility for benefits. A member shall receive the balance in his DROP account in accordance with the provisions of this subsection (d) upon his termination of employment as a general employee. Except as provided in subsection (d)(5), no amounts shall be paid to a member from the DROP prior to his termination of employment as a general employee. 
(2)  Form of distribution. 
a.  Unless the member elects otherwise, distribution of his DROP account shall be made in a lump sum, subject to the direct rollover provisions set forth in subsection (d)(6). A member may elect, in such time and manner as the board shall prescribe, to receive the optional form of benefit described below. 
Until the value of the member's DROP account is completely depleted, payments in approximately equal quarterly or annual installments over a period, designated by the member, not to exceed the life expectancy of the last survivor of the member and his beneficiary. In the event that the member dies before all installments have been paid, the remaining balance in his DROP account shall be paid in an immediate cash lump sum to his beneficiary, or if none is designated, then to the member's estate. 
b.  Notwithstanding the preceding, if a member dies before his benefits commence, his DROP account shall be paid to his beneficiary in such optional form as his beneficiary may select. If no beneficiary designation is made, the DROP account shall be distributed to the member's estate. 
(3)  Date of payment of distribution. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (d), distribution of a member's DROP account shall begin as soon as administratively practicable following the member's termination of employment. Distribution of the amount in a member's DROP account will not be made unless the member completes a written request for distribution and a written election, on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or a rollover of the lump sum amount. 
(4)  Proof of death and right of beneficiary or other person. The board may require and rely upon such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive the value of a deceased member's DROP account as the board may deem proper and its determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive payment shall be conclusive. 
(5)  Distribution limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of subsection (d), all distributions from the DROP shall conform to the "minimum distribution of benefits" provisions as provided for herein. 
(6)  Direct rollover of certain distributions. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the DROP to the contrary, a distributee may elect to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid in a direct rollover as otherwise provided under the system in section 66-110. 
(e)  Administration of DROP. 
(1)  Board administers the DROP. The general administration of the DROP, the responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the DROP and the responsibility of overseeing the investment of the DROP's assets shall be placed in the board. The members of the board may appoint from their number such subcommittees with such powers as they shall determine; may adopt such administrative procedures and regulations as they deem desirable for the conduct of their affairs; may authorize one or more of their number or any agent to execute or deliver any instrument or make any payment on their behalf; may retain counsel, employ agents and provide for such clerical, accounting, actuarial and consulting services as they may require in carrying out the provisions of the DROP; and may allocate among themselves or delegate to other persons all or such portion of their duties under the DROP, other than those granted to them as trustee under any trust agreement adopted for use in implementing the DROP, as they, in their sole discretion, shall decide. A trustee shall not vote on any question relating exclusively to himself. 
(2)  Individual accounts, records and reports. The board shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, records showing the operation and condition of the DROP, including records showing the individual balances in each member's DROP account, and the board shall keep, or cause to be kept, in convenient form such data as may be necessary for the valuation of the assets and liabilities of the DROP. The board shall prepare or cause to be prepared and distributed to members participating in the DROP and other individuals or filed with the appropriate governmental agencies, as the case may be, all necessary descriptions, reports, information returns, and data required to be distributed or filed for the DROP pursuant to the code, the applicable portions of the act and any other applicable laws. 
(3)  Establishment of rules. Subject to the limitations of the DROP, the board from time to time shall establish rules for the administration of the DROP and the transaction of its business. The board shall have discretionary authority to construe and interpret the DROP (including but not limited to determination of an individual's eligibility for DROP participation, the right and amount of any benefit payable under the DROP and the date on which any individual ceases to be a participant in the DROP). The determination of the board as to the interpretation of the DROP or its determination of any disputed questions shall be conclusive and final to the extent permitted by applicable law. The board shall also oversee the investment of the DROP'S assets. 
(4)  Limitation of liability. 
a.  The trustees shall not incur any liability individually or on behalf of any other individuals for any act or failure to act, made in good faith in relation to the DROP or the funds of the DROP. 
b.  Neither the board nor any trustee of the board shall be responsible for any reports furnished by any expert retained or employed by the board, but they shall be entitled to rely thereon as well as on certificates furnished by an accountant or an actuary, and on all opinions of counsel. The board shall be fully protected with respect to any action taken or suffered by it in good faith in reliance upon such expert, accountant, actuary or counsel, and all actions taken or suffered in such reliance shall be conclusive upon any person with any interest in the DROP. 
(f)  General provisions. 
(1)  The DROP is not a separate retirement plan. Instead, it is a program under which a member who is eligible for normal retirement under the system may elect to accrue future retirement benefits in the manner provided in this section 66-108 for the remainder of his employment, rather than in the normal manner provided under the plan. Upon termination of employment, a member is entitled to a lump sum distribution of his or her DROP account balance or may elect a rollover. The DROP account distribution is in addition to the member's monthly benefit. 
(2)  Notional account. The DROP account established for such a member is a notional account, used only for the purpose of calculation of the DROP distribution amount. It is not a separate account in the system. There is no change in the system's assets, and there is no distribution available to the member until the member's termination from the DROP. The member has no control over the investment of the DROP account. 
(3)  No employer discretion. The DROP benefit is determined pursuant to a specific formula which does not involve employer discretion. 
(4)  IRC limit. The DROP account distribution, along with other benefits payable from the system, is subject to limitation under Internal Revenue Code section 415(b). 
(5)  Amendment of DROP. The DROP may be amended by an ordinance of the city at any time and from time to time, and retroactively if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend in whole or in part any or all of the provisions of the DROP. However, except as otherwise provided by law, no amendment shall make it possible for any part of the DROP's funds to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under the DROP. No amendment shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the balance of the DROP account of any member. 
(6)  Facility of payment. If the board shall find that a member or other person entitled to a benefit under the DROP is unable to care for his affairs because of illness or accident or is a minor, the board may direct that any benefit due him, unless claim shall have been made for the benefit by a duly appointed legal representative, be paid to his spouse, a child, a parent or other blood relative, or to a person with whom he resides. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of the liabilities of the DROP for that benefit. 
(7)  Information. Each member, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit shall be payable to him or on his account under the DROP, shall file with the board the information that it shall require to establish his rights and benefits under the DROP. 
(8)  Written elections, notification. 
a.  Any elections, notifications or designations made by a member pursuant to the provisions of the DROP shall be made in writing and filed with the board in a time and manner determined by the board under rules uniformly applicable to all employees similarly situated. The board reserves the right to change from time to time and manner for making notifications, elections or designations by members under the DROP if it determines after due deliberation that such action is justified in that it improves the administration of the DROP. In the event of a conflict between the provisions for making an election, notification or designation set forth in the DROP and such new administrative procedures, those new administrative procedures shall prevail. 
b.  Each member or retiree who has a DROP account shall be responsible for furnishing the board with his current address and any subsequent changes in his address. Any notice required to be given to a member or retiree hereunder shall be deemed given if directed to him at the last such address given to the board and mailed by registered or certified United States mail. If any check mailed by registered or certified United States mail to such address is returned, mailing of checks will be suspended until such time as the member or retiree notifies the board of his address. 
(9)  Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable to a member from the DROP shall be paid only from the assets of the member's DROP account and neither the city nor the board shall have any duty or liability to furnish the DROP with any funds, securities or other assets except to the extent required by any applicable law. 
(10)  Construction. 
a.  The DROP shall be construed, regulated and administered under the laws of Florida, except where other applicable law controls. 
b.  The titles and headings of the subsections in this section 66-113 are for convenience only. In the case of ambiguity or inconsistency, the text rather than the titles or headings shall control. 
(11)  Forfeiture of retirement benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP participants from the application of any forfeiture provisions applicable to the system. DROP participants shall be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits. 
(12)  Effect of DROP participation on employment. Participation in the DROP is not a guarantee of employment and DROP participants shall be subject to the same employment standards and policies that are applicable to employees who are not DROP participants. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 3-2-99; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 06-26, § 5, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-25, § 6, 9-27-12; Ord. No. 19-10, § 9, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 66-114. - Prior government service. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the years or fractional parts of years that a general employee who was previously a member, but who terminated employment and is not otherwise entitled to credited service for such previous period of employment as a general employee, or the years or fractional parts of years that a member previously served as an employee for any governmental agency in the United States, including but not limited to federal, state or local government service, and for which he does not otherwise qualify for and receive credit under this system, shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  The request shall be made only once and made by the member on or before the later of 24 months from the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section or 18 months from the date of his employment or reemployment with the city. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six months of his or her request for credit, but, in any event, prior to retirement, and shall be made in one lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  The maximum credit for service other than with the City of St. Pete Beach under this section when combined with credited service purchased pursuant to section 66-115, shall be five years and shall count for all purposes except vesting and eligibility for disability benefits. There shall be no maximum purchase of credited service pursuant to this section for service with the City of St. Pete Beach and credited service purchased shall count for all purposes including vesting but excluding eligibility for disability benefits. 
(5)  In no event, however, may credited service be purchased pursuant to this section for prior service with any other governmental agency, if such prior service forms or will form the basis of a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan as set forth in section 66-108, subsection (2). 
(Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 19-10, § 10, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 66-115. - Military service prior to employment. 
The years or fractional parts of years that a member serves or has served on active duty in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily and honorably or under honorable conditions prior to first and initial employment with the city shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  The request shall be made only once and made by the member on of before 24 months from the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section or 18 months from the date of his employment with the city, whichever is later. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six months of his request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  The maximum credit under this section, when combined with credited service with an employer other than the City of St. Pete Beach purchased pursuant to section 66-114, shall be five years. 
(5)  Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count for all purposes, except vesting and eligibility for disability benefits. 
(Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-116. - Benefits effective October 1, 2012. 
(a)  Effective October 1, 2012, all members employed on that date who have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service, and all members hired on or after that date, shall accrue benefits as provided in this section 66-116. The provision of this section shall not apply to members who have retired, separated from service with the city with the right to a deferred vested benefit, entered DROP or attained normal retirement eligibility prior to October 1, 2012. 
(b)  Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(1)  Normal retirement age and date. A member's normal retirement age is the earlier of the attainment of age 60 and completion of ten years of credited service, or 30 years of credited service regardless of age. Provided, a member with ten or more years of credited service on September 30, 2012 shall be eligible for normal retirement at age 55 or upon completion of 25 years of credited service, regardless of age. Each member shall become 100 percent vested in his accrued benefit at normal retirement age. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date the member retires from the city after attaining normal retirement age. 
(2)  Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring on or after the normal retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following his retirement and which shall be continued thereafter during the member's lifetime, ceasing upon death, but with 120 monthly payments guaranteed in any event. The monthly retirement benefit shall equal 1.0 percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service earned on or after October 1, 2012, up to a maximum of 75 percent of average final compensation. Provided, if a member's accrued benefit as of October 1, 2012 is 75 percent or more of average final compensation, the benefit percentage may not be reduced. 
(3)  No Early retirement. A member may not receive an immediate or deferred retirement benefit under this section, prior to attaining his or her normal retirement date as defined in this section. 
(c)  COLA. Members accruing benefits under this section shall not be entitled to a cost of living adjustment. 
(d)  Vesting. If a member terminates employment, either voluntarily or by lawful discharge, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1)  With less than ten years of credited service (including credited service earned prior to October 1, 2012), a member is entitled to a refund of member contributions without interest. 
(2)  With ten or more years of credited service (including credited service earned prior to October 1, 2012) a member is entitled to either: 
a.  The pension benefit accrued to the member's date of termination, based on the terms of the plan in effect on such date of termination, payable commencing at the member's otherwise normal retirement date, provided the member does not elect to withdraw his or her member contributions; or 
b.  Refund of member contributions without interest. 
(e)  Employee contribution. Effective October 1, 2012 each member of the system shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of three percent of salary; provided, members who are employed on September 30, 2012 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of 7.6 percent of salary. 
(f)  DROP. No member may enter the DROP on or after October 1, 2012. Members already participating in DROP on October 1, 2012 may complete their DROP participation. Provided, members who are employed on September 30, 2012 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be eligible to enter and participate in the DROP on or after October 1, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 12-25, § 7, 9-27-12; Ord. No. 19-10, § 11, 7-23-19)  
Secs. 66-117—66-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - POLICE OFFICERS' RETIREMENT SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, adopted Apr. 18, 2000, repealed art. III, §§ 66-141—66-225, in its entirety, and replaced it with a new art. III, §§ 66-141—66-225. Former art. III pertained to similar material and derived from the Code of 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code of 1983, §§ 16-51—16-66, 16-68, 16-69(a)—(d), 16-70, 16-70.1—16-70.6, 16-71; Ord. No. 86-5, §§ 1—10, adopted Mar. 18, 1986; Ord. No. 86-6; Ord. No. 86-58, §§ 1—3, adopted Dec. 16, 1986; Ord. No. 87-9, §§ 1—4, adopted Mar. 17, 1987; Ord. No. 88-34, § 1, Sept. 20, 1988; Ord. No. 89-10, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 16, 1990; Ord. No. 91-15, §§ 1—14, 16, 18—24, adopted June 18, 1991; Ord. No. 94-3, §§ 1—3, adopted Feb. 1, 1994; Ord. No. 96-11, §§ 1—10, 12—14, adopted Mar. 5, 1996; Ord. No. 96-50, § 2, adopted Dec. 17, 1996; Ord. No. 98-50, § 1, adopted July 7, 1998; Ord. No. 98-57, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 1998; and Ord. No. 99-2, § 1, adopted Mar. 2, 1999. 
Cross reference— Tax on casualty insurance premiums for benefit of police officers retirement trust fund, § 78-27. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 66-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions without interest. For those members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the system, any payment representing interest and any required actuarially calculated payments for the purchase of such credited service, shall be included in accumulated contributions. 
Actuarial equivalent means a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon the RP 2000 Combined Healthy Unisex Mortality Table and an interest rate equal to the investment return assumption set forth in the last actuarial valuation report approved by the board. This definition may only be amended by the city pursuant to the recommendation of the board using the assumptions adopted by the board with the advice of the plan's actuary, such that actuarial assumptions are not subject to city discretion. 
Average final compensation means one-twelfth of the average salary of the five best years of the last ten years of credited service prior to retirement, termination, or death, or the career average as a full-time police officer, whichever is greater. A year shall be 12 consecutive months. 
Beneficiary means the person entitled to receive benefits under this article at the death of a member who has been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect or if no person so designated is living at the time of death of the member, the beneficiary shall be the estate of the member. 
Board means the board of trustees, which shall administer and manage the system provided in this article and serve as trustees of the fund. 
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. 
Credited service means the total number of years and fractional parts of years of service as a police officer with member contributions, when required, omitting intervening years or fractional parts of years when such member was not employed by the city as a police officer. A member may voluntarily leave his accumulated contributions in the fund for a period of five years after leaving the employ of the police department pending the possibility of being reemployed as a police officer, without losing credit for the time that he was a member of the system. If a vested member leaves the employ of the police department, his accumulated contributions will be returned only upon his written request. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed as a police officer with the police department within five years, his accumulated contributions, if $1,000.00 or less, shall be returned. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed within five years, his accumulated contributions, if more than $1,000.00, will be returned only upon the written request of the member and upon completion of a written election to receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount on forms designated by the board. Upon return of a member's accumulated contributions, all of his rights and benefits under the system are forfeited and terminated. Upon any reemployment a police officer shall not receive credit for the years and fraction parts of years of service for which he has withdrawn his accumulated contributions from the fund, unless the police officer repays into the fund the contributions he has withdrawn, with interest, as determined by the board, within 90 days after his reemployment. 
The years or fractional parts of years that a member performs "qualified military service" consisting of voluntary or involuntary "service in the uniformed services" as defined in the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) (P.L. 103-353), after separation from employment as a police officer with the city to perform training or service, shall be added to his years of credited service for all purposes, including vesting, provided that: 
(1)  The member is entitled to reemployment under the provisions of USERRA. 
(2)  The member returns to his employment as a police officer within one year from the earlier of the date of his military discharge or release from active service, unless otherwise required by USERRA. 
(3)  The maximum credit for military service pursuant to this paragraph shall be five years. 
(4)  This paragraph is intended to satisfy the minimum requirements of USERRA. To the extent that this paragraph does not meet the minimum standards of USERRA, as it may be amended from time to time, the minimum standards shall apply. 
In the event a member dies on or after January 1, 2007, while performing USERRA qualified military service, the beneficiaries of the member are entitled to any benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) as if the member had resumed employment and then died while employed. 
Beginning January 1, 2009, to the extent required by section 414(u)(12) of the code, an individual receiving differential wage payments (as defined under section 3401(h)(2) of the code) from an employer shall be treated as employed by that employer, and the differential wage payment shall be treated as compensation for purposes of applying the limits on annual additions under section 415(c) of the code. This provision shall be applied to all similarly situated individuals in a reasonably equivalent manner. 
Leave conversions of unused accrued paid time off shall not be permitted to be applied toward the accrual of credited service either during each plan year of a member's employment with the city or in the plan year in which the member terminates employment. 
Eligible employee means an individual who was a member before the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995. 
Fund means the trust fund established in this article as part of the system. 
Member means an actively employed police officer who fulfills the prescribed membership requirements. Benefit improvements which, in the past, have been provided for by amendments to the system adopted by city ordinance and any benefit improvements which might be made in the future shall apply prospectively and shall not apply to members who terminate employment or who retire prior to the effective date of any ordinance adopting such benefit improvements, unless such ordinance specifically provides to the contrary. 
Police officer means an actively employed full time person, employed by the city, including his initial probationary employment period, who is certified as a police officer as a condition of employment in accordance with F.S. § 943.1395, who is vested with authority to bear arms and make arrests, and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of the penal, traffic, or highway laws of the state. 
Retiree means a member who has entered retirement status. 
Retirement means a member's separation from city employment with eligibility for immediate receipt of benefits under the system. 
Salary for credited service prior to January 31, 2013 shall mean the total compensation for services rendered to the city as a police officer reportable on the member's W-2 form plus all tax deferred, tax sheltered or tax exempt items of income derived from elective employee payroll deductions or salary reductions. Compensation in excess of the limitations set forth in section 401(a)(17) of the code as of the first day of the plan year shall be disregarded for any purpose, including employee contributions or any benefit calculations. The annual compensation of each member taken into account in determining benefits or employee contributions for any plan year beginning on or after January 1, 2002, may not exceed $200,000.00, as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with code section 401(a)(17)(B). Compensation means compensation during the fiscal year. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. If the determination period consists of fewer than 12 months, the annual compensation limit is an amount equal to the otherwise applicable annual compensation limit multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the short determination period, and the denominator of which is 12. If the compensation for any prior determination period is taken into account in determining a member's contributions or benefits for the current plan year, the compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the applicable annual compensation limit in effect for that prior period. The limitation on compensation for an "eligible employee" shall not be less than the amount which was allowed to be taken into account under this article as in effect July 1, 1993. Effective February 1, 2013, "salary" shall be defined in accordance with the provisions of section 66-229. 
Spouse means the member's or retiree's spouse under applicable law at the time benefits become payable. 
System means the City of St. Pete Beach Police Officers' Retirement System as contained in this article and all amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 01-91, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 03-22, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 06-27, § 1, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-27, § 1, 12-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-26, § 1, 12-12-17)  
Sec. 66-142. - Exclusive use of fund. 
Under this article, at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system with respect to retirees and members and their spouses or beneficiaries shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-143. - Benefit freeze; maximum benefit; refund of contributions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the system: 
(a)  The accrued benefits of all active members shall be frozen on January 31, 2013, and such members shall thereafter accrue benefits in accordance with section 66-229. Such members shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit with no reduction upon attaining age 55 or upon completion of 25 years of credited service. Such members who attain age 50 with ten years of credited service, or 20 years of credited service regardless of age, shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit reduced by three percent for each year that retirement precedes the member's earliest applicable normal retirement date. 
(b)  The benefits of members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on January 31, 2013 shall be payable in two parts: 
a.  The frozen accrued benefit based on the vested percentage, credited service, average final compensation and other provisions of the system in effect on January 31, 2013; and 
b.  The benefit based on credited service, average final compensation and the provisions of the system in effect on and after February 1, 2013. 
(c)  Effective February 1, 2013, the maximum combined benefit under the system shall be 75 percent of average final compensation. Provided, if a member's accrued benefit as of February 1, 2013 is 75 percent or more of average final compensation, the benefit percentage may not be reduced. 
(d)  The benefits of members who have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service as of January 31, 2013 shall not be frozen, and such members shall continue to accrue benefits in accordance with the provisions of the system in effect on January 31, 2013 for as long as they are employed in a position covered by the system. 
(e)  Any member employed as a police officer on October 1, 2012, may elect to receive a refund of accumulated member contributions, without interest, in lieu of any benefit from the system. A member who receives a refund of accumulated contributions shall not thereafter be eligible for any benefit from the system. 
(Ord. No. 12-27, § 2, 12-27-12) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of § 66-143 by Ord. No. 12-27, § 2, adopted Dec. 27, 2012, Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 2010, repealed the former § 66-143 in its entirety, which pertained to qualification of system, and derived from Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, adopted Apr. 18, 2000.  
Sec. 66-144. - Membership. 
(a)  Conditions of eligibility. All police officers as of June 18, 1991 and all future new police officers shall become members of this system under this article as a condition of employment, except that if, a new employee who is hired as chief of police upon employment as chief of police has entered into an agreement with the city wherein he shall be permitted to participate in a pension plan other than the one provided in this article, he shall be entitled to waive participation in this plan. Current employees of the city who are selected to become chief of police are not eligible for the opt-out provided for herein. In order to waive such participation, the chief of police shall notify the city manager and the board of trustees, in writing, of his decision to waive such participation. The waiver shall be kept by the city clerk with a duplicate original copy maintained in the personnel file of the chief of police. Thereafter, contributions to the plan in accordance with sections 66-146 or 66-229 shall not be required, he shall not be eligible to be elected as a member trustee on the board or vote for a member trustee, and he shall not be eligible for any other benefits from the plan. 
(b)  Designation of beneficiary. Each police officer shall complete a form prescribed by the board designating a beneficiary or beneficiaries. 
(c)  Police officers employed by Pinellas County Sheriff's Office. Police officers who are employed by the Pinellas County Sheriff's Office pursuant to an interlocal agreement between the City of St. Pete Beach and the Pinellas County Sheriff's Office, who elect to continue participating in this system, shall remain members of this system for as long as they are employed in a position covered by the system, until retirement. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-27, § 3, 12-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-26, § 2, 12-12-17)  
Sec. 66-145. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a)  This article establishing the system and fund and subsequent ordinances pertaining to the system and fund may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part, provided that if this article or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefitting under this article, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby. 
(b)  If this article shall be repealed or if contributions to the system are discontinued or if there is a transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. ch. 121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with this article, for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one of the options provided for in this article who are designated by any of such members. If this article is repealed discontinuance of contributions, or transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there shall be full vesting of 100 percent of benefits accrued to date of repeal and such benefits shall be nonforfeitable. 
(c)  The fund shall be distributed in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The board shall determine the date of distribution and the asset value required to fund all the nonforfeitable benefits after taking into account the expenses of such distribution. The board shall inform the city if additional assets are required, in which event the city shall continue to financially support the plan until all nonforfeitable benefits have been funded. 
(2)  The board shall determine the method of distribution of the asset value, whether distribution shall be by payment in cash, by the maintenance of another or substituted trust fund, by the purchase of insured annuities, or otherwise, for each police officer entitled to benefits under the plan as specified in subsection (3). 
(3)  The board shall distribute the asset value as of the date of termination in the manner set forth in this subsection, on the basis that the amount required to provide any given retirement income is the actuarially computed single-sum value of such retirement income, except that if the method of distribution determined under subsection (2) involves the purchase of an insured annuity, the amount required to provide the given retirement income is the single premium payable for such annuity. The actuarial single-sum value may not be less than the police officer's accumulated contributions to the plan, with interest if provided by the plan, less the value of any plan benefits previously paid to the police officer. 
(4)  If there is asset value remaining after the full distribution specified in subsection (3), and after the payment of any expenses incurred with such distribution, such excess shall be returned to the city, less return to the state of the state's contributions, provided that, if the excess is less than the total contributions made by the city and the state to date of termination of the plan, such excess shall be divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the city and the state. 
(5)  The board shall distribute, in accordance with subsection (2), the amounts determined under subsection (3). 
If, after 24 months after the date the plan terminated or the date the board received written notice that the contributions thereunder were being permanently discontinued, the city or the board of the fund affected has not complied with all the provisions in this section, the Florida Department of Management Services will effect the termination of the fund in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-146. - Contributions. 
(a)  Member contributions. Under this article, contributions of members shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Amount. Each member of the system shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of 8.3 percent of his salary through January 31, 2013. Effective February 1, 2012, each member of the system who has not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date, and members hired on or after February 1, 2013, shall be required to make contributions to the fund in accordance with section 66-229. Member contributions withheld by the city on behalf of the member shall be deposited with the board immediately after each pay period. The contributions made by each member to the fund shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to section 414(h) of the code. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the member's gross income for federal income tax purposes. For all other purposes of the system, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
(2)  Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
(b)  State contributions. Any monies received or receivable because of laws of the state for the express purpose of funding and paying for retirement benefits for city police officers shall be deposited in the trust fund comprising part of this system immediately and under no circumstances more than five days after receipt by the city. 
(c)  City contributions. So long as this system is in effect, the city shall make quarterly contributions to the trust fund in an amount equal to the difference in each year between the total aggregate member contributions for the year, plus state contributions for such year, and the total cost for the year, as shown by the most recent actuarial valuation of the system. The total cost for any year shall be defined as the total normal cost plus the additional amount sufficient to amortize the unfunded past service liability as provided in part VII of F.S. ch. 112. 
(d)  Other. Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the fund, but such deposits must be accounted for separately and kept on a segregated bookkeeping basis. Funds arising from these sources may be used only for additional benefits for members, as determined by the board, and may not be used to reduce what would have otherwise been required city contributions. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-27, § 4, 12-27-12)  
Sec. 66-147. - Domestic relations orders; retiree directed payments; exemption from tax, non-assignability. 
(a)  Domestic relations orders. 
(1)  Prior to the entry of any domestic relations order which affects or purports to affect the system's responsibility in connection with the payment of benefits of a retiree, the member or retiree shall submit the proposed order to the board for review to determine whether the system may legally honor the order. 
(2)  If a domestic relations order is not submitted to the board for review prior to entry of the order, and the system is ordered to take action that it may not legally take, and the system expends administrative or legal fees in resolving the matter, the member or retiree who submits such an order will be required to reimburse the system for its expenses in connection with the order. 
(b)  Retiree directed payments. The board may, upon written request by a retiree or by a dependent, when authorized by a retiree or the retiree's beneficiary, authorize the system to withhold from the monthly retirement payment those funds that are necessary to pay for the benefits being received through the city, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the city, to make payment to insurance companies for insurance premiums as permitted by F.S. ch. 185 and to make any payments for child support or alimony. 
(c)  Exemption from tax, non-assignability. Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, annuities, or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under this article and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this article are exempted from any state, county or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, adopted September 28, 2010, changed the title of section 66-147 from "Exemption of tax, non-assignability" to "Domestic relations orders; retiree directed payments; exemption from tax, non-assignability."  
Sec. 66-148. - Pension validity. 
The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall have been granted under any prior or existing law or shall be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or correct the pension amount of any person granted a pension under prior or existing law or heretofore granted a pension under this article if the pension is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason and to reclassify any person who has under any prior or existing law been or who shall under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments or underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-149. - Vesting. 
If a member terminates his employment as a police officer, either voluntarily or by discharge, and is not eligible for any other retirement benefits under the retirement system of this article, he shall be entitled to one of the following: 
(1)  A percentage of the pension benefit accrued to his date of termination according to the following vesting schedule: 
Years of Credited 

Service 	Vested 

Percent 
Less than 1 	0 
1 	10 
2 	20 
3 	30 
4 	40 
5 	50 
6 	60 
7 	70 
8 	80 
9 	90 
10 or more 	100 
 
If the member is vested under the vesting schedule upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a monthly retirement benefit based on his vested percentage, determined in the same manner as for normal or early retirement and based upon the member's credited service, average final compensation and the benefit accrual rate as of the date of termination, payable to him commencing at the member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, determined as if he had remained employed, provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions and provided the member survives to his otherwise normal or early retirement date. If the member does not withdraw his accumulated contributions and does not survive to his otherwise normal or early retirement date, his designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as provided herein for a deceased member, vested or eligible for retirement under preretirement death. 
(2)  Refund of accumulated contributions. 
(3)  Any vested member of the system whose position is terminated, for whatever reason, but who remains employed by the city in some other capacity, shall have all retirement benefits accrued up to the date of such termination under this system preserved, provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions from this system. Such accrued retirement benefits shall be payable at his otherwise early (reduced as for early retirement) or normal retirement date hereunder, or later, in accordance with the provisions of this system; provided further, however, that benefits shall not be payable under this system during any period of continued employment by the city. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section 66-149, the provisions of this section shall apply to benefits accruing prior to February 1, 2013. Effective February 1, 2013, for benefits accruing on and after that date, vesting rights shall be as provided in section 66-229; provided, members who are employed on January 31, 2013 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall have vesting rights as provided in this section 66-149. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-27, § 5, 12-27-12)  
Secs. 66-150—66-152. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, adopted September 28, 2010, repealed the former sections 66-150—66-152 in their entirety, which pertained to forfeiture of pension, use of forfeitures, and reduction of accrued benefits, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, April 18, 2000.  
Sec. 66-153. - Conviction and forfeiture; false, misleading or fraudulent statements. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly make, or cause to be made, or to assist, conspire with, or urge another to make, or cause to be made, any false, fraudulent, or misleading oral or written statement or withhold or conceal material information to obtain any benefit from the system. 
(b)  A person who violates subsection (a) commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
(c)  In addition to any applicable criminal penalty, upon conviction for a violation described in subsection (a), a member or beneficiary of the system may, in the discretion of the board, be required to forfeit the right to receive any or all benefits to which the person would otherwise be entitled under the system. For purposes of this subsection, "conviction" means a determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Secs. 66-154—66-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 66-181. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  The sole and exclusive administration of and responsibility for the proper operation of the system, and for making effective provisions of this article, is vested in a board of trustees. The board is hereby designated as the plan administrator. The board shall consist of five trustees, two of whom, unless otherwise prohibited by law, shall be legal residents of the city, who shall be appointed by the city commission, at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election, or at the first regularly scheduled meeting after the city commission meeting where newly elected commissioners are sworn into office, which ever is later; and two of whom shall be members of the system, who shall be elected by a majority of the police officers who are members of the system. The fifth trustee shall be chosen by a majority of the previous four trustees as provided herein, and such person's name shall be submitted to the city commission. Upon receipt of the fifth person's name, the city commission shall, ministerial duty, appoint such person to the board of trustees as its fifth trustee. The fifth trustee shall have the same rights as each of the other four trustees appointed or elected as provided herein and shall a two-year term, unless he sooner vacates the office. Each resident trustee shall serve as trustee for a period of two years with staggered terms expiring in alternate years, unless he sooner vacates the office or is sooner replaced by the city commission, at whose pleasure he share serve. Each member trustee shall serve as trustee for a period of two years, unless he sooner leaves the employment of the city as a police officer or otherwise vacates his office as trustee, whereupon a successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the departing trustee. Each trustee may succeed himself in office. The board shall establish and administer the nominating and election procedures for each election. The board shall meet at least quarterly each year. The board shall be a legal entity with, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained in this article, the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature, and description. 
(b)  The trustees shall, by a majority vote, elect a chairman and a secretary. The secretary of the board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of the board. The trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by law. 
(c)  Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on the board. Three affirmative votes shall be necessary for any decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. A trustee shall have the right to abstain from voting as the result of a conflict of interest, provided that trustee complies with the provisions of F.S. § 112.3143. 
(d)  The board shall engage such actuarial, accounting, legal, and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the system shall be paid from the fund at such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. In the event the board chooses to use the city's legal counsel, actuary or other professional, technical or other advisors, it shall do so only under terms and conditions acceptable to the board. 
(e)  The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
(1)  Construe the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
(2)  Determine all questions relating to eligibility and membership. 
(3)  Determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits under this article. 
(4)  Establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit applications and all matters required to administer the system. 
(5)  Distribute to members, at regular intervals, information concerning the system. 
(6)  Receive and process all applications for benefits. 
(7)  Authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund, and notify the disbursing agent, in writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the system and fund. 
(8)  Have performed actuarial studies and valuations, at least as often as required by law, and make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the system. 
(9)  Perform such other duties as are required to prudently administer the system. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 04-08, § 3, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-182. - Indemnification of board of trustees. 
(a)  To the extent not covered by insurance contracts in force from time to time, the city shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless members of the board from all personal liability for damages and costs, including court costs and attorneys' fees, arising out of claims, suits, litigation, or threat of such, referred to in this section as "claims," against these individuals because of acts or circumstances connected with or arising out of their official duty as members of the board of trustees. The city reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to settle or not settle the claim at any time, and to appeal or to not appeal from any adverse judgment or ruling, and in either event will indemnify, defend and hold harmless any members of the board from the judgment, execution, or levy thereon. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to relieve any insurance company or other entity liable to defend the claim or liable for payment of the judgment or claim from any liability, nor does this section waive any provision of law affording the city immunity from any suit in whole or part or waive any other substantive or procedural rights the city may have. 
(c)  This section shall not apply nor shall the city be responsible in any manner to defend or pay for claims arising out of acts or omissions of members of the board which constitute felonies or gross malfeasance or gross misfeasance in office. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-183. - Finances and fund management; establishment and operation of fund. 
(a)  As part of the police officers' pension plan, there exists the fund, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the system. 
(b)  The actual custody and supervision of the fund and assets thereof shall be vested in the board. Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent but only upon written authorization from the board. 
(c)  All funds of the police officers' retirement system may be deposited by the board with the city finance director, acting in a ministerial capacity only, who shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as he is liable for the safekeeping of funds for the city. However, any funds so deposited with the city finance director shall be kept in a separate fund by the finance director or clearly identified as such funds of the police officers' retirement system. In lieu thereof, the board shall deposit the funds of the police officers' retirement system in a qualified public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which depository with regard to such funds shall conform to and be bound by all of the provisions of F.S. ch. 280. In order to fulfill its investment responsibilities as set forth herein, the board may retain the services of a custodian bank, an investment advisor registered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 or otherwise exempt from such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination of these, for the purposes of investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall have discretion, subject to any guidelines as prescribed by the board, in the investment of all fund assets. 
(d)  All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the fund, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and aggregate account basis; 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements; 
(3)  Benefit payments; 
(4)  Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the city; 
(5)  All interest, dividends and gains or losses whatsoever; and 
(6)  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(e)  An audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year of the system showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(f)  The board shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1)  The board shall be vested with full legal title to said fund, subject, however, and in any event to the authority and power of the city commission to amend or terminate this fund, provided that no amendment or fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this system, except as otherwise provided herein. All contributions from time to time paid into the fund and the income thereof, without distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its agent in the fund, and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any portion of the fund. 
(2)  All monies paid into or held in the fund shall be invested and reinvested by the board and the investment of all or any part of such funds shall be limited to: 
a.  Annuity and life insurance contracts with life insurance companies in amounts sufficient to provide, in whole or in part, the benefits to which all of the members in the fund shall be entitled under the provisions of this system and pay the initial and subsequent premium thereon. 
b.  Time or savings accounts of a national bank, a state bank insured by the bank insurance fund or a savings/building and loan association insured by the Savings Association Insurance Fund which is administered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or a state or federal chartered credit union whose share accounts are insured by the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund. 
c.  Obligations of the United States or obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the government of the United States or by an agency of the government of the United States. 
d.  Bonds issued by the State of Israel. 
e.  Stocks, commingled funds, mutual funds and bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, provided that: 
1.  Except as provided in paragraph 2., all individually held securities and all securities in a commingled or mutual fund must be issued or guaranteed by a corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized territory of the United States or the District of Columbia. 
2.  Up to 25 percent of the assets of the fund at market value may be invested in foreign securities. 
3.  The board shall not invest more than five percent of its assets in the common stock, capital stock or convertible securities of any one issuing company, nor shall the aggregate investment in any one issuing company exceed five percent of the outstanding capital stock of that company, nor shall the aggregate of its investments in common stock, capital stock and convertible securities at market exceed 75 percent of the assets of the fund. 
f.  Real estate, provided the board shall not invest more than 15 percent at market in real property or real estate, including investment in real estate investment trusts (REITS). 
(3)  At least once every three years, and more often as determined by the board, the board shall retain a professionally qualified independent consultant, as defined in F.S. § 185.06, to evaluate the performance of all current investment managers and make recommendations regarding the retention of all such investment managers. These recommendations shall be considered by the board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(4)  The board may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the system. 
(5)  Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to his or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(6)  The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them unregistered and in form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the fund. 
(7)  The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other investments comprising the fund which it may deem to be to the best interest of the fund to exercise. 
(8)  The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to secure any order of court for the exercise of any power contained herein. 
(9)  Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required to perform, either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as trustee under this article, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the city, or any other entity, of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(10)  Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member, retiree or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by the board in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the member, retiree or beneficiary was correctly entitled, shall be paid. Overpayment shall be charged against payments next succeeding the correction or collected in another manner if prudent. Underpayments shall be made up from the fund in a prudent manner. 
(11)  The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the payments and benefits herein provided for. 
(12)  In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary party, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be conclusive upon all persons. 
(13)  Any of the powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times maintains continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent and provided, further, that legal title to the fund shall always remain in the board. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 05-27, § 1, 8-23-05; Ord. No. 07-15, § 1, 5-22-07; Ord. No. 07-49, § 1, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-184. - Reports to division of retirement. 
Each year and no later than March 15, the board shall file an annual report with the division of retirement containing the documents and information required by F.S. § 185.221. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-185. - Roster of retirees. 
The secretary of the board shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under this article in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the pension shall cease to be paid. Additionally, the secretary shall keep a record of all police officers employed by the city in such a manner as to show the name, address, date of employment and date such employment is terminated. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-186. - Claims procedures. 
(a)  The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written requests ("claims"), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person ("claimant"), including members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(b)  The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth in state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Secs. 66-187—66-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 66-216. - Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(a)  (1)  Normal retirement age and date. Under this article, a member's normal retirement age is the earlier of the attainment of age 55 or the completion of 25 years of credited service for members who retired, entered the DROP or terminated employment with the right to a deferred vested benefit prior to February 1, 2013, and members who are employed on January 31, 2013 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date. Each member shall become 100 percent vested in his accrued benefit at normal retirement age. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date the member retires from the city after attaining normal retirement age. 
(2)  The normal retirement date for members who are employed on January 31, 2013, but have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date, and members hired on or after February 1, 2013, shall be as provided in section 66-229; provided, members who are employed on January 31, 2013 but have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit based on credited service prior to January 31, 2013, upon attaining age 55 or 25 years of credited service, or a reduced early retirement benefit based on their frozen accrued benefit upon attaining age 50 with ten years of credited service or 20 years of credited service. 
(b)  Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring under this article on or after his normal retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month next following his retirement and shall be continued thereafter during member's lifetime, ceasing upon death, but with 120 monthly payments guaranteed in any event. The monthly retirement benefit shall be as follows: 
(1)  If a member was hired by the city as a police officer prior to October 1, 1981, the monthly retirement benefit shall be equal to three and two-tenths percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service prior to October 1, 1981, plus four percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service subsequent to October 1, 1981, provided that the maximum monthly retirement benefit shall not exceed 90 percent of average final compensation or the minimum monthly benefit required by F.S. ch. 185, whichever is greater. 
(2)  If a member was hired by the city as a police officer on or after October 1, 1981, the monthly retirement benefit for credited service earned prior to October 1, 2012 shall be equal to three and two-tenths percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service, provided that the maximum monthly retirement benefit shall not exceed 90 percent of average final compensation or the minimum monthly benefit required by F.S. ch. 185, whichever is greater. The normal retirement benefit for credited service on and after February 1, 2013 shall be as provided in section 66-229. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, the normal retirement benefit of a member who is employed on January 31, 2013 and has attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall equal three and two-tenths percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service. 
(c)  Early retirement date. A member may retire on his early retirement date, which shall be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the earlier of the attainment of age 50 and the completion of ten years of credited service or the completion of 20 years of credited service regardless of age. Early retirement under the system is retirement on or after the early retirement date and prior to the normal retirement date. Effective February 1, 2013, there shall be no early retirement date or early retirement benefit; provided, members who are employed on January 31, 2013, but have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date, shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit through January 31, 2013 with a three percent reduction as provided in subsection (d)(2) below, upon attaining age 50 with ten years of credited service or 20 years of credited service regardless of age. 
(d)  Early retirement benefit. A member retiring under this article on his early retirement date may receive a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit payable for life as follows: 
(1)  A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on what would have been his normal retirement date had be remained a police officer and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement as his normal retirement date, except that credited service and average final compensation shall be determined as of his early retirement date; or 
(2)  An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on his early retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The benefit payable shall be as determined in subsection (d)(1) of this section, reduced by one-fifteenth for each of the first five years and one-thirtieth for each of the next five years by which the commencement of benefits precedes the member's normal retirement date three percent for each year by which the commencement of benefits precedes the date which would have been the member's normal retirement date had he continued employment as a police officer. 
(e)  Cost-of-living adjustment. Beginning October 1 following the date which is ten years from February 1, 1994 or ten years from the date which was a member's actual normal retirement, or which would have been a member's normal retirement date, whichever is later, and on each October 1 thereafter, all retirees receiving a normal, early or disability benefit, who retired prior to March 14, 2006, and beneficiaries receiving benefits by virtue of a deceased retired member, but not including terminated vested members and the beneficiaries of terminated vested members, shall have their benefits increased by three percent. This cost-of-living adjustment shall apply to all described retirees and beneficiaries, regardless of whether they retired before or after February 1, 1994, but prior to March 14, 2006. 
(f)  Cost-of-living adjustment. Beginning October 1 following the date which is seven years from the date which is a member's actual normal retirement or which would have been a member's normal retirement date, and on each October 1 thereafter, all retirees receiving a normal, early or disability benefit who retire on or after March 14, 2006, and beneficiaries receiving benefits by virtue of a deceased retired member, but not including terminated vested members and the beneficiaries of terminated vested members, shall have their benefits increased by three percent for all credited service earned prior to February 1, 2013. This reduction in the cost-of-living adjustment deferral period from ten years to seven years shall be funded from the annual state monies received by the plan in excess of $37,731.99. The maximum additional state monies that can be used in each year for this benefit, enhancement is $23,162.00. There shall be no cost of living adjustment applied to benefits based on credited service on or after February 1, 2013; provided, members who are employed on January 31, 2013 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall continue to be eligible for the cost-of-living adjustment provided in this subsection applied to benefits based on all periods of credited service. 
(g)  Required distribution date. The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 01-91, § 2, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 06-12, § 1, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 08-19, § 1, 4-22-08; Ord. No. 08-19, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-27, § 6, 12-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-26, § 3, 12-12-17)  
Sec. 66-217. - Preretirement death. 
(a)  Prior to vesting or eligibility for retirement. Under this article, the beneficiary of a deceased member who was not receiving monthly benefits or who was not yet vested or was not eligible for retirement shall receive a refund of 100 percent of the member's accumulated contributions. 
(b)  Deceased members vested or eligible retirement with spouse as beneficiary. This subsection (b) applies only when the member's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary. The beneficiary of any member who dies while actively employed and who, at the date of his death, was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement shall be entitled to a benefit as follows: 
(1)  If the member was vested, but not eligible for normal or early retirement, the spouse beneficiary shall receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the date that the deceased member would have been eligible for early or normal retirement, at the option of the spouse beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. The spouse beneficiary may also elect to receive an immediate benefit, payable for ten years, which is actuarially reduced to reflect the commencement of benefits prior to the early retirement date. 
(2)  If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement, the spouse beneficiary shall receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death or at the deceased member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, at the option of the spouse beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. 
(3)  A spouse beneficiary may not elect an optional form of benefit, except that the beneficiary may elect to receive a lump sum payment pursuant to subsection 66-219(g). The election provided for in this subsection shall be effective retroactively to January 1, 1995. 
(4)  A spouse beneficiary may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in subsections (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section, elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions. 
(5)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, in any event, distributions to the spouse beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by a date selected pursuant to the above provisions in this section that must be on or before December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained 70½. 
(6)  If the surviving spouse beneficiary commences receiving a benefit under subsections (b)(1) or (b)(2) above, but dies before all payments are made, the actuarial value of the remaining benefit will be paid to the spouse beneficiary's estate in a lump sum. 
(c)  Deceased members vested or eligible for retirement with non-spouse beneficiary. This subsection applies only when the member's spouse is not the beneficiary or is not the sole designated beneficiary, but there is a surviving beneficiary. The beneficiary of any member who dies and who, at the date of his death was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement, shall be entitled to a benefit as follows: 
(1)  If the member was vested, but not eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary will receive a benefit payable for ten years. The benefit will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. The benefit will be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation and actuarially reduced to reflect the commencement of benefits prior to the normal retirement date. 
(2)  If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary will receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death. The benefit will be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced for early retirement, if applicable. 
(3)  A beneficiary may not elect an optional form of benefit, however the board may elect to make a lump sum payment pursuant to subsection 66-219(g). 
(4)  A beneficiary, may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in subsections (c)(1) or (c)(2) above, elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions. 
(5)  If a surviving beneficiary commences receiving a benefit under subsections (c)(1) or (c)(2) above, but dies before all payments are made, the actuarial value of the remaining benefit will be paid to the surviving beneficiary's estate by December 31 of the calendar year of the beneficiary's death in a lump sum. 
(6)  If there is no surviving beneficiary as of the member's death, and the estate is to receive the benefits, the actuarial equivalent of the member's entire interest must be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
(7)  The Uniform Lifetime Table in Treasury Regulations Section 1.401(a)(9)-9 shall determine the payment period for the calendar year benefits commence, if necessary to satisfy the regulations. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-218. - Disability. 
(a)  Disability benefits in line of duty. Under this article, any member who shall become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a police officer, which disability was directly caused by performance of his duty as a police officer, shall, upon establishing the disability to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension determined as for normal retirement, taking into account his average final compensation and years of credited service at the date of disability, but in any event the minimum amount paid to the member shall be 50 percent of the average final compensation of the member. Terminated persons, either vested or nonvested, are not eligible for disability benefits. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a member is terminated by the city for medical reasons, the terminated person may apply for a disability benefit if the application is filed with the board within 30 days from the date of termination. If a timely application is received, it shall be processed and the terminated person shall be eligible to receive a disability benefit if the board otherwise determines that he is totally and permanently disabled as provided for above. 
(b)  In line of duty presumptions. 
(1)  Presumption. Any condition or impairment of health of a member caused by hypertension or heart disease shall be presumed to have been suffered in line of duty unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence, provided that such member shall have successfully passed a physical examination upon entering into such service, including cardiogram, which examination failed to reveal any evidence of such condition, and provided, further, that such presumption shall not apply to benefits payable or granted in a policy of life insurance or disability insurance. 
(2)  Additional presumption. The presumption provided for in this subsection shall apply only to those conditions described in this subsection that are diagnosed on or after January 1, 1996. 
a.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (b)(2), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  Body fluids means blood and body fluids containing visible blood and other body fluids to which universal precautions for prevention of occupational transmission of blood borne pathogens, as established by the Centers for Disease Control, apply. For purposes of potential transmission of meningococcal meningitis or tuberculosis, the term "body fluids" includes respiratory, salivary, and sinus fluids, including droplets, sputum, and saliva, mucous, and other fluids through which infectious airborne organisms can be transmitted between persons. 
2.  Emergency rescue or public safety member means any member employed full time by the city as a firefighter, paramedic, emergency medical technician, law enforcement officer, or correctional officer who, in the course of employment, runs a high risk of occupational exposure to hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis and who is not employed elsewhere in a similar capacity. However, the term "emergency rescue or public safety member" does not include any person employed by a public hospital licensed under F.S. ch. 395 or any person employed by a subsidiary thereof. 
3.  Hepatitis means hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis non-A, hepatitis non-B, hepatitis C, or any other strain of hepatitis generally recognized by the medical community. 
4.  High risk of occupational exposure means that risk that is incurred because a person subject to this subsection, in performing the basic duties associated with his employment: 
i.  Provides emergency medical treatment in a nonhealthcare setting where there is a potential for transfer of body fluids between persons; 
ii.  At the site of an accident, fire, or other rescue or public safety operation or in an emergency rescue or public safety vehicle, handles body fluids in or out of containers or works with or otherwise handles needles or other sharp instruments exposed to body fluids; 
iii.  Engages in the pursuit, apprehension, and arrest of law violators or suspected law violators and, in performing such duties, may be exposed to body fluids; or 
iv.  Is responsible for the custody and physical restraint when necessary of prisoners or inmates within a prison, jail, or other criminal detention facility, while on work detail outside the facility or while being transported and, in performing such duties, may be exposed to body fluids. 
5.  Occupational exposure means occupational exposure; in the case of hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, means an exposure that occurs during the performance of job duties that may place a worker at risk of infection. 
b.  Presumption. Any emergency rescue or public safety member who suffers a condition or impairment of health that is caused by hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, that requires medical treatment, and that results in total or partial disability or death shall be presumed to have a disability suffered in the line of duty, unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence; however, in order to be entitled to the presumption, the member must, by written affidavit as provided in F.S. § 92.50, verify by written declaration that, to the best of his knowledge and belief: 
1.  In the case of a medical condition caused by or derived from hepatitis, he has not: 
i.  Been exposed, through transfer of bodily fluids, to any person known to have sickness or medical conditions derived from hepatitis, outside the scope of his employment; 
ii.  Had a transfusion of blood or blood components, other than a transfusion arising out of an accident or injury happening in connection with his present employment, or received any blood products for the treatment of a coagulation disorder since last undergoing medical tests for hepatitis, which tests failed to indicate the presence of hepatitis; 
iii.  Engaged in unsafe sexual practices or other high risk behavior, as identified by the Centers for Disease Control or the Surgeon General of the United States or had sexual relations with a person known to him to have engaged in such unsafe sexual practices or other high risk behavior; or 
iv.  Used intravenous drugs not prescribed by a physician. 
2.  In the case of meningococcal meningitis, in the ten days immediately preceding diagnosis he was not exposed, outside the scope of his employment, to any person known to have meningococcal meningitis or known to be an symptomatic carrier of the disease. 
3.  In the case of tuberculosis, in the period of time since the member's last negative tuberculosis skin test, he has not been exposed, outside the scope of his employment, to any person known by him to have tuberculosis. 
c.  Immunization. Whenever any standard, medically recognized vaccine or other form of immunization or prophylaxis exists for the prevention of a communicable disease for which a presumption is granted under this subsection, if medically indicated in the given circumstances pursuant to immunization policies established by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of the U.S. Public Health Service, an emergency rescue or public safety member may be required by the city to undergo the immunization or prophylaxis unless the member's physician determines in writing that the immunization or other prophylaxis would pose a significant risk to the member's health. Absent such written declaration, failure or refusal by an emergency rescue or public safety member to undergo such immunization or prophylaxis disqualifies the member from the benefits of the presumption. 
d.  Record of exposures. The city shall maintain a record of any known or reasonably suspected exposure of an emergency rescue or public safety member in its employ to the disease described in this subsection and shall immediately notify the member of such exposure. An emergency rescue or public safety member shall file an incident or accident report with the city of each instance of known or suspected occupational exposure to hepatitis infection, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis. 
e.  Required medical tests; preemployment physical. In order to be entitled to the presumption provided by this subsection: 
1.  An emergency rescue or public safety member must, prior to diagnosis, have undergone standard medically acceptable tests for evidence of the communicable disease for which the presumption is sought, or evidence of medical conditions derived therefrom, which tests fail to indicate the presence of infection. This subsection does not apply in the case of meningococcal meningitis. 
2.  On or after June 15, 1995, an emergency rescue or public safety member may be required to undergo a preemployment physical examination that tests for and fails to reveal any evidence of hepatitis or tuberculosis. 
(c)  Disability benefits not in line of duty. Any member with ten years or more credited service who shall become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a police officer, which disability is not directly caused by the performance of his duties as a police officer, shall, upon establishing the disability to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension determined as for normal retirement taking into account his average final compensation and years of credited service at the date of disability. Terminated persons, either vested or nonvested, are not eligible for disability benefits. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a member is terminated by the city for medical reasons, the terminated person may apply for a disability benefit if the application is filed with the board within 30 days from the date of termination. If a timely application is received, it shall be processed and the terminated person shall be eligible to receive a disability benefit if the board otherwise determines that he is totally and permanently disabled as provided for above. 
(d)  Conditions disqualifying disability benefits. Each member who is claiming disability benefits shall establish, to the satisfaction of the board, that such disability was not occasioned primarily by: 
(1)  Excessive or habitual use of any drugs, intoxicants, or narcotics. 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots or civil insurrections or while committing a crime. 
(3)  Injury or disease sustained while serving in any branch of the armed forces. 
(4)  Injury or disease sustained after his employment as a police officer with the city shall have terminated. 
(e)  Physical examination requirement. 
(1)  A member shall not become eligible for disability benefits until and unless he undergoes a physical examination by a qualified physician or surgeon, who shall be selected by the board for that purpose. The board shall not select the member's treating physician or surgeon for this purpose except in an unusual case where the board determines that it would be reasonable and prudent to do so. 
(2)  Any retiree receiving disability benefits under provisions of this article may be periodically reexamined by a qualified physician who shall be selected by the board, to determine if such disability has ceased to exist. If the board finds that the retiree is no longer permanently and totally disabled to the extent that he is unable to render useful and efficient service as a police officer, the board shall recommend to the city that the retiree be returned to performance of duty as a police officer, and the retiree so returned shall enjoy the same rights that the member had at the time he was placed upon pension. If the retiree so ordered to return shall refuse to comply with the order within 30 days from the issuance thereof, member shall forfeit the right to his pension. 
(3)  The cost of the physical examination or reexamination of the member claiming or the retiree receiving disability benefits shall be borne by the fund. All other reasonable costs as determined by the board incident to the physical examination, such as but not limited to, transportation, meals and hotel accommodations, shall be borne by the fund. 
(4)  If the retiree recovers from disability and reenters the service of the city as a police officer, his service will be deemed to have been continuous. But the period beginning with the first month for which he received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date he reentered the service of the city will not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the plan. 
(5)  The board shall have the power and authority to make the final decisions regarding all disability claims. 
(f)  Disability payments. The monthly benefit to which a member is entitled for the member's disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date the board determined such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the first payment. The last payment will be: 
(1)  If the retiree recovers from the disability, the payment due next preceding the date of such recovery; or 
(2)  If the retiree dies without recovering from disability, the payment due next preceding his death or the 120th monthly payment, whichever is later. 
Provided, however, the disability retiree may select, at any time prior to the date on which benefit payments begin, an optional form of benefit payment as described in subsections 66-219(a)(1) or (a)(2), which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of benefit. 
(g)  Workers' compensation. When a member is receiving a disability pension and workers' compensation benefits pursuant to F.S. ch. 440, for the same disability, and the total monthly benefits received from both exceed 100 percent of the member's average monthly wage, as defined in F.S. ch. 440, excluding overtime, the disability pension benefit shall be reduced so that the total monthly amount received by the member does not exceed 100 percent of such average monthly wage. The amount of any lump sum workers' compensation payment shall be converted to an equivalent monthly benefit payable for ten years certain by dividing the lump sum amount by 83.9692. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the disability pension benefit be reduced below the greater of 42 percent of average final compensation and two percent of average final compensation times years of credited service. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 2017-26, § 4, 12-12-17)  
Sec. 66-219. - Optional forms of benefits. 
(a)  In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable for normal or early retirement as specified in this article, a member, upon request to the board, may elect to receive a retirement income or benefit of equivalent actuarial value payable in accordance with one of the following options: 
(1)  A retirement income of a larger monthly amount, payable to the retiree for his lifetime only. 
(2)  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the retiree during the lifetime of the retiree, and following the death of the retiree, 100 percent, 75 percent, 66 2/3 percent, or 50 percent of such monthly amounts payable to a joint pensioner for his lifetime. Except where the retiree's joint pensioner is his spouse, the payments to the joint pensioner as a percentage of the payments to the retiree, shall not exceed the applicable percentage provided for in the applicable table in the Treasury Regulations (see Q & A-2 of 1.401(a)(9)-6). 
(3)  Such other amount and form of retirement payments or benefits as, in the opinion of the board, will best meet the circumstances of the retiree. 
(b)  The member, upon electing any option of this section, will designate the joint pensioner or beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the system in the event of the member's death, and will have the power to change such designation from time to time. Such designation will name a joint pensioner or one or more primary beneficiaries where applicable. A member may change his beneficiary at any time. If a member has elected an option with a joint pensioner and the member's retirement income benefits have commenced, the member may thereafter change his designated beneficiary at any time, but may only change his joint pensioner twice. Subject to the restriction in the previous sentence, a member may substitute a new joint pensioner for a deceased joint pensioner. In the absence of proof of good health of the joint pensioner being replaced, the actuary will assume that the joint pensioner has deceased for purposes of calculating the new payment. 
(c)  The consent of a member's or retiree's joint pensioner or beneficiary to any such change shall not be required. The rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive benefits under the system shall thereupon cease. 
(d)  Upon change of a retiree's joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the amount of the retirement income payable to the retiree shall be actuarially redetermined to take into account the age of the former joint pensioner, the new joint pensioner, and the retiree and to ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the present value of the retiree's then current benefit at the time of the change. Any such retiree shall pay the actuarial recalculation expenses. Each request for a change will be made in writing on a form prepared by the board, and on completion will be filed with the board. In the event that no designated beneficiary survives the retiree, such benefits as are payable in the death of the retiree subsequent to his retirement shall be paid in section 66-220. 
(e)  Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  If a member dies prior to his normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first occurs, no retirement benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under this article. 
(2)  If the designated beneficiary (or beneficiaries) or joint pensioner dies before the member's retirement under the system, the option elected will be canceled automatically, and a retirement income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the member upon his retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the member prior to his retirement. 
(3)  If both the retiree and the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by the member or retiree die before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period certain and life thereafter, made pursuant to subsection (e)(1) of this section, the board of trustees may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be paid in a lump sum and in accordance with section 66-220. 
(4)  If a member continues beyond his normal retirement date pursuant to subsection 66-216(a) and dies prior to his actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made or a retirement benefit will be paid, under the option to a beneficiary designated by the member in the amount computed as if the member had retired under the option on the date on which his death occurred. 
(5)  The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(f)  A retiree may not change his retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his first retirement check. 
(g)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the board in its discretion may elect to make a lump sum payment to a member or a member's beneficiary in the event that the total commuted value of the monthly income payments to be paid do not exceed $1,000.00. Any such payment made to any person pursuant to the power and discretion conferred upon the board by the preceding sentence shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to such member and shall not be subject to review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 06-27, § 2, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-220. - Beneficiaries. 
(a)  Under this article, each member or retiree may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, designate a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable for his death. Each designation may be revoked or changed by such member or retiree by signing and filing with the board a new designation of beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefits under the system shall cease. 
(b)  If a deceased member or retiree failed to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection (a) of this section or if the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) named by a deceased member or retiree predeceases the member or retiree, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the system with respect to such deceased member or retiree may be paid, in the discretion of the board to the estate of the member or retiree and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(c)  Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-221. - Maximum pension. 
(a)  Basic limitation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this system to the contrary, the member contributions paid to, and retirement benefits paid from, the system shall be limited to such extent as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of code section 415 for a qualified retirement plan. Before January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the limits specified in code section 415(b), subject to the applicable adjustments in that section. On and after January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the dollar amount specified in code section 415(b)(1)(A) ($160,000.00), subject to the applicable adjustments in code section 415(b) and subject to any additional limits that may be specified in this system. For purposes of this section, "limitation year" shall be the calendar year. 
(b)  Adjustments to basic limitation for form of benefit. If the form of benefit without regard to any benefit increase feature is not a straight life annuity, then the code section 415(b) limit applicable at the annuity starting date is reduced to an actuarially equivalent amount (determined using the assumptions specified in Treasury Regulation Section 1.415(b)-1(c)(2)(ii)) that takes into account the death benefits under the form of benefit. 
(c)  Benefits not taken into account. For purposes of this section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account in applying these limits: 
(1)  Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; 
(2)  Any other benefit not required under section 415(b)(2) of the code and regulations thereunder to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of code section 415(b)(1). 
(d)  COLA effect. Effective on and after January 1, 2003, for purposes of applying the limits under code section 415(b) (the "limit"), the following will apply: 
(1)  A member's applicable limit will be applied to the member's annual benefit in the member's first calendar year of benefit payments without regard to any automatic cost-of-living adjustments; 
(2)  Thereafter, in any subsequent calendar year, a member's annual benefit, including any automatic cost-of-living increases, shall be tested under the then applicable benefit limit including any adjustment to the code section 415(b)(1)(A) dollar limit under code section 415(d), and the regulations thereunder; but 
(3)  In no event shall a member's benefit payable under the system in any calendar year be greater than the limit applicable at the annuity starting date, as increased in subsequent years pursuant to code section 415(d) and the regulations thereunder. 
Unless otherwise specified in the system, for purposes of applying the limits under code section 415(b), a member's applicable limit will be applied taking into consideration cost-of-living increases as required by section 415(b) of the code and applicable Treasury Regulations. 
(e)  Other adjustments in limitations. 
(1)  In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before age 62, the limit prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the provisions of code section 415(b) of the code, so that such limit (as so reduced) equals an annual straight life benefit (when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a $160,000.00 annual benefit beginning at age 62. 
(2)  In the event the member's benefit is based on at least 15 years of credited service as a full-time employee of the fire or police department of the city, the adjustments provided for in subsection (e)(1) above shall not apply. 
(3)  The reductions provided for in subsection (e)(1) above shall not be applicable to disability benefits pursuant to section 66-218, or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 66-217. 
(4)  In the event the member's retirement benefit becomes payable after age 65, for purposes of determining whether this benefit meets the limit set forth in subsection (a) herein, such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the benefit beginning at age 65. This adjustment shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate. 
(f)  Less than ten years of participation. The maximum retirement benefits payable under this section to any member who has completed less than ten years of participation shall be the amount determined under subsection (a) of this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of participation and the denominator of which is ten. The reduction provided by this subsection cannot reduce the maximum benefit below ten percent of the limit determined without regard to this subsection. The reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be applicable to pre-retirement disability benefits paid pursuant to section 66-218 or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 66-217. 
(g)  Participation in other defined benefit plans. The limit of this section with respect to any member who at any time has been a member in any other defined benefit plan as defined in code section 414(j) maintained by the city shall apply as if the total benefits payable under all city defined benefit plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one plan. 
(h)  Ten thousand dollar limit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the retirement benefit payable with respect to a member shall be deemed not to exceed the limit set forth in this section if the benefits payable, with respect to such member under this system and under all other qualified defined benefit pension plans to which the city contributes, do not exceed $10,000.00 for the applicable plan year and for any prior plan year and the city has not any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan in which the member participated. 
(i)  Reduction of benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or contributions to all plans, where required, shall be accomplished by first reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be determined by the board and the plan administrator of such other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures for defined contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be established by the board and the plan administrator for such other plans provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority pursuant to the agreement of the board and the plan administrator of all other plans covering such member. 
(j)  Service credit purchase limits. 
(1)  Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, if a member makes one or more contributions to purchase permissive service credit under the system, as allowed in sections 66-227 and 66-228, then the requirements of this section will be treated as met only if: 
a.  The requirements of code section 415(b) are met, determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all such contributions as an annual benefit for purposes of code section 415(b), or 
b.  The requirements of code section 415(c) are met, determined by treating all such contributions as annual additions for purposes of code section 415(c). 
c.  For purposes of applying subsection (j)(1)a., the system will not fail to meet the reduced limit under code section 415(b)(2)(C) solely by reason of this subsection (j)(1)c., and for purposes of applying subsection (j)(1)b. the system will not fail to meet the percentage limitation under section 415(c)(1)(B) of the code solely by reason of this subsection (j)(1)c. 
(2)  For purposes of this subsection the term "permissive service credit" means service credit: 
a.  Recognized by the system for purposes of calculating a member's benefit under the plan; 
b.  Which such member has not received under the plan; and 
c.  Which such member may receive only by making a voluntary additional contribution, in an amount determined under the system, which does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service credit. 
Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, such term may, if otherwise provided by the system, include service credit for periods for which there is no performance of service, and, notwithstanding clause (j)(2)b., may include service credited in order to provide an increased benefit for service credit which a member is receiving under the system. 
(3)  For purposes of applying the limits in this subsection (j), only and for no other purpose, the definition of compensation where applicable will be compensation actually paid or made available during a calendar year, except as noted below and as permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulations. Unless another definition of compensation that is permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulation, is specified by the system, compensation will be defined as wages within the meaning of code section 3401(a) and all other payments of compensation to an employee by an employer for which the employer is required to furnish the employee a written statement under code sections 6041(d), 6051(a)(3) and 6052 and will be determined without regard to any rules under code section 3401(a) that limit the remuneration included in wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services performed (such as the exception for agricultural labor in code section 3401(a)(2)). 
a.  However, for calendar years beginning after December 31, 1997, compensation will also include amounts that would otherwise be included in compensation but for an election under code sections 125(a), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 402(k), or 457(b). For calendar years beginning after December 31, 2000, compensation will also include any elective amounts that are not includible in the gross income of the employee by reason of code section 132(f)(4). 
b.  For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2007, compensation for the calendar year will also include compensation paid by the later of 2-1/2 months after an employee's severance from employment or the end of the calendar year that includes the date of the employee's severance from employment if: 
1.  The payment is regular compensation for services during the employee's regular working hours, or compensation for services outside the employee's regular working hours (such as overtime or shift differential), commissions, bonuses or other similar payments, and, absent a severance from employment, the payments would have been paid to the employee while the employee continued in employment with the employer; or 
2.  The payment is for unused accrued bona fide sick, vacation or other leave that the employee would have been able to use if employment had continued. 
c.  Back pay, within the meaning of Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2(g)(8), shall be treated as compensation for the limitation year to which the back pay relates to the extent the back pay represents wages and compensation that would otherwise be included under this definition. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the board may modify a request by a member to make a contribution to the system if the amount of the contribution would exceed the limits provided in code section 415 by using the following methods: 
a.  If the law requires a lump sum payment for the purchase of service credit, the board may establish a periodic payment deduction plan for the member to avoid a contribution in excess of the limits under code sections 415(c) or 415(n). 
b.  If payment pursuant to subsection (j)(4)a. will not avoid a contribution in excess of the limits imposed by code section 415(c), the board may either reduce the member's contribution to an amount within the limits of that section or refuse the member's contribution. 
(k)  Additional limitation on pension benefits. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary: 
(1)  The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to a retiree who becomes a member of the system and who has not previously participated in such system, on or after January 1, 1980, shall not exceed 100 percent of his average final compensation. However, nothing contained in this section shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension increases attributable to cost-of-living increases or adjustments. 
(2)  No member of the system shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to Social Security benefits or federal benefits under Chapter 1223, Title 10, U.S. Code. 
(l)  Effect of direct rollover on 415(b) limit. If the plan accepts a direct rollover of an employee's or former employee's benefit from a defined contribution plan qualified under code section 401(a) which is maintained by the employer, any annuity resulting from the rollover amount that is determined using a more favorable actuarial basis than required under code section 417(e) shall be included in the annual benefit for purposes of the limit under code section 415(b). 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 03-22, § 2, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 2017-26, § 5, 12-12-17)  
Sec. 66-222. - Minimum distribution of benefits. 
(a)  General rules. 
(1)  Effective date. Effective as of January 1, 1989, the plan will pay all benefits in accordance with a good faith interpretation of the requirements of code section 401(a)(9) and the regulations in effect under that section, as applicable to a governmental plan within the meaning of code section 414(d). Effective on and after January 1, 2003, the plan is also subject to the specific provisions contained in this section. The provisions of this section will apply for purposes of determining required minimum distributions for calendar years beginning with the 2003 calendar year. 
(2)  Precedence. The requirements of this section will take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the plan. 
(3)  TEFRA Section 242(b)(2) elections. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section other than this subsection (a)(4 3), distributions may be made under a designation made before January 1, 1984, in accordance with Section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the plan that related to Section 242(b)(2) of TEFRA. 
(b)  Time and manner of distribution. 
(1)  Required beginning date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date which shall not be later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(2)  Death of member before distributions begin. If the member dies before distributions begin, the member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed no later than as follows: 
a.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by a date on or before December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age 70½, if later, as the surviving spouse elects. 
b.  If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then, distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
c.  If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
d.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this subsection (b)(2), other than subsection (b)(2)a., will apply as if the surviving spouse were the member. 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(2), distributions are considered to begin on the member's required beginning date or, if subsection (b)(2)d. applies, the date of distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member before the member's required beginning date (or to the member's surviving spouse before the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a.) the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. 
(3)  Death after distributions begin. If the member dies after the required distribution of benefits has begun, the remaining portion of the member's interest must be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution before the member's death. 
(3)  Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with this section. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the code and Treasury Regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual account described in section 414(k) of the code will be distributed in a manner satisfying the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the code and Treasury Regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
(c)  Determination of amount to be distributed each year. 
(1)  General requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
a.  The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one year. 
b.  The member's entire interest must be distributed pursuant to section 66-216, section 66-217, section 66-149, or section 66-219 (as applicable) and in any event over a period equal to or less than the member's life or the lives of the member and a designated beneficiary, or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the member or of the member and a designated beneficiary. The life expectancy of the member, the member's spouse, or the member's beneficiary may not be recalculated after the initial determination for purposes of determining benefits. 
(2)  Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The amount that must be distributed on or before the member's required beginning date (or, if the member dies before distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under section 66-217) is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g., monthly. All of the member's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's required beginning date. 
(3)  Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues. 
(d)  General distribution rules. 
(1)  The amount of an annuity paid to a member's beneficiary may not exceed the maximum determined under the incidental death benefit requirement of code section 401(a)(9)(G), and effective for any annuity commencing on or after January 1, 2008, the minimum distribution incidental benefit rule under Treasury Regulation Section 1.401(a)(9)-6, Q&A-2. 
(2)  The death and disability benefits provided by the plan are limited by the incidental benefit rule set forth in code section 401(a)(9)(G) and Treasury Regulation Section 1.401-1(b)(1)(I) or any successor regulation thereto. As a result, the total death or disability benefits payable may not exceed 25 percent of the cost for all of the members' benefits received from the retirement system. 
(e)  Definitions. 
(1)  Designated beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the plan and is the designated beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the code and Section 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of the Treasury Regulations. 
(2)  Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin pursuant to section 66-217. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 06-27, § 3, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-223. - Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions; elimination of mandatory distribution. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Direct rollover means a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(2)  Distributee includes an employee or former employee. It also includes, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse. Effective January 1, 2007, it further includes a non-spouse beneficiary who is a designated beneficiary as defined by code section 401(a)(9)(E). However, a non-spouse beneficiary may rollover the distribution only to an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity established for the purpose of receiving the distribution and the account or annuity will be treated as an "inherited" individual retirement account or annuity. 
(3)  Eligible retirement plan means an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the code; an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the code; an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the code; effective January 1, 2002, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in section 457(b) of the code which is maintained by an eligible employer described in section 457(e)(1)(A) of the code and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan; effective January 1, 2002, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the code; a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the code; or effective January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA described in section 408A of the code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. This definition shall also apply for an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse. 
(4)  Eligible rollover distribution means any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life or life expectancy of the distributee or the joint lives or joint life expectancies of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the code; and the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income. Effective January 1, 2002, any portion of any distribution which would be includible in gross income as after-tax employee contributions will be an eligible rollover distribution if the distribution is made to an individual retirement account described in section 408(a); to an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b); to a qualified defined contribution plan described in sections 401(a) or 403(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible; or on or after January 1, 2007, to a qualified defined benefit plan described in code section 401(a) or to an annuity contract described in code section 403(b), that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of the distribution that is includible in gross income and the portion of the distribution that is not so includible. 
(b)  Payment. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the system under this article to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(c)  Rollovers or transfers into the fund. On or after January 1, 2002, the system will accept, solely for the purpose of purchasing credited service as provided herein, permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans, member rollover cash contributions and/or direct cash rollovers of distributions made on or after January 1, 2002, as follows: 
(1)  Transfers and direct rollovers or member rollover contributions from other plans. The system will accept either a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a member contribution of an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in sections 401(a) or 403(a) of the code, from an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the code or from an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state. The system will also accept legally permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans. 
(2)  Member rollover contributions from IRAs. The system will accept a member rollover contribution of the portion of a distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity described in sections 408(a) or 408(b) of the code that is eligible to be rolled over. 
(d)  Elimination of mandatory distributions. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, in the event this plan provides for a mandatory (involuntary) cash distribution from the plan not otherwise required by law, for an amount in excess of $1,000.00, such distribution shall be made from the plan only upon written request of the member and completion by the member of a written election on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 03-22, § 3, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 06-27, § 4, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-224. - Family and Medical Leave Act. 
The fractional parts of the 24-month period ending each March 1 that a member is on leave without pay from the city pursuant to the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) shall be added to his credited service under this article, provided: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the fractional parts of the 24 months ending each March 1 for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of periods of credited service. 
(2)  The request for credited service for FMLA leave time for the 24-month period prior to each March 1 and payment of professional fees shall be made on or before March 31. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made on or before April 30 for the preceding 24-month period ending March 1 and shall be made in one lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be issued. 
(4)  Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count toward vesting. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-225. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section 66-225, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  "DROP" means the City of St. Pete Beach Police Officers' Deferred Retirement Option Plan. 
(2)  "DROP account" means the account established for each DROP participant under subsection (c). 
(3)  "Total return of the assets," for purposes of calculating earnings on a member's DROP account pursuant to subsection (c)(2)b.2., for each fiscal year quarter, the percentage increase (or decrease) in the interest and dividends earned on investments, including realized and unrealized gains (or losses), of the total plan assets. 
(b)  Participation. 
(1)  Eligibility to participate. In lieu of terminating his employment as a police officer, any member who is eligible for normal retirement under subsection 66-216(a), of the system may, prior to February 1, 2013 elect to defer receipt of such service retirement pension and to participate in the DROP. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the DROP shall be closed to new participants effective February 1, 2013, and no member may enter the DROP on or after that date; provided, a member who is employed on January 31, 2013 and has attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date may enter and participate in the DROP on or after February 1, 2013 in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Election to participate. A member's election to participate in the DROP must be made in writing in a time and manner determined by the board and shall be effective on the first day of the first calendar month which is at least 15 business days after it is received by the board. 
(3)  Period of participation. A member who elects to participate in the DROP under subsection (b)(2), shall participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed 60 months beginning at the time his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. An election to participate in the DROP shall constitute an irrevocable election to resign from the service of the city not later than the date provided for in the previous sentence. A member may participate only once. 
(4)  Termination of participation. 
a.  A member's participation in the DROP shall cease participating at the earlier of: 
1.  The end of his permissible period of participation in the DROP as determined under subsection (b)(3); or 
2.  Termination of his employment as a police officer. 
b.  Upon the member's termination of participation in the DROP, pursuant to subsection 1. above, all amounts provided for in subsection (c)(2), including monthly benefits and investment earnings or losses or interest, as applicable, shall cease to be transferred from the system to his DROP account. Any amounts remaining in his DROP account shall be paid to him in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) when he terminates his employment as a police officer. 
c.  A member who terminates his participation in the DROP under subsection (b)(4) shall not be permitted to again become a participant in the DROP. 
(5)  Effect of DROP participation on the system. 
a.  A member's credited service and his accrued benefit under the system shall be determined on the date his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. The member's salary for the purposes of calculating his average final compensation shall include any lump sum payments paid to the member and included as salary as defined herein, which amounts shall be paid by the city upon the member's entry into the DROP, as provided in the city's personnel rules and regulations. The member shall not accrue any additional credited service or any additional benefits under the system (except for any supplemental benefit payable to DROP participants or any additional benefits provided under any cost-of-living adjustment for retirees in the system) while he is a participant in the DROP. After a member commences participation, he shall not be permitted to again contribute to the system, nor shall he be eligible for disability, nor shall his estate or beneficiary be eligible for pre-retirement death benefits. 
b.  No amounts shall be paid to a member from the system while the member is a participant in the DROP. Unless otherwise specified in the system, if a member's participation in the DROP is terminated other than by terminating his employment as a police officer, no amounts shall be paid to him from the system until he terminates his employment as a police officer. Unless otherwise specified in the system, amounts transferred from the system to the member's DROP account shall be paid directly to the member only on the termination of his employment as a police officer. 
(c)  Funding. 
(1)  Establishment of DROP account. A DROP account shall be established for each member participating in the DROP. A member's DROP account shall consist of amounts transferred to the DROP under subsection (c)(2), and earnings or interest on those amounts. 
(2)  Transfers from retirement system. 
a.  As of the first day of each month of a member's period of participation in the DROP, the monthly retirement benefit he would have received under the system had he terminated his employment as a police officer and elected to receive monthly benefit payments thereunder shall be transferred to his DROP account, except as otherwise provided for in subsection (b)(4)b. A member's period of participation in the DROP shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b)(3) and (b)(4), but in no event shall it continue past the date he terminates his employment as a police officer. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(4)b., a member's DROP account under this subsection (c)(2) shall be debited or credited with either: 
1.  Interest at an effective rate of 7-1/2 percent per annum compounded monthly determined on the last business day of the prior month's ending balance and credited to the member's DROP account as of such date (to be applicable to all current and future DROP participants); or 
2.  Earnings, to be credited or debited to the member's DROP account, determined as of the last business day of each fiscal year quarter and debited or credited as of such date, determined as follows: 
 The average daily balance in a member's DROP account shall be credited or debited at a rate equal to the net investment return realized by the system for that quarter. "Net investment return" for the purpose of this paragraph is the total return of the assets in which the member's DROP account is invested by the board net of brokerage commissions, transaction costs and management fees. 
 For purposes of calculating earnings on a member's DROP account pursuant to this subsection (c)(2)b.2., brokerage commissions, transaction costs, and management fees shall be determined for each quarter by the investment consultant pursuant to contracts with fund managers as reported in the custodial statement. The investment consultant shall report these quarterly contractual fees to the board. The investment consultant shall also report the net investment return for each manager and the net investment return for the total plan assets. 
Upon electing participation in the DROP, the member shall elect to receive either interest or earnings on his account to be determined as provided above. The member may, in writing, elect to change his election only once during his DROP participation. An election to change must be made prior to the end of a quarter and shall be effective beginning the following quarter. 
c.  A member's DROP account shall only be credited or debited with earnings or interest and monthly benefits while the member is a participant in the DROP. A member's final DROP account value for distribution to the member upon termination of participation in the DROP shall be the value of the account at the end of the quarter immediately preceding termination of participation for participants electing the net plan return and at the end of the month immediately preceding termination of participation for participants electing the flat interest rate return, plus any monthly periodic additions made to the DROP account subsequent to the end of the previous quarter or month, as applicable, and prior to distribution. If a member is employed by the city police department after participating in the DROP for the permissible period of DROP participation, then beginning with the member's first month of employment following the last month of the permissible period of DROP participation, the member's DROP account will no longer be credited or debited with earnings or interest, nor will monthly benefits be transferred to the DROP account. All such non-transferred amounts shall be forfeited and continue to be forfeited while the member is employed by the police department. A member employed by the police department after the permissible period of DROP participation will still not be eligible for disability benefits, nor shall his estate or beneficiary be eligible for pre-retirement death benefits, nor will he accrue additional credited service. 
(d)  Distribution of DROP accounts on termination of employment. 
(1)  Eligibility for benefits. A member shall receive the balance in his DROP account in accordance with the provisions of this subsection (d) upon his termination of employment as a police officer. Except as provided in subsection (d)(5), no amounts shall be paid to a member from the DROP prior to his termination of employment as a police officer. 
(2)  Form of distribution. 
a.  Unless the member elects otherwise, distribution of his DROP account shall be made in a cash lump sum. A member may elect, in such time and manner as the board shall prescribe, to receive the optional form of benefit described below. 
1.  Until the value of the member's DROP account is completely depleted, payments in approximately equal quarterly or annual installments over a period, designated by the member, not to exceed the life expectancy of the last survivor of the member and his beneficiary. In the event that the member dies before all installments have been paid, the remaining balance in his DROP account shall be paid in an immediate cash lump sum to his beneficiary, or if none is designated, then to the member's estate. 
2.  The purchase of a nonforfeitable fixed annuity payable in such form as the member may elect. Elections under this clause 2. shall be in writing and shall be made in such time or manner as the board shall determine. 
b.  Notwithstanding the preceding, if a member dies before his benefits commence, his DROP account shall be paid to his beneficiary in such optional form as his beneficiary may select. If no beneficiary designation is made, the DROP account shall be distributed to the member's estate. 
(3)  Date of payment of distribution. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (d), distribution of a member's DROP account shall begin as soon as administratively practicable following the member's termination of employment. Distribution of the amount in a member's DROP account will not be made unless the member completes a written request for distribution and a written election, on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or a rollover of the lump sum amount. 
(4)  Proof of death and right of beneficiary or other person. The board may require and rely upon such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive the value of a deceased member's DROP account as the board may deem proper and its determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive payment shall be conclusive. 
(5)  Distribution limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (d), all distributions from the DROP shall conform to the "minimum distribution of benefits" provisions as provided for herein. 
(6)  Direct rollover of certain distributions. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the DROP to the contrary may elect to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid in a direct rollover as otherwise provided under the system in section 66-223. 
(e)  Administration of DROP. 
(1)  Board administers the DROP. The general administration of the DROP, the responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the DROP and the responsibility of overseeing the investment of the DROP's assets shall be placed in the board. The members of the board may appoint from their number such subcommittees with such powers as they shall determine; may adopt such administrative procedures and regulations as they deem desirable for the conduct of their affairs; may authorize one or more of their number or any agent to execute or deliver any instrument or make any payment on their behalf; may retain counsel, employ agents and provide for such clerical, accounting, actuarial and consulting services as they may require in carrying out the provisions of the DROP; and may allocate among themselves or delegate to other persons all or such portion of their duties under the DROP, other than those granted to them as trustee under any trust agreement adopted for use in implementing the DROP, as they, in their sole discretion, shall decide. A trustee shall not vote on any question relating exclusively to himself. 
(2)  Individual accounts, records and reports. The board shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, records showing the operation and condition of the DROP, including records showing the individual balances in each member's DROP account, and the board shall keep, or cause to be kept, in convenient form such data as may be necessary for the valuation of the assets and liabilities of the DROP. The board shall prepare or cause to be prepared and distributed to members participating in the DROP and other individuals or filed with the appropriate governmental agencies, as the case may be, all necessary descriptions, reports, information returns, and data required to be distributed or filed for the DROP pursuant to the code, the applicable portions of the Act and any other applicable laws. 
(3)  Establishment of rules. Subject to the limitations of the DROP, the board from time to time shall establish rules for the administration of the DROP and the transaction of its business. The board shall have discretionary authority to construe and interpret the DROP (including but not limited to, determination of an individual's eligibility for DROP participation, the right and amount of any benefit payable under the DROP and the date on which any individual ceases to be a participant in the DROP). The determination of the board as to the interpretation of the DROP or its determination of any disputed questions shall be conclusive and final to the extent permitted by applicable law. The board shall also oversee the investment of the DROP's assets. 
(4)  Limitation of liability. 
a.  The trustees shall not incur any liability individually or on behalf of any other individuals for any act or failure to act, made in good faith in relation to the DROP or the funds of the DROP. 
b.  Neither the board nor any trustee of the board shall be responsible for any reports furnished by any expert retained or employed by the board, but they shall be entitled to rely thereon as well as on certificates furnished by an accountant or an actuary, and on all opinions of counsel. The board shall be fully protected with respect to any action taken or suffered by it in good faith in reliance upon such expert, accountant, actuary or counsel, and all actions taken or suffered in such reliance shall be conclusive upon any person with any interest in the DROP. 
(f)  General provisions. 
(1)  The DROP is not a separate retirement plan. Instead, it is a program under which a member who is eligible for normal retirement under the system may elect to accrue future retirement benefits in the manner provided in this section 66-218 for the remainder of his employment, rather than in the normal manner provided under the plan. Upon termination of employment, a member is entitled to a lump sum distribution of his or her DROP account balance or may elect a rollover. The DROP account distribution is in addition to the member's monthly benefit. 
(2)  Notional account. The DROP account established for such a member is a notional account, used only for the purpose of calculation of the DROP distribution amount. It is not a separate account in the system. There is no change in the system's assets, and there is no distribution available to the member until the member's termination from the DROP. The member has no control over the investment of the DROP account. 
(3)  No employer discretion. The DROP benefit is determined pursuant to a specific formula which does not involve employer discretion. 
(4)  IRC limit. The DROP account distribution, along with other benefits payable from the system, is subject to limitation under Internal Revenue Code section 415(b). 
(5)  Amendment of DROP. The DROP may be amended by an ordinance of the city at any time and from time to time, and retroactively if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend in whole or in part any or all of the provisions of the DROP. However, except as otherwise provided by law, no amendment shall make it possible for any part of the DROP's funds to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under the DROP. No amendment shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the balance of the DROP account of any member. 
(6)  Facility of payment. If the board shall find that a member or other person entitled to a benefit under the DROP is unable to care for his affairs because of illness or accident or is a minor, the board may direct that any benefit due him, unless claim shall have been made for the benefit by a duly appointed legal representative, be paid to his spouse, a child, a parent or other blood relative, or to a person with whom he resides. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of the liabilities of the DROP for that benefit. 
(7)  Information. Each member, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit shall be payable to him or on his account under the DROP, shall file with the board the information that it shall require to establish his rights and benefits under the DROP. 
(8)  Prevention of eschea t. If the board cannot ascertain the whereabouts of any person to whom a payment is due under the DROP, the board may, no earlier than three years from the date such payment is due, mail a notice of such due and owing payment to the last known address of such person, as shown on the records of the board or the city. If such person has not made written claim therefor within three months of the date of the mailing, the board may, if it so elects and upon receiving advice from counsel to the DROP, direct that such payment and all remaining payments otherwise due such person be canceled on the records of the DROP. Upon such cancellation, the DROP shall have no further liability therefor except that, in the event such person or his beneficiary later notifies the board of his whereabouts and requests the payment or payments due to him under the DROP, the amount so applied shall be paid to him in accordance with the provisions of the DROP. 
(9)  Written elections, notification. 
a.  Any elections, notifications or designations made by a member pursuant to the provisions of the DROP shall be made in writing and filed with the board in a time and manner determined by the board under rules uniformly applicable to all employees similarly situated. The board reserves the right to change from time to time and manner for making notifications, elections or designations by members under the DROP if it determines after due deliberation that such action is justified in that it improves the administration of the DROP. In the event of a conflict between the provisions for making an election, notification or designation set forth in the DROP and such new administrative procedures, those new administrative procedures shall prevail. 
b.  Each member or retiree who has a DROP account shall be responsible for furnishing the board with his current address and any subsequent changes in his address. Any notice required to be given to a member or retiree hereunder shall be deemed given if directed to him at the last such address given to the board and mailed by registered or certified United States mail. If any check mailed by registered or certified United States mail to such address is returned, mailing of checks will be suspended until such time as the member or retiree notifies the board of his address. 
(10)  Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable to a member from the DROP shall be paid only from the assets of the member's DROP account and neither the city nor the board shall have any duty or liability to furnish the DROP with any funds, securities or other assets except to the extent required by any applicable law. 
(11)  Construction. 
a.  The DROP shall be construed, regulated and administered under the laws of Florida, except where other applicable law controls. 
b.  The titles and headings of the subsections in this section 66-225 are for convenience only. In the case of ambiguity or inconsistency, the text rather than the titles or headings shall control. 
(12)  Forfeiture of retirement benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP participants from the application of any forfeiture provisions applicable to the system. DROP participants shall be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits. 
(13)  Effect of DROP participation on employment. Participation in the DROP is not a guarantee of employment and DROP participants shall be subject to the same employment standards and policies that are applicable to employees who are not DROP participants. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 03-22, § 4, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 06-27, § 5, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-27, § 7, 12-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-26, § 6, 12-12-17)  
Sec. 66-226. - Prior police service. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, and except as provided for in section 66-141, the years of fractional parts of years that a member previously served as a police officer with the city during a period of previous employment and for which period accumulated contributions were withdrawn from the fund, or the years and fractional parts of years that a member served as a police officer for any other municipality, county, or special law enforcement department in the United States, shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of this system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit, plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  The request shall be made only once and made by the member on or before the later of 24 months from the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section or 18 months from the date of his employment or reemployment with the city police department. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six months of his request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  The maximum credit for service other than with the City of St. Pete Beach under this section when combined with credited service purchased pursuant to section 66-227, shall be five years and shall count for all purposes except vesting and not-in-line of duty disability. There shall be no maximum purchase of credited service with the City of St. Pete Beach and such service shall count for all purposes including vesting. 
(5)  In no event, however, may credited service be purchased pursuant to this section for prior service with any other municipal, county, or special law enforcement police department, if such prior service forms or will form the basis of a retirement benefit or pension from another retirement system or plan as set forth in subsection 66-221(k)(2). 
(Ord. No. 03-22, § 5, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 2017-26, § 7, 12-12-17)  
Sec. 66-227. - Military service prior to employment. 
The years or fractional parts of years that a member serves or has served on active duty in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior to first and initial employment with the city police department shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of this system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit, plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  The request shall be made only once and made by the member on or before 24 months from the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section or 18 months from the date of his employment with the city police department, whichever is later. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six months of his request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  The maximum credit under this section, when combined with credited service with an employer other than the City of St. Pete Beach purchased pursuant to section 66-226, shall be five years. 
(5)  Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count for all purposes, except vesting and eligibility for not-in-line of duty disability benefits. 
(Ord. No. 03-22, § 6, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-228. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Interest of members in system. All assets of the fund are held in trust, and at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system with respect to retirees and members and their spouses or beneficiaries, shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(b)  No reduction of accrued benefits. No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the city commission of the City of St. Pete Beach which shall have the effect of reducing the then vested accrued benefits of members or a member's beneficiaries. 
(c)  Qualification of system. It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified public pension plan under the applicable provisions of the code for a qualified plan under code section 401(a) and a governmental plan under code section 414(d), as now in effect or hereafter amended. Any modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of the code as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other applicable provisions of the U.S. Federal Tax Laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(d)  Use of forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to reduce future city contributions. 
(e)  Prohibited transactions. Effective as of January 1, 1989, a board may not engage in a transaction prohibited by code section 503(b). 
(f)  USERRA. Effective December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any other provision of this system, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service are governed by code section 414(u) and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, as amended. To the extent that the definition of "credited service" sets forth contribution requirements that are more favorable to the member than the minimum compliance requirements, the more favorable provisions shall apply. 
(g)  Vesting. 
(1)  Member will be 100 percent vested in all benefits upon attainment of the plan's age and service requirements for the plan's normal retirement benefit; and 
(2)  A member will be 100 percent vested in all accrued benefits, to the extent funded, if the plan is terminated or experiences a complete discontinuance of employer contributions. 
(h)  Electronic forms. In those circumstances where a written election or consent is not required by the plan or the code, an oral, electronic, or telephonic form in lieu of or in addition to a written form may be prescribed by the board. However, where applicable, the board shall comply with Treasury Regulations Section 1.401(a)-21. 
(i)  Compliance with F.S. ch. 185. It is intended that the system will continue to qualify for funding under F.S. § 185.08. Accordingly, unless otherwise required by law, any provision of the system which violates the requirements of F.S. ch. 185, as amended from time to time, shall be superseded by and administered in accordance with the requirements of such chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-22, § 7, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-229. - Benefits effective February 1, 2013. 
(a)  Effective February 1, 2013 all members employed on that date who have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service, and all members hired on or after that date, shall accrue benefits as provided in this section 66-229. The provisions of this section shall not apply to members who have retired, terminated employment with the right to a deferred vested benefit, entered DROP or attained normal retirement eligibility prior to February 1, 2013. 
(b)  Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(1)  Normal retirement age and date. A member's normal retirement age is the earlier of the attainment of age 60 and completion of ten years of credited service, or 30 years of credited service regardless of age. Provided, a member with ten or more years of credited service on January 31, 2013 shall be eligible for normal retirement at age 55 or upon completion of 25 years of credited service, regardless of age. Each member shall become 100 percent vested in his accrued benefit at normal retirement age. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date the member retires from the city after attaining normal retirement age. 
(2)  Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring on or after the normal retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following his retirement and which shall be continued thereafter during the member's lifetime, ceasing upon death, but with 120 monthly payments guaranteed in any event. The monthly retirement benefit shall equal 1.25 percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service earned on or after February 1, 2013, up to a maximum of 75 percent of average final compensation. Provided, if a member's accrued benefit as of February 1, 2013 is 75 percent or more of average final compensation, the benefit percentage may not be reduced. 
(3)  No early retirement. A member may not receive an immediate or deferred retirement benefit under this section, prior to attaining his or her normal retirement date as defined in this section. 
(c)  COLA. Members accruing benefits under this section shall not be entitled to a cost-of-living adjustment. 
(d)  Salary. For purposes of this section, salary shall be defined as a member's base pay, excluding overtime and all other forms of compensation. 
(e)  Vesting. If a member terminates employment, either voluntarily or by lawful discharge, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1)  With less than ten years of credited service (including credited service earned prior to February 1, 2013), a member is entitled to a refund of member contributions without interest. 
(2)  With ten or more years of credited service (including credited service earned prior to February 1, 2013) a member is entitled to either: 
a.  The pension benefit accrued to the member's date of termination, based on the terms of the plan in effect on such date of termination, payable commencing at the member's otherwise normal retirement date, provided the member does not elect to withdraw his or her member contributions; or 
b.  Refund of member contributions without interest. 
(f)  Employee contribution. Effective February 1, 2013 each member of the system shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of three percent of salary; provided, members who are employed on January 31, 2013 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of 8.3 percent of salary. 
(g)  DROP. No member may enter the DROP on or after February 1, 2013. Members already participating in DROP on February 1, 2013 may complete their DROP participation. Provided, members who are employed on January 31, 2013 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be eligible to enter and participate in the DROP on or after February 1, 2013. 
(Ord. No. 12-27, § 8, 12-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-26, § 8, 12-12-17)  
Sec. 66-230. - Share plan. 
(a)  Effective February 1, 2013, there is created a supplemental retirement benefit for the City of St. Pete Beach Police Officers in accordance with this section. The supplemental retirement benefit shall consist of an individual share account established for each police officer employed by the city on October 1, 2012, including DROP participants. The supplemental retirement benefit shall be funded solely by excess premium tax revenues received by the city pursuant to F.S. ch. 185, as provided in this section. The total initial amount to be allocated to the participants' share accounts as provided herein shall be the "total state monies reserve" reflected in the actuarial valuation report as of October 1, 2012. In the event the division of retirement determines that a lesser amount of F.S. ch. 185 monies are available to fund the share plan, the share plan shall be funded with the amount of F.S. ch. 185 revenues determined to be available by the division of retirement. Participants' share accounts shall be credited with premium tax revenues and investment earnings or losses, and distributed as follows: 
(1)  Crediting of excess premium tax monies. No later than April 1, 2013, a share account shall be established for each eligible member, and each share account shall be credited as follows. Each member who was employed as a police officer on October 1, 2012 shall receive one share for each complete month of credited service earned from January 1, 2006 through December 31, 2012, or date of DROP entry, whichever applies to each individual. The total number of shares thus determined shall be divided into the total amount of premium tax monies to be allocated to derive the initial value of each share. 
a.  Example: Officer (A) was employed January 1, 2006 and entered the DROP July 1, 2008. In the initial crediting of premium tax monies, this officer would receive 12 shares for 12 months of credited service in 2006, 12 shares for 12 months of credited service in 2007 and six shares for six months of credited service in 2008 before entering the DROP (Total: 30 shares). 
b.  Example: Officer (B) was employed January 1, 2006 and is still an active member of the system (non-DROP) on October 1, 2012. In the initial crediting of premium tax monies, this officer would receive one share for each month of credited service from January 1, 2006 through December 31, 2012 (Total: 72 shares). 
c.  Example: Officer (C) was employed in mid-November 2009 and is still an active member of the system (non-DROP) on December 31, 2012. In the initial crediting of premium tax monies, this officer would not receive a share for November 2009 since it was not a full month of credited service, but the officer would receive a share for each month thereafter through December 31, 2012 (Total: 37 shares). 
(3)  Investment earnings and losses. Effective January 1, 2014 and each January 1 thereafter, each participant's share account balance shall be credited or debited with earnings or losses at a rate equal to the fund's actual net rate of investment return for the plan year ending on the preceding September 30. There are no percentage gains guaranteed since all gains and losses are determined by the fund's market performance. 
(b)  Distribution of share accounts. Participants shall be eligible to receive a distribution of 100 percent of the balance in their share account, together with all applicable earnings and losses credited to their share account through the date of termination of employment. The designated beneficiary of a participant who dies while employed shall receive the accumulated total of the participant's share account balance and a participant who is awarded a disability benefit from the system shall receive the accumulated total of his/her share account balance. Payment of the share account balance shall be by lump sum, which shall consist of the accumulated total balance of the participant's share account, or, at the participant's direction, all or a portion of the share account balance may be rolled over to an IRA or another qualified plan in accordance with applicable law. The distribution of participants' share account funds is subject to the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, and distributions shall be made with any applicable taxes and penalties withheld as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 12-27, § 9, 12-27-12)  
Secs. 66-231—66-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIREFIGHTERS' RETIREMENT SYSTEM[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, adopted Apr. 18, 2000, repealed art. IV, §§ 66-251—66-336, in its entirety and replaced it with a new art. IV, §§ 66-251—66-335. Former art. IV pertained to similar material and derived from the Code of 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 81-51, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-45, § 1; Ord. No. 82-46, § 1; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1; Code of 1983, §§ 16-71—16-80, 16-81, 16-83—16-85, 16-88, 16-89(a)—(d), 16-91, 16-92, 16-95—16-97; Ord. No. 86-6, §§ 1—10, adopted Mar. 18, 1986; Ord. No. 86-59, §§ 1—3, adopted Dec. 16, 1986; Ord. No. 88-18, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 19, 1988; Ord. No. 91-19, §§ 1(1)—(11), (13)—(16), (18), (19), (21), (22), (24), adopted July 16, 1991; Ord. No. 94-57, §§ 1—6, adopted Dec. 20, 1994; Ord. No. 95-54, §§ 1—6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14, adopted Dec. 19, 1995; Ord. No. 96-27, § 1, adopted June 4, 1996; Ord. No. 96-51, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 17, 1996; Ord. No. 98-58, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 1998; Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, adopted Mar. 2, 1999; and Ord. No. 99-42, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 1999. 
Cross reference— Tax on property insurance for benefit of firefighters pension trust fund, § 78-26. 
State Law reference— Municipal firefighters' pension trust funds, F.S. ch. 175. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 66-251. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions without interest. For those members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the system, any payment representing interest and any required actuarially calculated payments for the purchase of such credited service shall be included in accumulated contributions. 
Actuarial equivalent means a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon the RP 2000 Combined Healthy Unisex Mortality Table and an interest rate equal to the investment return assumption set forth in the last actuarial valuation report approved by the board. This definition may only be amended by the city pursuant to the recommendation of the board using the assumptions adopted by the board with the advice of the plan's actuary, such that actuarial assumptions are not subject to city discretion. 
Average final compensation means one-twelfth of the average salary of the five best years of the last ten years of credited service prior to retirement, termination, or death, or the career average as a full time firefighter, whichever is greater. A year shall be 12 consecutive months. 
Beneficiary means the person entitled to receive benefits under this article at the death of a member who has been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect or if no person so designated is living at the time of death of the member, the beneficiary shall be the estate of the member. 
Board means the board of trustees, which shall administer and manage the system provided in this article and serve as trustees of the fund. 
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. 
Credited service means the total number of years and fractional parts of years of service as a firefighter with member contributions, when required, omitting intervening years or fractional parts of years when such member was not employed by the city as a firefighter. A member may voluntarily leave his accumulated contributions in the fund for a period of five years after leaving the employ of the fire department pending the possibility of being reemployed as a firefighter, and without losing credit for the time that he was a member of the system. If a vested member leaves the employ of the fire department his accumulated contributions will be returned only upon his written request. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed as a firefighter with the fire department within five years, his accumulated contributions, if $1,000.00 or less, shall be returned. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed within five years, his accumulated contributions, if more than $1,000.00, will be returned only upon the written request of the member and upon completion of a written election to receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount on forms designated by the board. Upon return of a member's accumulated contributions, all of his rights and benefits under the system are forfeited and terminated. Upon any reemployment, a firefighter shall not receive credit for the years and fractional parts of years of service for which he has withdrawn his accumulated contributions from the fund, unless the firefighter repays into the fund the contributions he has withdrawn, with interest, as determined by the board, within 90 days after his reemployment. 
The years or fractional parts of a year that a member performs "qualified military service" consisting of voluntary or involuntary "service in the uniformed services" as defined in the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) (P.L. 103-353) after separation from employment as a firefighter with the city to perform training or service, shall be added to his years of credited service for all purposes, including vesting, provided that: 
(1)  The member is entitled to reemployment under the provisions of USERRA. 
(2)  The member returns to his employment as a firefighter within one year from the earlier of the date of his military discharge or his release from active service unless otherwise required by USERRA. 
(3)  The maximum credit for military service pursuant to this paragraph shall be five years. 
(4)  This paragraph is intended to satisfy the minimum requirements of USERRA. To the extent that this paragraph does not meet the minimum standards of USERRA, as it may be amended from time to time, the minimum standards shall apply. 
In the event a member dies on or after January 1, 2007, while performing USERRA qualified military service, the beneficiaries of the member are entitled to any benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) as if the member had resumed employment and then died while employed. 
Beginning January 1, 2009, to the extent required by section 414(u)(12) of the code, an individual receiving differential wage payments (as defined under section 3401(h)(2) of the code) from an employer shall be treated as employed by that employer, and the differential wage payment shall be treated as compensation for purposes of applying the limits on annual additions under section 415(c) of the code. This provision shall be applied to all similarly situated individuals in a reasonably equivalent manner. 
Leave conversions of unused accrued paid time off shall not be permitted to be applied toward the accrual of credited service either during each plan year of a member's employment with the city or in the plan year in which the member terminates employment. 
Eligible employee means an individual who was a member before the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995. 
Firefighter means an actively employed full-time person employed by the city, including his initial probationary employment period, who is certified as a firefighter as a condition of employment in accordance with F.S. § 633.408 and whose duty it is to extinguish fires, to protect life and to protect property. The term includes all certified, supervisory, and command personnel whose duties include, in whole or in part, the supervision, training, guidance, and management responsibilities of full-time firefighters, part-time firefighters, or auxiliary firefighters but does not include part-time firefighters or auxiliary firefighters. 
Fund means the trust fund established in this article as part of the system. 
Member means an actively employed firefighter who fulfills the prescribed membership requirements. Benefit improvements which, in the past, have been provided for by amendments to the system adopted by city ordinance and any benefit improvements which might be made in the future shall apply prospectively and shall not apply to members who terminate employment or who retire prior to the effective date of any ordinance adopting such benefit improvements, unless such ordinance specifically provides to the contrary. 
Plan year means the 12-month period beginning October 1 and ending September 30 of the following year. 
Retiree means a member who has entered retirement status. 
Retirement means a member's separation from city employment with eligibility for immediate receipt of benefits under the system. 
Salary for credited service prior to January 1, 2013 shall mean the total compensation for services rendered to the city as a firefighter reportable on the member's W-2 form, excluding single sum payments of accrued sick leave and vacation pay, plus all tax deferred, tax sheltered or tax exempt items of income derived from elective employee payroll deductions or salary reductions. Salary for credited service beginning January 1, 2013 and ending on the day prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be defined in accordance with the provisions of section 66-339 of this chapter. Salary for credited service on or after the effective date of this ordinance shall mean the total compensation for services rendered to the city as a firefighter reportable on the member's W-2 form, excluding single sum payments of accrued sick leave and vacation pay and excluding overtime that exceeds 300 hours per fiscal year (over and above the regularly scheduled FSLA overtime), plus all tax deferred, tax sheltered or tax exempt items of income derived from elective employee payroll deductions or salary reductions. 
Compensation in excess of the limitations set forth in code section 401(a)(17) as of the first day of the plan year shall be disregarded for any purpose, including employee contributions or any benefit calculations. The annual compensation of each member taken into account in determining benefits or employee contributions for any plan year beginning on or after January 1, 2002, may not exceed $200,000.00, as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with code section 401(a)(17)(B). Compensation means compensation during the fiscal year. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. If the determination period consists of fewer than 12 months, the annual compensation limit is an amount equal to the otherwise applicable annual compensation limit multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the short determination period, and the denominator of which is 12. If the compensation for any prior determination period is taken into account in determining a member's contributions or benefits for the current plan year, the compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the applicable annual compensation limit in effect for that prior period. The limitation on compensation for an "eligible employee" shall not be less than the amount which was allowed to be taken into account hereunder as in effect on July 1, 1993. "Eligible employee" is an individual who was a member before the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995. 
Spouse means the member's or retiree's spouse under applicable law at the time benefits become payable. 
System means the city firefighters' retirement system as contained in this article and all amendments thereto. 
(b)  Masculine gender. The masculine gender, where used herein, unless the context specifically requires otherwise, shall include both the feminine and masculine genders. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 03-23, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-24, § 1, 12-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 1, 10-10-17)  
Sec. 66-252. - Benefit freeze and maximum benefit. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the system, the accrued benefits of all active members shall be frozen on December 31, 2012, and such members shall accrue benefits in accordance with section 66-339 for service between January 1, 2013 and the day prior to the effective date of this ordinance. Such members shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit with no reduction upon termination of employment and attaining age 55 or upon completion of 25 years of credited service. Such members who attain age 50 with ten years of credited service, or 20 years of credited service regardless of age, shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit reduced by three percent for each year prior to the member's earliest applicable normal retirement date. 
(b)  The benefits of members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on December 31, 2012 shall be payable in two parts: 
(1)  The frozen accrued benefit based credited service, average final compensation and the provisions of the system in effect on December 31, 2012; and 
(2)  The benefit based on credited service, average final compensation and the provisions of the system in effect on and after January 1, 2013. 
(c)  Effective January 1, 2013 and ending on the day prior to the adoption of this ordinance, the maximum combined benefit under the system shall be 75 percent of average final compensation. Provided, if a member's accrued benefit as of January 1, 2013 is 75 percent or more of average final compensation, the benefit percentage may not be reduced. Beginning on the effective date of this ordinance, the maximum combined benefit under the system shall be 100 percent of average final compensation. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the system, the benefits of members who have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service as of December 31, 2012 shall not be frozen, and such members shall continue to accrue benefits in accordance with the provisions of the system in effect on December 31, 2012 for as long as they are employed in a position covered by the system. 
(Ord. No. 12-24, § 2, 12-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 2, 10-10-17)  
Sec. 66-253. - Membership. 
(a)  Conditions of eligibility. All firefighters as of July 16, 1991 and all future firefighters shall become members of the firefighters' retirement system as a condition of employment, except that if, a new employee who is hired as fire chief has entered into an agreement with the city wherein he shall be permitted to participate in a pension plan other than the one provided in this article, he shall be entitled to waive participation in this plan. Current employees of the city who are selected to become fire chief are not eligible for the opt-out provided for herein. In order to waive such participation, the fire chief shall notify the city manager and the board of trustees, in writing, of his decision to waive such participation. The waiver shall be kept by the city clerk with a duplicate original copy maintained in the personnel file of the fire chief. Thereafter, contributions to the plan in accordance with sections 66-254 or 66-339 shall not be required, he shall not be eligible to be elected as a member trustee on the board or vote for a member trustee, and he shall not be eligible for any other benefits from the plan. 
(b)  Designation of beneficiary. Each firefighter shall complete a form prescribed by the board designating a beneficiary or beneficiaries. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 11-06, § 1, 2-22-11; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 3, 10-10-17)  
Sec. 66-254. - Contributions. 
(a)  Member contributions. Contributions to the system shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Amount. Each member of the system who has attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on December 31, 2012 shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of 10.3 percent of his salary. Members who are employed on December 31, 2012 but have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date, and members hired on or after January 1, 2013, shall be required to make contributions to the fund in accordance with section 66-339 of this chapter until the effective date of this ordinance. Member contributions for the period from the effective date of this ordinance through September 30, 2017, shall be 12.4 percent of his salary. Member contributions for each fiscal year after that date, shall be determined by the actuary and shall equal four percent of salary plus an amount that reflects the annual cost of the following benefit improvements, determined as of prior valuation date: (1) an increase in the benefit accrual rate for service after January 1, 2013 from 2.25 percent to 3.4 percent; (2) the change to the definition of salary effective with the effective date of this ordinance described in section 66-251, Definitions; and (3) the three percent automatic COLA commencing seven years after retirement on benefits accrued on or after January 1, 2013. 
Member contributions withheld by the city on behalf of the member shall be deposited with the board of trustees immediately after each pay period. The contributions made by each member to the fund shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to section 414(h) of the code. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the member's gross income for federal income tax purposes. For all other purposes of the system, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
(2)  Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
(b)  State contributions. Any monies received or receivable because of state laws for the express purpose of funding and paying for retirement benefits for city firefighters shall be deposited in the fund comprising part of this system immediately and under no circumstances more than five days after receipt by the city. 
(c)  City contributions. So long as this system is in effect, the city shall make quarterly contributions to the fund in an amount equal to the difference in each year, between the total aggregated member contributions for the year, plus state contributions for such year, and the total cost for the year, as shown by the most recent actuarial valuation of the system, but in no event shall the city's annual contribution be less than two percent of the total salary of members. The total cost for any year shall be defined as the total normal cost plus the additional amount sufficient to amortize the unfunded past service liability as provided in part VII of F.S. ch. 112. 
(d)  Other. Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the fund, but such deposits must be accounted for separately and kept on a segregated bookkeeping basis. Funds arising from these sources may be used only for additional benefits for members, as determined by the board, and may not be used to reduce what would have otherwise been required city contributions. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 00-38, § 2, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-24, § 3, 12-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 4, 10-10-17)  
Sec. 66-255. - Exclusive use of income of fund. 
At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system with respect to retirees and members and their spouses or beneficiaries shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-256. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 2010, repealed § 66-256 in its entirety, which pertained to reduction of accrued benefits, and derived from Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, adopted Apr. 18, 2000.  
Sec. 66-257. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a)  This article establishing the system and fund and subsequent ordinances pertaining to the system and fund may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part, provided that if this article or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefitting under this article, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby. 
(b)  If this article shall be repealed or if contributions to the system are discontinued or if there is a transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. ch. 121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with this article, for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one of the options provided for in this article who are designated by any of the members. In the event of repeal, discontinuance of contributions, or transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there shall be full vesting of 100 percent of benefits accrued to date of repeal and such benefits shall be nonforfeitable. 
(c)  The fund shall be distributed in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The board shall determine the date of distribution and the asset value required to fund all the nonforfeitable benefits after taking into account the expenses of such distribution. The board shall inform the city if additional assets are required, in which event the city shall continue to financially support the plan until all nonforfeitable benefits have been funded. 
(2)  The board shall determine the method of distribution of the asset value, whether distribution shall be by payment in cash, by the maintenance of another or substituted trust fund, by the purchase of insured annuities, or otherwise, for each firefighter entitled to benefits under the plan as specified in subsection (c)(3). 
(3)  The board shall distribute the asset value as of the date of termination in the manner set forth in this subsection, on the basis that the amount required to provide any given retirement income is the actuarially computed single-sum value of such retirement income, except that if the method of distribution determined under subsection (c)(2) involves the purchase of an insured annuity, the amount required to provide the given retirement income is the single premium payable for such annuity. The actuarial single-sum value may not be less than the firefighter's accumulated contributions to the plan, with interest if provided by the plan, less the value of any plan benefits previously paid to the firefighter. 
(4)  If there is asset value remaining after the full distribution specified in subsection (c)(3), and after the payment of any expenses incurred with such distribution, such excess shall be returned to the city, less return to the state of the state's contributions, provided that, if the excess is less than the total contributions made by the city and the state to date of termination of the plan, such excess shall be divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the city and the state. 
(5)  The board shall distribute, in accordance with subsection (c)(2), the amounts determined under subsection (c)(3). 
If, after 24 months after the date the plan terminated or the date the board received written notice that the contributions thereunder were being permanently discontinued, the city or the board of the fund affected has not complied with all the provisions in this section, the Florida Department of Management Services will effect the termination of the fund in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-258. - Domestic relations orders; retiree directed payments; exemption from tax, execution; nonassignability. 
(a)  Domestic relations orders. 
(1)  Prior to the entry of any domestic relations order which affects or purports to affect the system's responsibility in connection with the payment of benefits of a retiree, the member or retiree shall submit the proposed order to the board for review to determine whether the system may legally honor the order. 
(2)  If a domestic relations order is not submitted to the board for review prior to entry of the order, and the system is ordered to take action that it may not legally take, and the system expends administrative or legal fees in resolving the matter, the member or retiree who submits such an order will be required to reimburse the system for its expenses in connection with the order. 
(b)  Retiree directed payments. The board may, upon written request by a retiree or by a dependent, when authorized by a retiree or the retiree's beneficiary, authorize the system to withhold from the monthly retirement payment those funds that are necessary to pay for the benefits being received through the city, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the city, to make payment to insurance companies for insurance premiums as permitted by F.S. ch. 175 and to make any payments for child support or alimony. 
(c)  Exemption from tax, non-assignability. Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, annuities or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under this article and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this article are exempted from any state, county or municipal tax of the state and shall not be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 2010, changed the title of § 66-258 from "Exemption from tax, execution; nonassignability" to "Domestic relations orders; retiree directed payments; exemption from tax, execution; nonassignability."  
Sec. 66-259. - Pension validity. 
The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall have been granted under any prior or existing law or which shall be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or correct the pension amount of any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law or any person hereafter granted a pension under this article if the pension is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason and to reclassify any person who has under any prior or existing law been or who shall under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments or underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Secs. 66-260, 66-261. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 2010, repealed §§ 66-260 and 66-261, which pertained to forfeiture of pension and use of forfeitures, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, adopted Apr. 18, 2000.  
Sec. 66-262. - Vesting. 
If a member terminates his employment as a firefighter, either voluntarily or by discharge, and is not eligible for any other retirement benefits under the firefighters' retirement system, he shall be entitled to one of the following: 
(1)  A percentage of the pension benefit accrued to his date of termination according to the following vesting schedule: 
Years of 

Credited Service 	Vested 

Percent 
Less than 1 	0 
1 	10 
2 	20 
3 	30 
4 	40 
5 	50 
6 	60 
7 	70 
8 	80 
9 	90 
10 or more 	100 
 
If the member is vested under the vesting schedule upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a monthly retirement benefit based on his vested percentage, determined in the same manner as for normal or early retirement and based upon the member's credited service, average final compensation and the benefit accrual rate as of the date of termination, payable to him commencing at the member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, determined as if he had remained employed, provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions and provided the member survives to his otherwise normal or early retirement date. If the member does not withdraw his accumulated contributions and does not survive to his otherwise normal or early retirement date, his designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as provided herein for a deceased member, vested or eligible for retirement under pre-retirement death. 
(2)  Refund of accumulated contributions. 
(3)  Any vested member of the system whose position is terminated, for whatever reason, but who remains employed by the city in some other capacity, shall have all retirement benefits accrued up to the date of such termination under this system preserved, provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions from this system. Such accrued retirement benefits shall be payable at his otherwise early (reduced as for early retirement) or normal retirement date hereunder, or later, in accordance with the provisions of this system; provided further, however, that benefits shall not be payable under this system during any period of continued employment by the city. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section 66-262, the provisions of this section shall apply to benefits accruing prior to January 1, 2013. Effective January 1, 2013, for benefits accruing on and after that date, vesting rights shall be as provided in section 66-339 of this chapter; provided, members who are employed on December 31, 2012 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be entitled to a vested benefit in accordance with this section 66-262. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-24, § 4, 12-27-12)  
Sec. 66-263. - Conviction and forfeiture; false, misleading or fraudulent statements. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly make, or cause to be made, or to assist, conspire with, or urge another to make, or cause to be made, any false, fraudulent, or misleading oral or written statement or withhold or conceal material information to obtain any benefit from the system. 
(b)  A person who violates subsection (a) commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. §§ 775.082 or 775.083. 
(c)  In addition to any applicable criminal penalty, upon conviction for a violation described in subsection (a), a member or beneficiary of the system may, in the discretion of the board, be required to forfeit the right to receive any or all benefits to which the person would otherwise be entitled under the system. For purposes of this subsection, "conviction" means a determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Secs. 66-264—66-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 66-291. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  The sole and exclusive administration of and responsibility for the proper operation of the system and for making effective this article is hereby October 20, 1999 vested in a board of trustees. The board is hereby designated as the plan administrator. The board shall consist of five trustees, two of whom, unless otherwise prohibited by law, shall be legal residents of the city, who shall be appointed by the city commission at the first regularly scheduled meeting following the general election, or at the first regularly scheduled meeting after the city commission meeting where newly elected commissioners are sworn into office, which ever is later; and two of whom shall be members of the system, who shall be members of the system, who shall be elected by a majority of the firefighters who are members of the system. The fifth trustee shall be chosen by a majority of the previous four trustees as provided in this section, and such person's name shall be submitted to the city commission. Upon receipt of the fifth person's name, the city commission shall, as a ministerial duty, appoint such person to the board of trustees as its fifth trustee. The fifth trustee shall have the same rights as each of the other four trustees appointed or elected as provided in this section and shall serve a two-year term unless he sooner vacates the office. Each resident trustee shall serve as trustee for a period of two years, with staggered terms expiring in alternate years, unless the sooner vacates the office or is sooner replaced by the city commission at whose pleasure he shall serve. Each member trust shall serve as trustee for a period of two years, unless he sooner leaves the employment of the city as a firefighter or otherwise vacates his office, whereupon a successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the departing trustee. Each trustee may succeed himself in office. The board shall establish and administer the nominating and election procedures for each election. The board shall meet at least quarterly each year. The board shall be a legal entity with, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained in this article, the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature and description. 
(b)  The trustees shall, by a majority vote, elect a chairman and a secretary. The secretary of the board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of the board. The trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by law. 
(c)  Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on the board. Three affirmative votes shall be necessary for any decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. A trustee shall have the right to abstain from voting as the result of a conflict of interest, provided that trustee complies with the provisions of F.S. § 112.3143. 
(d)  The board shall engage in such actuarial, accounting, legal and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the system shall be paid from the fund at such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. In the event the board chooses to use the city's legal counsel, actuary or other professional, technical or other advisors, it shall do so only under terms and conditions acceptable to the board. 
(e)  The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
(1)  Construe the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
(2)  Determine all questions relating to eligibility and membership. 
(3)  Determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits under this article. 
(4)  Establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit applications and all matters required to administer the system. 
(5)  Distribute to members, at regular intervals, information concerning the system. 
(6)  Receive and process all applications for benefits. 
(7)  Authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund, and notify the disbursing agent, in writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the system and fund. 
(8)  Have performed actuarial studies and valuations, at least as often as required by law, and make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the system. 
(9)  Perform such other duties as are required to prudently administer the system. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 04-08, § 4, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-292. - Indemnification. 
(a)  To the extent not covered by insurance contracts in force from time to time, the city shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless members of the board from all personal liability for damages and costs, including court costs and attorney's fees, arising out of claims, suits, litigation, or threat of such, referred to in this section as "claims," against these individuals because of acts or circumstances connected with or arising out of their official duty as members of the board. The city reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to settle or not settle the claim at any time, and to appeal or to not appeal from any adverse judgment or ruling, and in either event will indemnify, defend and hold harmless any member of the board from the judgment, execution, or levy thereon. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to relieve any insurance company or other entity liable to defend the claim or liable for payment of the judgment or claim, from any liability, nor does this section waive any provision of law affording the city immunity from any suit in whole or part or waive any other substantive or procedural rights the city may have. 
(c)  This section shall not apply nor shall the city be responsible in any manner to defend or pay for claims arising out of acts or omissions of members of the board of trustees which constitute felonies or gross malfeasance or gross misfeasance in office. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-293. - Roster of retirees. 
The secretary of the board shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under this article in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the pension shall cease to be paid. Additionally, the secretary shall keep a record of all members in such a manner as to show the name, address, date of employment and date of termination of employment. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-294. - Claims procedures. 
(a)  The board of trustees of the firefighters' retirement system shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written requests (claims), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person (claimant), including members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(b)  The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth in state law. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-295. - Reports to division of retirement. 
Each year and no later than March 15, the board shall file an annual report with the division of retirement containing the documents and information required by F.S. § 175.261. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-296. - Finances and fund management; establishment and operation of fund. 
(a)  As part of the firefighter's pension plan system, there exists the fund, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the system, including the assets of the prior firefighter's retirement system. 
(b)  The actual custody and supervision of the fund and assets thereof shall be vested in the board. Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent but only upon written authorization from the board. 
(c)  All funds of the firefighters' retirement system may be deposited by the board with the city finance director, acting in a ministerial capacity only, who shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as he is liable for the safekeeping of funds for the city. However, any funds so deposited with the city finance director shall be kept in a separate fund by the finance director or clearly identified as such funds of the firefighters' retirement system. In lieu thereof, the board shall deposit the funds of the firefighters' retirement system in a qualified public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which depository with regard to such funds shall conform to and be bound by all of the provisions of F.S. ch. 280. In order to fulfill its investment responsibilities as set forth herein, the board may retain the services of a custodian bank, an investment advisor registered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 or otherwise exempt from such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination of these, for the purposes of investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall have discretion, subject to any guidelines as prescribed by the board, in the investment of all fund assets. 
(d)  All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the fund, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and aggregate account basis; 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements; 
(3)  Benefit payments; 
(4)  Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the city; 
(5)  All interest, dividends and gains or losses whatsoever; and 
(6)  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(e)  An audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year of the system showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(f)  The board shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1)  The board shall be vested with full legal title to said fund, subject, however, and in any event to the authority and power of the city commission to amend or terminate this fund, provided that no amendment or fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this system, except as otherwise provided herein. All contributions from time to time paid into the fund and the income thereof, without distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its agent in the fund, and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any portion of the fund. 
(2)  All monies paid into or held in the fund shall be invested and reinvested by the board and the investment of all or any part of such funds shall be limited to: 
a.  Annuity and life insurance contracts with life insurance companies in amounts sufficient to provide, in whole or in part, the benefits to which all of the members in the fund shall be entitled under the provisions of this system and pay the initial and subsequent premium thereon. 
b.  Time or savings accounts of a national bank, a state bank insured by the bank insurance fund or a savings/building and loan association insured by the savings association insurance fund which is administered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or a state or federal chartered credit union whose share accounts are insured by the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund. 
c.  Obligations of the United States or obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the Government of the United States or by an agency of the Government of the United States. 
d.  Bonds issued by the State of Israel. 
e.  Stocks, commingled funds, mutual funds and bonds or other evidences of indebtedness provided that: 
1.  Except as provided in subsection (f)(2)e.2. all individually held securities and all securities in a commingled or mutual fund must be issued or guaranteed by a corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized territory of the United States or the District of Columbia. 
2.  Up to 25 percent of the assets of the fund at market value may be invested in foreign securities. 
3.  The board shall not invest more than five percent of its assets in the common stock, capital stock or convertible securities of any one issuing company, nor shall the aggregate investment in any one issuing company exceed five percent of the outstanding capital stock of that company, nor shall the aggregate of its investments in common stock, capital stock and convertible securities at market exceed 75 percent of the assets of the fund. 
f.  Real estate, provided the board shall not invest more than 15 percent at market in real property or real estate, including real estate investment trusts (REITS). 
(3)  At least once every three years, and more often as determined by the board, the board shall retain a professionally qualified independent consultant, as defined in F.S. § 175.071, to evaluate the performance of all current investment managers and make recommendations regarding the retention of all such investment managers. These recommendations shall be considered by the board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(4)  The board may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the system. 
(5)  Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to his or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(6)  The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them unregistered and in form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the fund. 
(7)  The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other investments comprising the fund which it may deem to be to the best interest of the fund to exercise. 
(8)  The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to secure any order of court for the exercise of any power contained herein. 
(9)  Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required to perform, either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as trustee under this article, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the city, or any other entity, of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(10)  Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member, retiree or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by the board in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the member, retiree or beneficiary was correctly entitled, shall be paid. Overpayments shall be charged against payments next succeeding the correction or collected in another manner if prudent. Underpayments shall be made up from the fund in a prudent manner. 
(11)  The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the payments and benefits provided for herein. 
(12)  In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary party, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be conclusive upon all persons. 
(13)  Any of the powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times maintains continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent and provided, further, that legal title to the fund shall always remain in the board. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 8-23-05; Ord. No. 07-14, § 1, 5-22-07; Ord. No. 07-48, § 1, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Secs. 66-297—66-325. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 66-326. - Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(a)  (1)  Normal retirement age and date. A member's normal retirement age is the earlier of the attainment of age 55 regardless of years of credited service or the completion of 25 years of credited service regardless of age for members who retired, entered the DROP or terminated employment with the right to a deferred vested benefit prior to January 1, 2013, and members who are employed on December 31, 2012 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date. Each member shall become 100 percent vested in his accrued benefit at normal retirement age. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date the member retires from the city after attaining normal retirement age. 
(2)  Normal retirement under the system is retirement from employment with the city on or after the normal retirement date. The normal retirement date for members who are employed on December 31, 2012 but have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date, and members hired on or after January 1, 2013, shall be as provided in section 66-339 of this chapter; provided, members who are employed on December 31, 2012 but have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit through December 31, 2012 upon attaining age 55 or 25 years of credited service, and terminating city employment. 
(b)  Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on or after his normal retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following his retirement and which shall be continued thereafter during the member's lifetime, ceasing upon death, but with 120 monthly payments guaranteed in any event. The monthly retirement benefit for credited service earned prior to January 1, 2013 shall equal 3.4 percent of average final compensation, for each year of credited service. The normal retirement benefit for credited service on and after January 1, 2013 shall be as provided in section 66-339 of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, the normal retirement benefit of a member who is employed on December 31, 2012 and has attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall equal 3.4 percent of average final compensation for all years of credited service. 
(c)  Early retirement date. A member may retire on his early retirement date which shall be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the attainment of age 50 and the completion of ten years of credited service or the completion of 20 years of credited service regardless of age. Early retirement under the plan is retirement from employment with the city on or after the early retirement date and prior to the normal retirement date. Members who are employed on December 31, 2012 but have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit through December 31, 2012 with the three percent reduction provided in subsection (d) (2) below, upon attaining age 50 with ten years of credited service or 20 years of credited service regardless of age, and terminating city employment. For members terminating employment on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derived, the early retirement date will be age 50 and the completion of ten years of credited service. 
(d)  Early retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on his early date may receive either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit payable for life as follows: 
(1)  A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on what would have been his normal retirement date had he remained a firefighter for those members terminating employment prior to January 1, 2013, and age 55 for those members terminating employment on or after the effective date of this ordinance, and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement as his normal retirement date except that credited service and average final compensation shall be determined as of his early retirement date; or 
(2)  An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on his early retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The benefit payable shall be as determined in subsection (d)(1) of this section, reduced by three percent for each year by which the commencement of benefits precedes the date which would have been the member's normal retirement date had he continued employment as a firefighter for those members terminating employment prior to January 1, 2013, and age 55 for those members terminating employment on or after the effective date of this ordinance. 
(e)  Cost-of-living adjustment. The monthly amount payable based on credited service prior to January 1, 2013 for any member who terminated prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or the entire benefit for those retirees who terminate employment after the effective date of this ordinance to any retiree, including current retirees, and his joint pensioner or beneficiary, if applicable, who retires on or after such member's normal or early retirement date, not including terminated vested persons or disability retirees, shall be subject to an annual cost-of-living adjustment commencing on the first October 1 following seven complete years of receiving retirement income payments. The cost-of-living adjustment shall be three percent of the previous years' benefit amount. For those retirees who terminate employment between January 1, 2013 and the effective date of this ordinance, there shall be no cost-of-living adjustment applied to benefits based on credited service on or after January 1, 2013; provided, members who are employed on December 31, 2012 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall continue to be eligible for the cost of living adjustment provided in this subsection applied to benefits based on all periods of credited service. 
(f)  Required distribution date. The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70-1/2; or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 00-38, § 1, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 03-25, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-24, § 5, 12-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 5, 10-10-17; Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 66-327. - Pre-retirement death. 
(a)  Prior to vesting or eligibility for retirement. The beneficiary of a deceased member who was not receiving monthly benefits or who was not yet vested or eligible for retirement under the firefighters' retirement system shall receive a refund of 100 percent of the member's accumulated contributions. 
(b)  Deceased members vested or eligible for retirement with spouse as beneficiary. This subsection (b) applies only when the member's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary. The spouse beneficiary of any member who dies and who, at the date of his death, was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement shall be entitled to a benefit as follows: 
(1)  If the member was vested, but not eligible for normal or early retirement, the spouse beneficiary shall receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the date that the deceased member would have been eligible for early or normal retirement, at the option of the spouse beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. The spouse beneficiary may also elect to receive an immediate benefit, payable for ten years, which is actuarially reduced to reflect the commencement of benefits prior to the early retirement date. 
(2)  If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement, the spouse beneficiary shall receive payable for ten years, beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death or at the deceased member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, at the option of the spouse beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. 
(3)  A spouse beneficiary may not elect an optional form of benefit, except that the beneficiary may elect to receive a lump sum payment pursuant to subsection 66-329(g). 
(4)  A spouse beneficiary may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in subsections (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section, elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions. 
(5)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, in any event, distributions to the spouse beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by a date selected pursuant to the above provisions in this section that must be on or before December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained 70½. 
(6)  If the surviving spouse beneficiary commences receiving a benefit under subsections (1) or (2) above, but dies before all payments are made, the actuarial value of the remaining benefit will be paid to the spouse beneficiary's estate in a lump sum. 
(c)  Deceased members vested or eligible for retirement with non-spouse beneficiary. This subsection applies only when the member's spouse is not the beneficiary or is not the sole designated beneficiary, but there is a surviving beneficiary. The beneficiary of any member who dies and who, at the date of his death was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement, shall be entitled to a benefit as follows: 
(1)  If the member was vested, but not eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary will receive a benefit payable for ten years. The benefit will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. The benefit will be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation and actuarially reduced to reflect the commencement of benefits prior to the normal retirement date. 
(2)  If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary will receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death. The benefit will be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced for early retirement, if applicable. 
(3)  A beneficiary may not elect an optional form of benefit, however the board may elect to make a lump sum payment pursuant to subsection 66-329(g). 
(4)  A beneficiary, may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in subsections (c)(1) or (c)(2) above, elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions. 
(5)  If a surviving beneficiary commences receiving a benefit under subsections (c)(1) or (c)(2) above, but dies before all payments are made, the actuarial value of the remaining benefit will be paid to the surviving beneficiary's estate by December 31 of the calendar year of the beneficiary's death in a lump sum. 
(6)  If there is no surviving beneficiary as of the member's death, and the estate is to receive the benefits, the actuarial equivalent of the member's entire interest must be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
(7)  The Uniform Lifetime Table in Treasury Regulations § 1.401(a)(9)-9 shall determine the payment period for the calendar year benefits commence, if necessary to satisfy the regulations. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-328. - Disability. 
(a)  Disability benefits in line of duty. Any member of the firefighters' retirement system who shall become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, because of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a firefighter, which disability was directly caused by the performance of his duty as a firefighter, shall, upon establishing the disability to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension determined as for normal retirement, taking into account his average final compensation and years of credited service at the date of disability, but in any event the minimum amount paid to the member shall be 42 percent of the average final compensation of the member. Eligibility requirements for disability benefits are set forth in subsection (h), below. 
(b)  In line of duty presumptions. 
(1)  Any condition or impairment of health of a member caused by hypertension or heart disease shall be presumed to have been suffered in the line of duty unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence, provided such member shall have successfully passed a physical examination upon entering into such service, which examination failed to reveal any evidence of such condition, and provided, further, that such presumption shall not apply to benefits payable or granted in a policy of life insurance or disability insurance. 
(2)  Additional presumption. The presumption provided for in this subsection (b)(2) shall apply only to those conditions described in this subsection that are diagnosed on or after January 1, 1996. 
a.  Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following definitions apply: 
1.  Body fluids means blood and body fluids containing visible blood and other body fluids to which universal precautions for prevention of occupational transmission of bloodborne pathogens, as established by the Centers for Disease Control, apply. For purposes of potential transmission of meningococcal meningitis or tuberculosis, the term "body fluids" includes respiratory, salivary, and sinus fluids, including droplets, sputum, and saliva, mucous, and other fluids through which infectious airborne organisms can be transmitted between persons. 
2.  Emergency rescue or public safety member means any member employed full-time by the city as a firefighter, paramedic, emergency medical technician, law enforcement officer, or correctional officer who, in the course of employment, runs a high risk of occupational exposure to hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis and who is not employed elsewhere in a similar capacity. However, the term "emergency rescue or public safety member" does not include any person employed by a public hospital licensed under F.S. ch. 395 or any person employed by a subsidiary thereof. 
3.  Hepatitis means hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis non-A, hepatitis non-B, hepatitis C, or any other strain of hepatitis generally recognized by the medical community. 
4.  High risk of occupational exposure means that risk that is incurred because a person subject to this subsection, in performing the basic duties associated with his employment: 
i.  Provides emergency medical treatment in a non-healthcare setting where there is a potential for transfer of body fluids between persons; 
ii.  At the site of an accident, fire, or other rescue or public safety operation or in an emergency rescue or public safety vehicle handles body fluids in or out of containers or works with or otherwise handles needles or other sharp instruments exposed to body fluids; 
iii.  Engages in the pursuit, apprehension, and arrest of law violators or suspected law violators and, in performing such duties, may be exposed to body fluids; or 
iv.  Is responsible for the custody, and physical restraint when necessary, of prisoners or inmates within a prison, jail, or other criminal detention facility, while on work detail outside the facility, or while being transported and, in performing such duties, may be exposed to body fluids. 
5.  Occupational exposure, in the case of hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, means an exposure that occurs during the performance of job duties that may place a worker at risk of infection. 
b.  Presumption. Any emergency rescue or public safety member who suffers a condition or impairment of health that is caused by hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis that requires medical treatment and that results in total or partial disability or death shall be presumed to have a disability suffered in the line of duty, unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence; however, in order to be entitled to the presumption, the member must, by written affidavit as provided in F.S. § 92.50, verify by written declaration that, to the best of his knowledge and belief: 
1.  In the case of a medical condition caused by or derived from hepatitis, he has not: 
i.  Been exposed, through transfer of bodily fluids, to any person known to have sickness or medical conditions derived from hepatitis, outside the scope of his employment; 
ii.  Had a transfusion of blood or blood components, other than a transfusion arising out of an accident or injury happening in connection with his present employment, or received any blood products for the treatment of a coagulation disorder since last undergoing medical tests for hepatitis, which tests failed to indicate the presence of hepatitis; 
iii.  Engaged in unsafe sexual practices or other high risk behavior, as identified by the Centers for Disease Control or the Surgeon General of the United States or had sexual relations with a person known to him to have engaged in such unsafe sexual practices or other high risk behavior; or 
iv.  Used intravenous drugs not prescribed by a physician. 
2.  For meningococcal meningitis, in the ten days immediately preceding diagnosis he was not exposed, outside the scope of his employment, to any person known to have meningococcal meningitis or known to be an asymptomatic carrier of the disease. 
3.  For tuberculosis, in the period of time since the member's last negative tuberculosis skin test, he has not been exposed, outside the scope of his employment, to any person known to him to have tuberculosis. 
c.  Immunization. Whenever any standard, medically recognized vaccine or other form of immunization or prophylaxis exists for the prevention of a communicable disease for which a presumption is granted under this subsection, if medically indicated in the given circumstances pursuant to immunization policies established by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of the U.S. Public Health Service, an emergency rescue or public safety member may be required by the city to undergo the immunization or prophylaxis unless the member's physician determines in writing that the immunization or other prophylaxis would pose a significant risk to the member's health. Absent such written declaration, failure or refusal by an emergency rescue or public safety member to undergo such immunization or prophylaxis disqualifies the member from the benefits of the presumption. 
d.  Record of exposures. The city shall maintain a record of any known or reasonably suspected exposure of an emergency rescue or public safety member in its employ to the disease described in this subsection and shall immediately notify the member of such exposure. An emergency rescue or public safety member shall file an incident or accident report with the city of each instance of known or suspected occupational exposure to hepatitis infection, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis. 
e.  Required medical tests; preemployment physical. In order to be entitled to the presumption provided by this subsection: 
1.  An emergency rescue of public safety member must, prior to diagnosis, have undergone standard, medically acceptable tests for evidence of the communicable disease for which the presumption is sought or evidence of medical conditions derived therefrom, which tests fail to indicate the presence of infection. This subsection does not apply to meningococcal meningitis. 
2.  On or after June 15, 1995, an emergency rescue or public safety member may be required to undergo a preemployment physical examination that tests for and fails to reveal any evidence of hepatitis or tuberculosis. 
(c)  Disability benefits not in line of duty. Any member with ten years or more credited service who shall become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, because of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a firefighter, which disability is not directly caused by the performance of his duties as a firefighter, shall, upon establishing the disability to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension determined as for normal retirement taking into account his average final compensation and years of credited service at the date of disability. Eligibility requirements for disability benefits are set forth in subsection (h), below. 
(d)  Conditions disqualifying disability benefits. Each member who is claiming disability benefits shall establish, to the satisfaction of the board, that such disability was not occasioned primarily by: 
(1)  Excessive or habitual use of any drugs, intoxicants, or narcotics. 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots or civil insurrections or while committing a crime. 
(3)  Injury or disease sustained while serving in any branch of the armed forces. 
(4)  Injury or disease sustained after his employment as a firefighter with the city shall have terminated. 
(e)  Physical examination requirement. 
(1)  A member shall not become eligible for disability benefits until and unless he undergoes a physical examination by a qualified physician or surgeon, who shall be selected by the board for that purpose. The board shall not select the member's treating physician or surgeon for this purpose except in an unusual case where the board determines that it would be reasonable and prudent to do so. 
(2)  Any retiree receiving disability benefits under this article may be periodically reexamined by a qualified physician or surgeon who shall be selected by the board, to determine if such disability has ceased to exist. If the board finds that the retiree is no longer permanently and totally disabled to the extent that he is unable to render useful and efficient service as a firefighter, the board shall recommend to the city that the retiree be returned to performance of duty as a firefighter, and the retiree so returned shall enjoy the same rights that he had at the time he was placed upon pension. If the retiree so ordered to return shall refuse to comply with the order within 30 days from the issuance thereof, he shall forfeit the right to his pension. 
(3)  The cost of the physical examination or reexamination of the member claiming or the retiree receiving disability benefits shall be borne by the fund. All other reasonable costs as determined by the board incident to the physical examination, such as but not limited to, transportation, meals and hotel accommodations, shall be borne by the fund. 
(4)  If the retiree recovers from disability and reenters the service of the city as a firefighter, his service will be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month for which he received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date he reentered service of the city will not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the plan. 
(5)  The board shall have the power and authority to make the final decisions regarding all disability claims. 
(f)  Disability payments. The monthly benefit to which a member is entitled for the member's disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date of the board determined such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the first payment. The last payment will be: 
(1)  If the retiree recovers from the disability, the payment due next preceding the date of such recover; or 
(2)  If the retiree dies without recovering from disability, the payment due next preceding his death or the 120th monthly payment, whichever is later. 
Provided, however, the disability retiree may select, at any time prior to the date on which benefit payments begin, an optional form of benefit payment as described in subsections 66-329(a)(1) or (a)(2), which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of benefit. 
(g)  Workers' compensation. When a retiree is receiving a disability pension and workers' compensation benefits pursuant to F.S. ch. 440 for the same disability, and the total monthly benefits received from both exceed 100 percent of the member's average monthly wage, as defined in F.S. ch. 440, excluding overtime, the disability pension shall be reduced so that the total monthly amount received by the member does not exceed 100 percent of such wage. The amount of any lump sum workers' compensation payment shall be converted to an equivalent monthly benefit payable for ten years certain by dividing the lump sum amount by 83.9692. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the disability pension benefit be reduced below the greater of 42 percent of average final compensation and two percent of average final compensation times years of credited service. 
(h)  Eligibility for disability benefits. Subject to (h)(4) below, only active members of the system on the date the board determines entitlement to a disability benefit are eligible for disability benefits. 
(1)  Terminated persons, either vested or non-vested, are not eligible for disability benefits. 
(2)  If a member voluntarily terminates his employment, either before or after filing an application for disability benefits, he is not eligible for disability benefits. 
(3)  If a member is terminated by the city for any reason other than for medical reasons, either before or after he files an application for disability benefits, he is not eligible for disability benefits. 
(4)  The only exception to (1) above is: 
a.  If the member is terminated by the city for medical reasons and he has already applied for disability benefits before the medical termination, or; 
b.  If the member is terminated by the city for medical reasons and he applies within 30 days after the medical termination date. 
If either (4)a., or (4)b. above applies, the member's application will be processed and fully considered by the board. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 6, 10-10-17; Ord. No. 19-11, § 2, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 66-329. - Optional forms of benefits. 
(a)  In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable for normal or early retirement as specified in this article, a member, upon written request to the board, may elect to receive a retirement income or benefit of equivalent actuarial value payable in accordance with one of the following options: 
(1)  A retirement income of a larger monthly amount, payable to the retiree for his lifetime only. 
(2)  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the retiree during the lifetime of the retiree and following the death of the retiree, 100 percent, 75 percent, 66 2/3 percent, or 50 percent of such monthly amounts payable to the joint pensioner for his lifetime. Except where the retiree's joint pensioner is his spouse, the payments to the joint pensioner as a percentage of the payments to the retiree shall not exceed the applicable percentage provided for in the applicable table in the Treasury Regulations (see Q & A-2 of 1.401(a)(9)-6). 
(3)  Such other amount and form of retirement payments or benefits as, in the opinion of the board, will best meet the circumstances of the retiree. 
(b)  The member, upon electing any option of this section, will designate the joint pensioner or beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the system for the member's death and will have the power to change such designation from time to time. Such designation will name a joint pensioner or one or more primary beneficiaries where applicable. A member may change his beneficiary at any time. If a member has elected an option with a joint pensioner and the member's retirement income benefits have commenced, the member may thereafter change his designated beneficiary at any time, but may only change his joint pensioner twice. Subject to the restriction in the previous sentence, a member may substitute a new joint pensioner for a deceased joint pensioner. In the absence of proof of good health of the joint pensioner being replaced, the actuary will assume that the joint pensioner has deceased for purposes of calculating the new payment. 
(c)  The consent of a member's or retiree's joint pensioner or beneficiary to any such change shall not be required. The rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive benefits under the system shall thereupon cease. 
(d)  Upon change of a retiree's joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the amount of the retirement income payable to the retiree shall be actuarially redetermined to take into account the age of the former joint pensioner, the new joint pensioner, and the retiree and to ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the present value of the retiree's then current benefit at the time of the change. Any such retiree shall pay the actuarial recalculation expenses. Each request for a change will be made in writing on a form prepared by the board and on completion will be filed with the board. If no designated beneficiary survives the retiree, such benefits as are payable for the death of the retiree subsequent to his retirement shall be paid as provided in section 66-330. 
(e)  Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  If a member dies prior to his normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first occurs, no retirement benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under section 66-327. 
(2)  If the designated beneficiary (or beneficiaries) or joint pensioner dies before the member's retirement under the system, the option elected will be canceled automatically, and a retirement income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the member upon his retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with this section or a new beneficiary, is designated by the member prior to his retirement. 
(3)  If both the retiree and the beneficiary designated by member or retiree die before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period certain and life thereafter, made pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the board may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be paid in a lump sum and in accordance with section 66-330. 
(4)  If a member continues beyond his normal retirement date pursuant to subsection 66-326(a) and dies prior to his actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made or a retirement benefit will be paid under the option to a beneficiary designated by the member in the amount computed as if the member had retired under the option on the date on which his death occurred. 
(5)  The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(f)  A retiree may not change his retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his first retirement check. 
(g)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the board in its discretion, may elect to make a lump sum payment to a member or a member's beneficiary in the event that the total commuted value of the monthly income payments to be paid do not exceed $1,000.00. Any such payment made to any person pursuant to the power and discretion conferred upon the board by the preceding sentence shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to such member and shall not be subject to review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 06-28, § 2, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-330. - Beneficiaries. 
(a)  Under this article, each member or retiree may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, designate a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable for his death. Each designation may be revoked or changed by such member or retiree by signing and filing with the board a new designation of beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefits under the system shall cease. 
(b)  If a deceased member or retiree failed to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection (a) of this section or if the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) named by a deceased member or retiree predeceases the member or retiree, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the system with respect to such deceased member or retiree shall be paid to the estate of the member or retiree and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(c)  Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-331. - Maximum pension. 
(a)  Basic limitation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this system to the contrary, the member contributions paid to, and retirement benefits paid from, the system shall be limited to such extent as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of code section 415 for a qualified retirement plan. Before January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the limits specified in code section 415(b), subject to the applicable adjustments in that section. On and after January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the dollar amount specified in code section 415(b)(1)(A) ($160,000.00), subject to the applicable adjustments in code section 415(b) and subject to any additional limits that may be specified in this system. For purposes of this section, "limitation year" shall be the calendar year. 
(b)  Adjustments to basic limitation for form of benefit. If the form of benefit without regard to any benefit increase feature is not a straight life annuity, then the code section 415(b) limit applicable at the annuity starting date is reduced to an actuarially equivalent amount (determined using the assumptions specified in Treasury Regulation Section 1.415(b)-1(c)(2)(ii)) that takes into account the death benefits under the form of benefit. 
(c)  Benefits not taken into account. For purposes of this section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account in applying these limits: 
(1)  Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; 
(2)  Any other benefit not required under section 415(b)(2) of the code and regulations thereunder to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of code section 415(b)(1). 
(d)  COLA effect. Effective on and after January 1, 2003, for purposes of applying the limits under code section 415(b) (the "limit"), the following will apply: 
(1)  A member's applicable limit will be applied to the member's annual benefit in the member's first calendar year of benefit payments without regard to any automatic cost-of-living adjustments; 
(2)  Thereafter, in any subsequent calendar year, a member's annual benefit, including any automatic cost-of-living increases, shall be tested under the then applicable benefit limit including any adjustment to the code section 415(b)(1)(A) dollar limit under code section 415(d), and the regulations thereunder; but 
(3)  In no event shall a member's benefit payable under the system in any calendar year be greater than the limit applicable at the annuity starting date, as increased in subsequent years pursuant to code section 415(d) and the regulations thereunder. 
Unless otherwise specified in the system, for purposes of applying the limits under code section 415(b), a member's applicable limit will be applied taking into consideration cost-of-living increases as required by section 415(b) of the code and applicable Treasury Regulations. 
(e)  Other adjustments in limitations. 
(1)  In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before age 62, the limit prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the provisions of code section 415(b) of the code, so that such limit (as so reduced) equals an annual straight life benefit (when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a $160,000.00 annual benefit beginning at age 62. 
(2)  In the event the member's benefit is based on at least 15 years of credited service as a full-time employee of the fire or police department of the city, the adjustments provided for in subsection (e)(1) above shall not apply. 
(3)  The reductions provided for in subsection (e)(1) above shall not be applicable to disability benefits pursuant to section 66-328, or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 66-327. 
(4)  In the event the member's retirement benefit becomes payable after age 65, for purposes of determining whether this benefit meets the limit set forth in subsection (a) herein, such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the benefit beginning at age 65. This adjustment shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate. 
(f)  Less than ten years of participation. The maximum retirement benefits payable under this section to any member who has completed less than ten years of participation shall be the amount determined under subsection (a) of this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's participation and the denominator of which is ten. The reduction provided by this subsection cannot reduce the maximum benefit below ten percent of the limit determined without regard to this subsection. The reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be applicable to pre-retirement disability benefits paid pursuant to section 66-328 or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 66-327. 
(g)  Participation in other defined benefit plans. The limit of this section with respect to any member who at any time has been a member in any other defined benefit plan as defined in code section 414(j) maintained by the city shall apply as if the total benefits payable under all city defined benefit plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one plan. 
(h)  Ten thousand dollar limit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the retirement benefit payable with respect to a member shall be deemed not to exceed the limit set forth in this section if the benefits payable, with respect to such member under this system and under all other qualified defined benefit pension plans to which the city contributes, do not exceed $10,000.00 for the applicable plan year and for any prior plan year and the city has not any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan in which the member participated. 
(i)  Reduction of benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or contributions to all plans, where required, shall be accomplished by first reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be determined by the board and the plan administrator of such other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures for defined contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be established by the board and the plan administrator for such other plans provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority pursuant to the agreement of the board and the plan administrator of all other plans covering such member. 
(j)  Service credit purchase limits. 
(1)  Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, if a member makes one or more contributions to purchase permissive service credit under the system, as allowed in sections 66-336 and 66-337, then the requirements of this section will be treated as met only if: 
a.  The requirements of code section 415(b) are met, determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all such contributions as an annual benefit for purposes of code section 415(b); or 
b.  The requirements of code section 415(c) are met, determined by treating all such contributions as annual additions for purposes of code section 415(c). 
c.  For purposes of applying subsection (j)(1)a., the system will not fail to meet the reduced limit under code section 415(b)(2)(C) solely by reason of this subsection (j)(1)c., and for purposes of applying subsection (j)(1)b. the system will not fail to meet the percentage limitation under section 415(c)(1)(B) of the code solely by reason of this subsection c. 
(2)  For purposes of this subsection the term "permissive service credit" means service credit: 
a.  Recognized by the system for purposes of calculating a member's benefit under the plan; 
b.  Which such member has not received under the plan; and 
c.  Which such member may receive only by making a voluntary additional contribution, in an amount determined under the system, which does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service credit. 
Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, such term may, if otherwise provided by the system, include service credit for periods for which there is no performance of service, and, notwithstanding clause (j)(2)b., may include service credited in order to provide an increased benefit for service credit which a member is receiving under the system. 
(3)  For purposes of applying the limits in this subsection (j), only and for no other purpose, the definition of compensation where applicable will be compensation actually paid or made available during a calendar year, except as noted below and as permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulations. Unless another definition of compensation that is permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulation, is specified by the system, compensation will be defined as wages within the meaning of code section 3401(a) and all other payments of compensation to an employee by an employer for which the employer is required to furnish the employee a written statement under code sections 6041(d), 6051(a)(3) and 6052 and will be determined without regard to any rules under code section 3401(a) that limit the remuneration included in wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services performed (such as the exception for agricultural labor in code section 3401(a)(2). 
a.  However, for calendar years beginning after December 31, 1997, compensation will also include amounts that would otherwise be included in compensation but for an election under code sections 125(a), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 402(k), or 457(b). For calendar years beginning after December 31, 2000, compensation will also include any elective amounts that are not includible in the gross income of the employee by reason of code section 132(f)(4). 
b.  For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2007, compensation for the calendar year will also include compensation paid by the later of 2-1/2 months after an employee's severance from employment or the end of the calendar year that includes the date of the employee's severance from employment if: 
1.  The payment is regular compensation for services during the employee's regular working hours, or compensation for services outside the employee's regular working hours (such as overtime or shift differential), commissions, bonuses or other similar payments, and, absent a severance from employment, the payments would have been paid to the employee while the employee continued in employment with the employer; or 
2.  The payment is for unused accrued bona fide sick, vacation or other leave that the employee would have been able to use if employment had continued. 
c.  Back pay, within the meaning of Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2(g)(8), shall be treated as compensation for the limitation year to which the back pay relates to the extent the back pay represents wages and compensation that would otherwise be included under this definition. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the board may modify a request by a member to make a contribution to the system if the amount of the contribution would exceed the limits provided in code section 415 by using the following methods: 
a.  If the law requires a lump sum payment for the purchase of service credit, the board may establish a periodic payment deduction plan for the member to avoid a contribution in excess of the limits under code sections 415(c) or 415(n). 
b.  If payment pursuant to subsection (j)(4)a. will not avoid a contribution in excess of the limits imposed by code section 415(c), the board may either reduce the member's contribution to an amount within the limits of that section or refuse the member's contribution. 
(k)  Additional limitation on pension benefits. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary: 
(1)  The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to a retiree who becomes a member of the system and who has not previously participated in such system, on or after January 1, 1980, shall not exceed 100 percent of his average final compensation. However, nothing contained in this section shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension increases attributable to cost-of-living increases or adjustments. 
(2)  No member of the system shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to Social Security benefits or federal benefits under Chapter 1223, Title 10, U.S. Code. 
(l)  Effect of direct rollover on 415(b) limit. If the plan accepts a direct rollover of an employee's or former employee's benefit from a defined contribution plan qualified under code section 401(a) which is maintained by the employer, any annuity resulting from the rollover amount that is determined using a more favorable actuarial basis than required under code section 417(e) shall be included in the annual benefit for purposes of the limit under code section 415(b). 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 03-23, § 2, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 7, 10-10-17)  
Sec. 66-332. - Minimum distribution of benefits. 
(a)  General rules. 
(1)  Effective date. Effective as of January 1, 1989, the plan will pay all benefits in accordance with a good faith interpretation of the requirements of code section 401(a)(9) and the regulations in effect under that section, as applicable to a governmental plan within the meaning of code section 414(d). Effective on and after January 1, 2003, the plan is also subject to the specific provisions contained in this section. The provisions of this section will apply for purposes of determining required minimum distributions for calendar years beginning with the 2003 calendar year. 
(2)  Precedence. The requirements of this section will take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the plan. 
(3)  TEFRA Section 242(b)(2) elections. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section other than this subsection (a)(3), distributions may be made under a designation made before January 1, 1984, in accordance with Section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the plan that related to Section 242(b)(2) of TEFRA. 
(b)  Time and manner of distribution. 
(1)  Required beginning date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date which shall not be later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(2)  Death of member before distributions begin. If the member dies before distributions begin, the member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed no later than as follows: 
a.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by a date on or before December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age 70½, if later, as the surviving spouse elects. 
b.  If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then, distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
c.  If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
d.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this subsection (b)(2), other than subsection (b)(2)a., will apply as if the surviving spouse were the member. 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(2), distributions are considered to begin on the member's required beginning date or, if subsection (b)(2)d. applies, the date of distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member before the member's required beginning date (or to the member's surviving spouse before the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a.) the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. 
(3)  Death after distributions begin. If the member dies after the required distribution of benefits has begun, the remaining portion of the member's interest must be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution before the member's death. 
(4)  Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with this section. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the code and Treasury Regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual account described in section 414(k) of the code will be distributed in a manner satisfying the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the code and Treasury Regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
(c)  Determination of amount to be distributed each year. 
(1)  General requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
a.  The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one year. 
b.  The member's entire interest must be distributed pursuant to section 66-326, section 66-327, section 66-262, or section 66-329 (as applicable) and in any event over a period equal to or less than the member's life or the lives of the member and a designated beneficiary, or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the member or of the member and a designated beneficiary. The life expectancy of the member, the member's spouse, or the member's beneficiary may not be recalculated after the initial determination for purposes of determining benefits. 
(2)  Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The amount that must be distributed on or before the member's required beginning date (or, if the member dies before distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under section 66-327) is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g., monthly. All of the member's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's required beginning date. 
(3)  Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues. 
(d)  General distribution rules. 
(1)  The amount of an annuity paid to a member's beneficiary may not exceed the maximum determined under the incidental death benefit requirement of code section 401(a)(9)(G), and effective for any annuity commencing on or after January 1, 2008, the minimum distribution incidental benefit rule under Treasury Regulation Section 1.401(a)(9)-6, Q&A-2. 
(2)  The death and disability benefits provided by the plan are limited by the incidental benefit rule set forth in code section 401(a)(9)(G) and Treasury Regulation Section 1.401-1(b)(1)(I) or any successor regulation thereto. As a result, the total death or disability benefits payable may not exceed 25 percent of the cost for all of the members' benefits received from the retirement system. 
(e)  Definitions. 
(1)  Designated beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the plan and is the designated beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the code and Section 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of the Treasury Regulations. 
(2)  Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin pursuant to section 66-327. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 06-28, § 3, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-333. - Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions; elimination of mandatory distributions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Direct rollover means a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(2)  Distributee includes an employee or former employee. It also includes, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse. Effective January 1, 2007, it further includes a non-spouse beneficiary who is a designated beneficiary as defined by code section 401(a)(9)(E). However, a non-spouse beneficiary may rollover the distribution only to an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity established for the purpose of receiving the distribution and the account or annuity will be treated as an "inherited" individual retirement account or annuity. 
(3)  Eligible retirement plan means an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the code; an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the code; an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the code; effective January 1, 2002, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in section 457(b) of the code which is maintained by an eligible employer described in section 457(e)(1)(A) of the code and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan; effective January 1, 2002, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the code; or a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the code; or effective January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA described in section 408A of the code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. This definition shall also apply in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse. 
(4)  Eligible rollover distribution means any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments, not less frequently than annually, made for the life or life expectancy of the distributee or the joint lives or joint expectancies of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the code and the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income. Effective January 1, 2002, any portion of any distribution which would be includible in gross income as after-tax employee contributions will be an eligible rollover distribution if the distribution is made to an individual retirement account described in section 408(a); to an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b); to a qualified defined contribution plan described in sections 401(a) or 403(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible; or on or after January 1, 2007, to a qualified defined benefit plan described in code section 401(a) or to an annuity contract described in code section 403(b), that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of the distribution that is includible in gross income and the portion of the distribution that is not so includible. 
(b)  Payment. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the system to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(c)  Rollovers or transfers into the fund. On or after January 1, 2002, the system will accept, solely for the purpose of purchasing credited service as provided herein, permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans, member rollover cash contributions and/or direct cash rollovers of distributions made on or after January 1, 2002, as follows: 
(1)  Transfers and direct rollovers or member rollover contributions from other plans. The system will accept either a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a member contribution of an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in sections 401(a) or 403(a) of the code, from an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the code or from an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state. The system will also accept legally permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans. 
(2)  Member rollover contributions from IRAs. The system will accept a member rollover contribution of the portion of a distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity described in sections 408(a) or 408(b) of the code that is eligible to be rolled over. 
(d)  Elimination of mandatory distributions. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, in the event this plan provides for a mandatory (involuntary) cash distribution from the plan not otherwise required by law, for an amount in excess of $1,000.00, such distribution shall be made from the plan only upon written request of the member and completion by the member of a written election on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 03-23, § 3, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 06-28, § 4, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-334. - Family and Medical Leave Act. 
The fractional parts of the 24-month period ending each March 1 that a member is on leave without pay from the city pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) shall be added to his credited service under the system, provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the fractional parts of the 24 months ending each March 1 for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of periods of credited service. 
(2)  The request for credited service for FMLA leave time for the 24-month period prior to each March 1 and payment of professional fees shall be made on or before March 31. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made on or before April 30 for the preceding 24-month period ending March 1 and shall be made in one lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be issued. 
(4)  Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count toward vesting. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-335. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section 66-335, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  DROP means the City of St. Pete Beach Firefighters' Deferred Retirement Option Plan. 
(2)  DROP account means the account established for each DROP participant under subsection (c) of this section. 
(3)  "Total return of the assets," for purposes of calculating earnings on a member's DROP account pursuant to subsection (c)(2)b.2., for each fiscal year quarter, the percentage increase (or decrease) in the interest and dividends earned on investments, including realized and unrealized gains (or losses), of the total plan assets. 
(b)  Participation. 
(1)  Eligibility to participate. In lieu of terminating his employment as a firefighter, any member who is eligible for normal retirement under subsection 66-326(a) of this division, of the system may, prior to January 1, 2013, elect to defer receipt of such service retirement pension and to participate in the DROP. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the DROP shall be closed to new participants effective January 1, 2013, and no member may enter the DROP on or after that date; provided, a member who is employed on December 31, 2012 and has attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date may enter and participate in the DROP on or after January 1, 2013 in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Election to participate. A member's election to participate in the DROP must be made in writing in a time and manner determined by the board and shall be effective on the first day of the first calendar month which is at least 15 business days after it is received by the board. 
(3)  Period of participation. A member who elects to participate in the DROP under subsection (b)(2), shall participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed 60 months beginning at the time his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. An election to participate in the DROP shall constitute an irrevocable election to resign from the service of the city not later than the date provided for in the previous sentence. A member may participate only once. 
(4)  Termination of participation. 
a.  A member's participation in the DROP shall cease at the earlier of: 
1.  The end of his permissible period of participation in the DROP as determined under subsection (b)(3); or 
2.  Termination of his employment as a firefighter. 
b.  Upon the member's termination of participation in the DROP, pursuant to subsection (b)(4)a.1. above, all amounts provided for in subsection (c)(2), including monthly benefits and investment earnings or losses or interest, as applicable, shall cease to be transferred from the system to his DROP account. Any amounts remaining in his DROP account shall be paid to him in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) when he terminates his employment as a firefighter. 
c.  A member who terminates his participation in the DROP under subsection (b)(4) shall not be permitted to again become a participant in the DROP. 
(5)  Effect of DROP participation on the system. 
a.  A member's credited service and his accrued benefit under the system shall be determined on the date his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. For purposes of determining the accrued benefit, the member's salary for the purposes of calculating his average final compensation shall include an amount equal to any lump sum payments which would have been paid to the member and included as salary as defined herein, had the member retired under normal retirement and not elected DROP participation. Member contributions attributable to any lump sums used in the benefit calculation and not actually received by the member shall be deducted from the first payments to the member's DROP account. The member shall not accrue any additional credited service or any additional benefits under the system (except for any supplemental benefit payable to DROP participants or any additional benefits provided under any cost-of-living adjustment for retirees in the system) while he is a participant in the DROP. After a member commences participation, he shall not be permitted to again contribute to the system, nor shall he be eligible for disability, nor shall his estate or beneficiary be eligible for pre-retirement death benefits. 
b.  No amounts shall be paid to a member from the system while the member is a participant in the DROP. Unless otherwise specified in the system, if a member's participation in the DROP is terminated other than by terminating his employment as a firefighter, no amounts shall be paid to him from the system until he terminates his employment as a firefighter. Unless otherwise specified in the system, amounts transferred from the system to the member's DROP account shall be paid directly to the member only on the termination of his employment as a firefighter. 
(c)  Funding. 
(1)  Establishment of DROP account. A DROP account shall be established for each member participating in the DROP. A member's DROP account shall consist of amounts transferred to the DROP under subsection (c)(2), and earnings or interest on those amounts. 
(2)  Transfers from retirement system. 
a.  As of the first day of each month of a member's period of participation in the DROP, the monthly retirement benefit he would have received under the system had he terminated his employment as a firefighter and elected to receive monthly benefit payments thereunder shall be transferred to his DROP account, except as otherwise provided for in subsection (b)(4)b. A member's period of participation in the DROP shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b)(3) and (b)(4), but in no event shall it continue past the date he terminates his employment as a firefighter. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(4)b., a member's DROP account under this subsection (c)(2) shall be debited or credited with either: 
1.  Interest at an effective rate of 7-1/2 percent per annum compounded monthly determined on the last business day of the prior month's ending balance and credited to the member's DROP account as of such date (to be applicable to all current and future DROP participants); or 
2.  Earnings, to be credited or debited to the member's DROP account, determined as of the last business day of each fiscal year quarter and debited or credited as of such date, determined as follows: 
 The average daily balance in a member's DROP account shall be credited or debited at a rate equal to the net investment return realized by the system for that quarter. "Net investment return" for the purpose of this paragraph is the total return of the assets in which the member's DROP account is invested by the board net of brokerage commissions, transaction costs and management fees. 
 For purposes of calculating earnings on a member's DROP account pursuant to this subsection (c)(2)b.2., brokerage commissions, transaction costs, and management fees shall be determined for each quarter by the investment consultant pursuant to contracts with fund managers as reported in the custodial statement. The investment consultant shall report these quarterly contractual fees to the board. The investment consultant shall also report the net investment return for each manager and the net investment return for the total plan assets. 
Upon electing participation in the DROP, the member shall elect to receive either interest or earnings on his account to be determined as provided above. The member may, in writing, elect to change his election only once during his DROP participation. An election to change must be made prior to the end of a quarter and shall be effective beginning the following quarter. 
c.  A member's DROP account shall only be credited or debited with earnings or interest and monthly benefits while the member is a participant in the DROP. A member's final DROP account value for distribution to the member upon termination of participation in the DROP shall be the value of the account at the end of the quarter immediately preceding termination of participation for participants electing the net plan return and at the end of the month immediately preceding termination of participation for participants electing the flat interest rate return, plus any monthly periodic additions made to the DROP account subsequent to the end of the previous quarter or month, as applicable, and prior to distribution. If a member is employed by the city fire department after participating in the DROP for the permissible period of DROP participation, then beginning with the member's first month of employment following the last month of the permissible period of DROP participation, the member's DROP account will no longer be credited or debited with earnings or interest, nor will monthly benefits be transferred to the DROP account. All such non-transferred amounts shall be forfeited and continue to be forfeited while the member is employed by the fire department. A member employed by the fire department after the permissible period of DROP participation will still not be eligible for disability benefits, nor will he accrue additional credited service. 
(d)  Distribution of DROP accounts on termination of employment. 
(1)  Eligibility for benefits. A member shall receive the balance in his DROP account in accordance with the provisions of this subsection (d) upon his termination of employment as a firefighter. Except as provided in subsection (d)(5), no amounts shall be paid to a member from the DROP prior to his termination of employment as a firefighter. 
(2)  Form of distribution. 
a.  Unless the member elects otherwise, distribution of his DROP account shall be made in a cash lump sum. A member may elect, in such time and manner as the board shall prescribe, to receive the optional form of benefit described below. 
1.  Until the value of the member's DROP account is completely depleted, payments in approximately equal quarterly or annual installments over a period, designated by the member, not to exceed the life expectancy of the last survivor of the member and his beneficiary. In the event that the member dies before all installments have been paid, the remaining balance in his DROP account shall be paid in an immediate cash lump sum to his beneficiary, or if none is designated, then to the member's estate. 
2.  The purchase of a nonforfeitable fixed annuity payable in such form as the member may elect. Elections under this clause 2. shall be in writing and shall be made in such time or manner as the board shall determine. 
b.  Notwithstanding the preceding, if a member dies before his benefits commence, his DROP account shall be paid to his beneficiary in such optional form as his beneficiary may select. If no beneficiary designation is made, the DROP account shall be distributed to the member's estate. 
(3)  Date of payment of distribution. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (d), distribution of a member's DROP account shall begin as soon as administratively practicable following the member's termination of employment. distribution of the amount in a member's DROP account will not be made unless the member completes a written request for distribution and a written election, on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or a rollover of the lump sum amount. 
(4)  Proof of death and right of beneficiary or other person. The board may require and rely upon such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive the value of a deceased member's DROP account as the board may deem proper and its determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive payment shall be conclusive. 
(5)  Distribution limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (d), all distributions from the DROP shall conform to the "minimum distribution of benefits" provisions as provided for herein. 
(6)  Direct rollover of certain distributions. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the DROP to the contrary, a distributee may elect to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid in a direct rollover as otherwise provided under the system in section 66-333. 
(e)  Administration of DROP. 
(1)  Board administers the DROP. The general administration of the DROP, the responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the DROP and the responsibility of overseeing the investment of the DROP's assets shall be placed in the board. The members of the board may appoint from their number such subcommittees with such powers as they shall determine; may adopt such administrative procedures and regulations as they deem desirable for the conduct of their affairs; may authorize one or more of their number or any agent to execute or deliver any instrument or make any payment on their behalf; may retain counsel, employ agents and provide for such clerical, accounting, actuarial and consulting services as they may require in carrying out the provisions of the DROP; and may allocate among themselves or delegate to other persons all or such portion of their duties under the DROP, other than those granted to them as trustee under any trust agreement adopted for use in implementing the DROP, as they, in their sole discretion, shall decide. A trustee shall not vote on any question relating exclusively to himself. 
(2)  Individual accounts, records and reports. The board shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, records showing the operation and condition of the DROP, including records showing the individual balances in each member's DROP account, and the board shall keep, or cause to be kept, in convenient form such data as may be necessary for the valuation of the assets and liabilities of the DROP. The board shall prepare or cause to be prepared and distributed to members participating in the DROP and other individuals or filed with the appropriate governmental agencies, as the case may be, all necessary descriptions, reports, information returns, and data required to be distributed or filed for the DROP pursuant to the Code, the applicable portions of the Act and any other applicable laws. 
(3)  Establishment of rules. Subject to the limitations of the DROP, the board from time to time shall establish rules for the administration of the DROP and the transaction of its business. The board shall have discretionary authority to construe and interpret the DROP (including but not limited to, determination of an individual's eligibility for DROP participation, the right and amount of any benefit payable under the DROP and the date on which any individual ceases to be a participant in the DROP). The determination of the board as to the interpretation of the DROP or its determination of any disputed questions shall be conclusive and final to the extent permitted by applicable law. The board shall also oversee the investment of the DROP'S assets. 
(4)  Limitation of liability. 
a.  The trustees shall not incur any liability individually or on behalf of any other individuals for any act or failure to act, made in good faith in relation to the DROP or the funds of the DROP. 
b.  Neither the board nor any trustee of the board shall be responsible for any reports furnished by any expert retained or employed by the board, but they shall be entitled to rely thereon as well as on certificates furnished by an accountant or an actuary, and on all opinions of counsel. The board shall be fully protected with respect to any action taken or suffered by it in good faith in reliance upon such expert, accountant, actuary or counsel, and all actions taken or suffered in such reliance shall be conclusive upon any person with any interest in the DROP. 
(f)  General provisions. 
(1)  The DROP is not a separate retirement plan. Instead, it is a program under which a member who is eligible for normal retirement under the system may elect to accrue future retirement benefits in the manner provided in this section 66-335 for the remainder of his employment, rather than in the normal manner provided under the plan. Upon termination of employment, a member is entitled to a lump sum distribution of his or her DROP account balance or may elect a rollover. The DROP account distribution is in addition to the member's monthly benefit. 
(2)  Notional account. The DROP account established for such a member is a notional account, used only for the purpose of calculation of the DROP distribution amount. It is not a separate account in the system. There is no change in the system's assets, and there is no distribution available to the member until the member's termination from the DROP. The member has no control over the investment of the DROP account. 
(3)  No employer discretion. The DROP benefit is determined pursuant to a specific formula which does not involve employer discretion. 
(4)  IRC limit. The DROP account distribution, along with other benefits payable from the system, is subject to limitation under Internal Revenue Code Section 415(b). 
(5)  Amendment of DROP. The DROP may be amended by an ordinance of the city at any time and from time to time, and retroactively if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend in whole or in part any or all of the provisions of the DROP. However, except as otherwise provided by law, no amendment shall make it possible for any part of the DROP's funds to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under the DROP. No amendment shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the balance of the DROP account of any member. 
(6)  Facility of payment. If the board shall find that a member or other person entitled to a benefit under the DROP is unable to care for his affairs because of illness or accident or is a minor, the board may direct that any benefit due him, unless claim shall have been made for the benefit by a duly appointed legal representative, be paid to his spouse, a child, a parent or other blood relative, or to a person with whom he resides. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of the liabilities of the DROP for that benefit. 
(7)  Information. Each member, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit shall be payable to him or on his account under the DROP, shall file with the board the information that it shall require to establish his rights and benefits under the DROP. 
(8)  Written elections, notification. 
a.  Any elections, notifications or designations made by a member pursuant to the provisions of the DROP shall be made in writing and filed with the board in a time and manner determined by the board under rules uniformly applicable to all employees similarly situated. The board reserves the right to change from time to time the manner for making notifications, elections or designations by members under the DROP if it determines after due deliberation that such action is justified in that it improves the administration of the DROP. In the event of a conflict between the provisions for making an election, notification or designation set forth in the DROP and such new administrative procedures, those new administrative procedures shall prevail. 
b.  Each member or retiree who has a DROP account shall be responsible for furnishing the board with his current address and any subsequent changes in his address. Any notice required to be given to a member or retiree hereunder shall be deemed given if directed to him at the last such address given to the board and mailed by registered or certified United States mail. If any check mailed by registered or certified United States mail to such address is returned, mailing of checks will be suspended until such time as the member or retiree notifies the board of his address. 
(9)  Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable to a member from the DROP shall be paid only from the assets of the member's DROP account and neither the city nor the board shall have any duty or liability to furnish the DROP with any funds, securities or other assets except to the extent required by any applicable law. 
(10)  Construction. 
a.  The DROP shall be construed, regulated and administered under the laws of Florida, except where other applicable law controls. 
b.  The titles and headings of the subsections in this section 66-335 are for convenience only. In the case of ambiguity or inconsistency, the text rather than the titles or headings shall control. 
(11)  Forfeiture of retirement benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP participants from the application of any forfeiture provisions applicable to the system. DROP participants shall be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits. 
(12)  Effect of DROP participation on employment. Participation in the DROP is not a guarantee of employment and DROP participants shall be subject to the same employment standards and policies that are applicable to employees who are not DROP participants. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 03-23, § 4, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 06-28, § 5, 9-13-06; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-24, § 6, 12-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 8, 10-10-17; Ord. No. 19-11, § 3, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 66-336. - Military service prior to employment. 
The years or fractional parts of years that a firefighter serves or has served on active duty in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States, or the United States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior to first and initial employment with the city fire department shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  Multiple requests to buy credited service may be made at any time prior to retirement, but no purchase of credited service of less than one year is permitted, unless the total qualified time to be purchased is less than one year. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six months of his request for credit and prior to retirement and shall be made in one lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  The maximum credit under this section combined with section 66-337, shall be four years. 
(5)  Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count for all purposes except vesting. 
(Ord. No. 01-47, § 1, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 05-29, § 1, 9-27-05; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 66-337. - Prior fire service. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, and except as provided for in section 66-251, the years or fractional parts of years that a member previously served as a firefighter with the city during a period of previous employment and for which period accumulated contributions were withdrawn from the fund, or the years and fractional parts of years that a member served as a firefighter for any other municipality, county, or special fire district in the State of Florida or another state, shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The firefighter contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of this system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit, plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  Multiple requests to buy credited service may be made at any time prior to retirement, but no purchase of credited service of less than one year is permitted, unless the total qualified time to be purchased is less than one year. 
(3)  Payment by the firefighter of the required amount shall be made within six months of his request for credit and prior to retirement and shall be made in one lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  The maximum credit under this section combined with section 66-336, shall be four years of credited service and shall count for all purposes except vesting. Credited service with the City of St. Pete Beach shall count towards vesting also. 
(5)  In no event, however, may credited service be purchased pursuant to this section for prior service with any other municipal, county fire department, if such prior service forms or will form the basis of a retirement benefit or pension from another retirement system or plan as set forth in subsection 66-331(k)(2). 
(Ord. No. 01-47, § 2, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 05-29, § 2, 9-27-05; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 9, 10-10-17)  
Sec. 66-338. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Interest of members in system. All assets of the fund are held in trust, and at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system with respect to retirees and members and their spouses or beneficiaries, shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(b)  No reduction of accrued benefits. No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the city commission of the City of St. Pete Beach which shall have the effect of reducing the then vested accrued benefits of members or a member's beneficiaries. 
(c)  Qualification of system. It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified public pension plan under the applicable provisions of the code for a qualified plan under code section 401(a) and a governmental plan under code section 414(d), as now in effect or hereafter amended. Any modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of the code as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other applicable provisions of the U.S. Federal Tax Laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(d)  Use of forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to reduce future city contributions. 
(e)  Prohibited transactions. Effective as of January 1, 1989, a board may not engage in a transaction prohibited by code section 503(b). 
(f)  USERRA. Effective December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any other provision of this system, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service are governed by code section 414(u) and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, as amended. To the extent that the definition of "credited service" sets forth contribution requirements that are more favorable to the member than the minimum compliance requirements, the more favorable provisions shall apply. 
(g)  Vesting. 
(1)  Member will be 100 percent vested in all benefits upon attainment of the plan's age and service requirements for the plan's normal retirement benefit; and 
(2)  A member will be 100 percent vested in all accrued benefits, to the extent funded, if the plan is terminated or experiences a complete discontinuance of employer contributions. 
(h)  Electronic forms. In those circumstances where a written election or consent is not required by the plan or the code, an oral, electronic, or telephonic form in lieu of or in addition to a written form may be prescribed by the board. However, where applicable, the board shall comply with Treasury Regulations § 1.401(a)-21. 
(i)  Compliance with F.S. ch. 175. It is intended that the system will continue to qualify for funding under F.S. § 175.101. Accordingly, unless otherwise required by law, any provision of the system which violates the requirements of F.S. ch. 175, as amended from time to time, shall be superseded by and administered in accordance with the requirements of such chapter. 
(j)  Missing benefit recipients. The system shall follow the procedures outlined in the IRS Employee Plans Compliance Resolution System (EPCRS) Program and other applicable IRS guidance to locate any missing individuals to whom a full unreduced benefit payment is due and if, at the conclusion of such efforts, the individual cannot be located, the existing procedure of cancelling payments otherwise due (provided that, if the individual is later located, the benefits due shall be paid) will apply. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 5, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-28, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 19-11, § 4, 7-23-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-23, § 5, adopted Nov. 18, 2003, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as a new § 66-336. Inasmuch as there already exist provisions so designated, § 5 has been codified as a new § 66-338 at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 66-339. - Benefits Effective January 1, 2013. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2013 all members employed on that date who have not attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service, and all members hired on or after that date, shall accrue benefits as provided in this section 66-339. The provision of this section shall not apply to members who have retired, separated from service with the city with the right to a deferred vested benefit, entered DROP or attained normal retirement eligibility prior to January 1, 2013. 
(b)  Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(1)  Normal retirement age and date. For members who terminate employment prior to the effective date of this ordinance a member's normal retirement age is the earlier of the attainment of age 55 and completion of ten years of credited service, the attainment of age 52 and 25 years of credited service, or 30 years of credited service regardless of age. Provided, a member with ten or more years of credited service on December 31, 2012 shall be eligible for normal retirement at age 55 or upon completion of 25 years of credited service, regardless of age. For members who terminate employment on or after the effective date of this ordinance who had completed less than ten years of credited service on December 31, 2012, a members normal retirement age is the earlier of the attainment of age 55 and completion of ten years of credited service, age 52 and completion of 25 years of credited service or the completion of 30 years of credited service, regardless of age. For members who terminate employment on or after the effective date of this ordinance with ten or more years of credited service on December 31, 2012 shall be eligible for normal retirement at age 55 or upon completion of 25 years of credited service, regardless of age. Each member shall become 100 percent vested in his accrued benefit at normal retirement age. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date the member retires from the city after attaining normal retirement age. 
(2)  Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring on or after the normal retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following his retirement and which shall be continued thereafter during the member's lifetime, ceasing upon death, but with 120 monthly payments guaranteed in any event. For members who terminate employment prior to the effective date of this ordinance, the monthly retirement benefit shall equal 1.25 percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service earned on or after January 1, 2013, up to a maximum of 75 percent of average final compensation. Provided, if a member's accrued benefit as of January 1, 2013 is 75 percent or more of average final compensation, the benefit percentage may not be reduced. For members who terminate employment on or after the effective date of this ordinance, the monthly retirement benefit shall equal 3.4 percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service earned on or after January 1, 2013, up to a maximum of 100 percent of average final compensation. 
(3)  No early retirement. A member may not receive an immediate or deferred retirement benefit under this section, prior to attaining his or her normal retirement date as defined in this section, except as provided for in subsection 66-326(c) and subsection 66-326(d). 
(c)  COLA. Members accruing benefits under this section shall not be entitled to a cost of living adjustment, except as provided for in subsection 66-326(e). 
(d)  Vesting. If a member terminates employment, either voluntarily or by lawful discharge, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1)  With less than ten years of credited service (including credited service earned prior to January 1, 2013), a member is entitled to a refund of member contributions without interest. 
(2)  With ten or more years of credited service (including credited service earned prior to January 1, 2013) a member is entitled to either: 
a.  The pension benefit accrued to the member's date of termination, based on the terms of the plan in effect on such date of termination, payable commencing at the member's otherwise normal retirement date, provided the member does not elect to withdraw his or her member contributions; or 
b.  Refund of member contributions without interest. 
(e)  DROP. No member may enter the DROP on or after January 1, 2013. Members already participating in DROP on January 1, 2013 may complete their DROP participation. Provided, members who are employed on December 31, 2012 and have attained age 55 or 25 years of credited service on that date shall be eligible to enter and participate in the DROP on or after January 1, 2013. 
(Ord. No. 12-24, § 7, 12-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 10, 10-10-17)  
Sec. 66-339.1. - Supplemental benefit component for special benefits; chapter 175 share accounts. 
There is hereby established an additional plan component to provide special benefits in the form of a supplemental retirement, termination, death and disability benefits to be in addition to the benefits provided for in the previous sections of this plan, such benefit to be funded solely and entirely by F.S. ch. 175, premium tax monies for each plan year which are allocated to this supplemental component as provided for in F.S. § 175.351. Amounts allocated to this supplemental component ("share plan") shall be further allocated to the members and DROP participants in a manner to be agreed upon. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16, § 11, 10-10-17)  
Sec. 66-339.2. - Reemployment after retirement. 
(a)  Any retiree under this system may be reemployed by any public or private employer and may receive compensation from that employment without limiting or restricting in any way the retirement benefits payable under this system. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, reemployment by the city shall be subject to the limitations set forth in this section. 
(b)  After normal retirement. Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system and who is reemployed as a firefighter and, by virtue of that reemployment, is eligible to participate in this system, shall upon being reemployed, discontinue receipt of benefits. Upon reemployment, the member shall be deemed to be fully vested and the additional credited service accrued during the subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit amount attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be added to the benefit determined upon the initial retirement to determine the total benefit payable upon final retirement. Calculations of benefits upon retirement shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation, and credited service as of that date and the retirement benefit amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation (based only on the subsequent employment period and not including any period of DROP participation), and credited service as of the date of subsequent retirement. The amount of any death or disability benefit received during a subsequent period of employment shall be reduced by the amount of accrued benefit eligible to be paid for a prior period of employment. The optional form of benefit and any joint pensioner selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to change upon subsequent retirement except as otherwise provided herein, but the retiree may select a different optional form and joint pensioner applicable only to the subsequent retirement benefit. 
(c)  Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system who is reemployed by the city in a position other than as a firefighter, shall upon being reemployed, continue receipt of benefits for the period of any subsequent employment period. Former DROP participants shall begin receipt of benefits under these circumstances. 
(d)  After early retirement. Any retiree who is retired under early retirement pursuant to this system and who subsequently becomes an employee of the city in any capacity shall discontinue receipt of benefits from the system. If the reemployed person, by virtue of his reemployment, is eligible to participate in this system, that person shall accrue a second benefit as provided for in subsection (2) above and benefit payments shall remain suspended during any such subsequent employment period. If the reemployed person is not eligible to participate in this system, that person's pension benefit payments shall be suspended until the earlier of termination of employment or such time as the reemployed retiree reaches the date that he would have been eligible for normal retirement under this system had he continued employment and not elected early retirement. "Normal retirement" as used in this subsection shall be the current normal retirement date provided for under this system. 
(e)  After disability retirement. 
(1)  Subject to paragraph (2) below, any retiree who is retired under section 66-328, Disability ("disability retiree"), may, subject to subsection (e), physical examination requirement, of that section, be reemployed by any public or private employer, and may receive compensation from that employment without limiting or restricting in any way, the retirement benefits payable under this system. 
(2)  Any disability retiree who subsequently becomes an employee of the city in any capacity, except as a firefighter, shall discontinue receipt of disability benefits from the system for the period of any such employment. 
(3)  If a disability retiree is reemployed as a firefighter for the city, his disability benefit shall cease and section 66-328, subsection (e) shall apply. 
(f)  Reemployment of terminated vested persons. Reemployed terminated vested persons shall not be subject to the provisions of this section until such time as they begin to actually receive benefits. Upon receipt of benefits, terminated vested persons shall be treated as normal or early retirees for purposes of applying the provisions of this section and their status as an early or normal retiree shall be determined by the date they elect to begin to receive their benefit. 
(g)  DROP Participants. Retirees who were in the deferred retirement option plan shall, following termination of employment after DROP participation, have the options provided for in this section for reemployment. 
(Ord. No. 19-11, § 5, 7-23-19)  
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Distribution of handbills restricted, § 46-1; nuisances, § 46-31 et seq.; junked, wrecked and abandoned property, § 46-96 et seq.; utilities, ch. 86; concurrency management system, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; Florida Litter Law of 1971, F.S. § 403.413. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction and demolition debris means, for purposes of this article, construction and demolition debris has the dame meaning as assigned to that term in Chapter 62-701.200(27) F.A.C. 
Dumpster means a garbage, trash or other waste material container that is mechanically lifted on to a refuse truck. The term "dumpster" shall include compactors and roll-offs. 
Garbage means refuse, tin cans, glass, paper, bottles and the boxes and paper coming from or being disposed of by residents and commercial or business establishments, and all refuse, kitchen accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or other, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables, and other refuse that may accumulate in the normal household, which shall all be contained in receptacles specifically provided for that purpose. The term shall also include all boxes and containers, provided such boxes and containers shall be broken down flat. 
Garbage can means a galvanized iron or other standard metal or plastic can and cover to fit, of the type commonly sold as a garbage can, of not less than five nor more than 20 gallons in capacity, or other acceptable container; such receptacle to have two handles upon the sides thereof or a suitable bale by which it may be readily lifted for the purposes of easily emptying the can in a garbage pickup truck; and the metal cover of which shall be tightfitting and kept in place on the can for the purpose of preventing stenches or other nuisance. 
Multiple dwellings means all places of abode other than single-family residences such as apartment houses, roominghouses and boardinghouses, sanitariums, rest homes, hospitals, resident schools, hotels, motels and motor courts, guesthouses, tourist homes, trailer courts, trailer camps and all other similar places. 
Noncombustible refuse or words of similar connotation mean refuse materials that are unburnable at ordinary bonfire or incinerator temperatures, such as durable junk, metals, mineral matter, stone, cement and concrete derivatives, glass, crockery, metal furniture, or parts thereof, vehicle bodies or parts thereof, and other similar material or refuse, none of which shall be placed in garbage containers or in any way mixed with garbage. 
Temporary construction roll-off container means a dumpster used on a temporary construction site or a special event. 
Trash means any refuse other than garbage or putrescible material. This shall include discarded paper, discarded flower decorations, cuttings of grass and weeds and branches and vines, provided such branches, shrubs and vines are placed in containers or bundles not to exceed 40 pounds in weight or four feet in length. The term "trash" does not include earth, trees, tree trunks, limbs over three inches in diameter, wallpaper, roofing material, plaster, concrete, or other substances that may accumulate as a result of repairs to land or buildings or as a result of initial clearing of lots or as a result of building operations. For practical purposes, unless otherwise prohibited and where not unduly cumbersome for ordinary pickup and disposal purposes, trash may include noncombustible as well as combustible refuse, unless and until trash shall be disposed of by incinerator method. 
(Code 1960, § 10-1; Ord. No. 25, §§ 3—6, 8; Code 1983, § 9-1; Ord. No. 91-1, § 1, 2-5-91; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 5-13-08) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-2. - Treatment of garbage matter specified. 
(a)  All garbage, tin cans, bottles and other disposable containers shall first be drained of liquids and shall be deposited at least once daily in garbage cans required in section 70-36. 
(b)  The wet garbage matter shall be drained and wrapped in paper before being placed in a garbage can; provided, however, hotels, restaurants or other eating establishments, upon an exemption granted by the city, shall not be required to wrap wet garbage and provided, further, all such excepted persons shall clean and rinse and maintain in a reasonably sanitary and nonodorous condition each garbage can immediately following each collection of garbage and shall at all times maintain the can free from stench or other nuisance, which shall be done in such way as not to commit a public or private nuisance. 
(Code 1960, § 10-6; Ord. No. 25, § 10; Code 1983, § 9-5)  
Sec. 70-3. - Accumulation of garbage and insufficient number of cans. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant or manager or person responsible for any land or premises to permit, suffer or allow, either by commission or omission, any accumulation of garbage or other waste material upon premises or property within the city for a period longer than four days, without having arranged for disposal of the accumulation by some person qualified under this chapter to perform such services or by the duly authorized garbage collector of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether owner, manager or occupant of any premises, to fail to provide a sufficient number of containers per unit as provided in this chapter to amply provide for any four-day period of garbage or other noxious wastes. 
(Code 1960, § 10-7; Ord. No. 25, § 30; Code 1983, § 9-6)  
Sec. 70-4. - Removal of industrial waste by owner. 
Industrial wastes and other noncombustible refuse must be removed by the owner, occupant or operator or by a duly licensed contractor at the user's expense. 
(Code 1960, § 10-8; Ord. No. 25, § 28; Code 1983, § 9-7)  
Sec. 70-5. - Burning. 
No garbage, refuse, trash or other discarded matter shall be burned in an incinerator, furnace or other similar incinerating device or directly upon real property within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1960, § 10-9; Ord. No. 25, § 16; Ord. No. 115, § 1; Code 1983, § 9-8)  
Sec. 70-6. - Burial. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury garbage, trash or any other unwholesome matter. 
(Code 1960, § 10-10; Ord. No. 25, § 15; Code 1983, § 9-9)  
Sec. 70-7. - Transportation of garbage. 
Unless specifically authorized by resolution of the city commission, it shall be unlawful for any person to transport garbage through or over the public streets or alleys, except for the purpose of having the garbage picked up by persons authorized by the city to pick up and dispose of the garbage. 
(Code 1960, § 10-11; Ord. No. 25, § 17; Code 1983, § 9-10)  
Sec. 70-8. - Littering; placement in cans of another. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit garbage, refuse, trash or other discarded matter upon the premises of another or upon any street, alley, parkway, or other public or private property or into any drain, canal, ditch, waterway, gulf, bay, rockbed, sandbed, pool, pond, or the like within the city or in the can or receptacle of another who has paid the collection service fee as provided in this chapter. However, tenants of multiple dwellings or businesses where authorized may deposit garbage in cans which shall be authorized for the use of such tenants by the owner or manager thereof. 
(Code 1960, § 10-12; Ord. No. 127, § 1; Ord. No. 250, § 1; Code 1983, § 9-11)  
Sec. 70-9. - Prevention of accumulations. 
In order to prevent any overflow of garbage, trash, noncombustible refuse or any other waste material, the city shall be entitled to require that either the size of the garbage can or dumpster be increased or that pickup service be increased or both, at the expense of the property owner or property occupant. 
(Code 1983, § 9-12; Ord. No. 91-1, § 5, 2-5-91)  
Secs. 70-10—70-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONTAINERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Garbage cans and dumpsters, § 134-1296 et seq. 
 
Sec. 70-36. - Required; exemptions; covers; placement for collection. 
(a)  All owners or residents or occupants of single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, businesses, and commercial establishments or enterprises within the city shall provide either garbage cans or dumpsters of sufficient capacity to hold garbage and trash which has accumulated between service pickup days. 
(b)  Each cooking unit of a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or a multiple-family dwelling shall have either garbage cans or dumpsters adequate and sufficient in size to hold garbage, trash, noncombustible refuse and other waste materials which have accumulated between service pickup days as provided in subsection (a) of this section. Garbage cans and dumpsters, whether for residential dwellings, two-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, businesses or commercial enterprises or establishments, shall be placed in one location on the premises for collection purposes, which location shall be approved by the city. 
(c)  Garbage cans and dumpsters shall be kept tightly covered at all times, except when it is necessary to lift the cover for disposal or removal of garbage, trash, noncombustible refuse or other waste materials or to deposit such therein. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit garbage, trash, noncombustible refuse or other waste materials in such amounts in the can or dumpster that will not permit the cover to be kept tightly in place. Temporary construction roll-off containers shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection, but shall be required to comply with all other requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Residential garbage can customers may not deposit cans at the curb other than the night before their scheduled pickup and the cans must be removed by nightfall the same day of the scheduled pickup. 
(e)  Dumpster screening gates shall be open in a position suitable for pickup of front loader service. 
(f)  Horticultural trimmings placed at curbside in accordance with other city ordinances and regulations shall be exempt from this section. 
(Code 1960, §§ 10-2, 10-3; Ord. No. 25, §§ 9, 11; Code 1983, § 9-2; Ord. No. 91-1, § 2, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 70-37. - Sanitation. 
Garbage cans and dumpsters shall be kept aboveground in places easily accessible to the city inspector and to the employees of the garbage collector. Garbage cans and dumpsters shall not be kept in such places or under such conditions as to cause an unnecessary or unreasonable offense to sightliness, cleanliness, safety or other sanitary conditions. Garbage cans shall not be kept upon neighboring property not in ownership or tenancy of the person by whom the garbage was accumulated, whether such neighboring property is vacant or improved, without the written consent of the person having the right to grant such consent. This section is subject to the regulations contained in section 134-1296 et seq. 
(Code 1960, § 10-4; Ord. No. 25, § 12; Code 1983, § 9-3; Ord. No. 91-1, § 3, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 70-38. - Inspection; condemnation. 
All garbage cans and dumpsters shall be subject to an inspection and approval or condemnation by the city inspector or police department at all times. Upon condemnation by the city inspector or police of any garbage can or dumpster, a notice of such condemnation shall be placed upon the condemned can or handed to the owner or occupant or left at his regular place of abode, and he shall comply therewith. It shall be unlawful for any person to place in such condemned can or dumpster any garbage or other material, and the owner or occupant of the premises shall forthwith provide a new can or dumpster to take the place of the can or dumpster condemned. 
(Code 1960, § 10-5; Ord. No. 25, § 13; Code 1983, § 9-4; Ord. No. 91-1, § 4, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 70-39. - Construction and demolition debris collection. 
All temporary construction roll off containers for sites within the city that contain construction and demolition debris shall be provided by a construction and demolition debris collection and/or recycling provider authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 5-13-08)  
Secs. 70-40—70-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION SERVICE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Florida Resources Recovery and Management Act, F.S. § 403.701 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-66. - City to provide; use required. 
(a)  The city shall provide garbage and trash collection services reasonably adequate and sufficient to take care of the reasonable disposal needs of all properties within the city limits, either by establishing and operating its own garbage and trash collection and disposal facilities or by contracting or subcontracting with a private contractor. 
(b)  All residents, occupants or owners of premises in the city are required to have all accumulations of garbage removed and disposed of by such garbage collection services. 
(Code 1960, § 10-23; Ord. No. 25, §§ 23(a), 25(b); Code 1983, § 9-26; Ord. No. 95-58, § 1, 1-3-96)  
Sec. 70-67. - City manager's duties. 
The office of the city manager shall do whatsoever is necessary and proper in the organization, operation, billing, collections and all other things incident to the garbage and trash collection and disposal services. 
(Code 1960, § 10-36; Ord. No. 25, § 23(i); Ord. No. 412, § 30; Ord. No. 418, § 8; Code 1983, § 9-28)  
Sec. 70-68. - Collection schedule for transient users. 
Other special, temporary or transient users of the solid waste collection system, such as circuses, tent shows, carnivals or other miscellaneous or transient users, shall pay such fee for garbage and trash collection services as determined by the city commission either by ordinance or franchise agreement. 
(Code 1960, § 10-28; Ord. No. 25, § 25(k); Code 1983, § 9-27)  
Secs. 70-69—70-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Rates are also provided for in a contract or agreement between the city and a private garbage collection company. 
 
Sec. 70-96. - Payment required. 
It is mandatory for all improved properties within the city, unless specifically exempted, to pay the prescribed fees and charges for garbage and trash collection service. The owner of each unit of improved real estate within the city and all persons utilizing garbage and trash collection services shall pay the fee for such collection services as billed. 
(Code 1960, §§ 10-31, 10-32; Ord. No. 25, § 25(b), (d); Ord. No. 418, § 6; Code 1983, § 9-41)  
Sec. 70-97. - Basis. 
(a)  Generally. The city shall determine from time to time the reasonable cost of garbage collection and disposal services and shall, by appropriate ordinance or franchise agreement, assess and impose a unit cost against the owner, user or occupant of every improved property within the city, which rate for the collection and disposal services furnished or available shall be equivalent and uniform according to a schedule of rate per unit or for other type of classified user having need for garbage and trash collection and disposal services. 
(b)  Overhead expenses. The city commission, in computing the charge per unit against the users of garbage and trash collection service, shall take into consideration the administrative and servicing charges incident to billing and collecting accounts, making payments to the garbage collector and any other incidental or legitimate charges as may be sufficient to pay for the entire garbage collection services. 
(c)  Type and amount of service. The charge for such services shall be based upon the type and amount of garbage and trash collections, the number of containers per week, and the frequency in schedule of collections, as the city commission shall from time to time determine and provide by ordinance or franchise agreement. Appropriate discounts for advance payment of the required service fees may be provided by appropriate ordinance. 
(Code 1960, §§ 10-29, 10-30; Ord. No. 25, §§ 24, 25(a), (c); Ord. No. 412, § 27; Ord. No. 418, § 5; Code 1983, § 9-42)  
Sec. 70-98. - Changes or modifications. 
(a)  Nothing shall prevent the city commission from time to time from modifying or changing the type or schedule of garbage and trash collection service, so long as reasonably adequate service is provided to take care of the minimum needs of the people of the city. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city commission from time to time, in the light of experience and in accordance with its contractual or other costs, including administrative and other incidental costs, to modify the charge per unit for garbage and trash collection services rendered by the city for the people of the city, provided that such shall be done by ordinance or franchise agreement adopted by the city commission. 
(Code 1960, § 10-35; Ord. No. 25, § 25(f); Code 1983, § 9-43)  
Sec. 70-99. - Collection procedures and remedies. 
(a)  If a customer fails to pay the amount due to the city under this division, the city may enforce collection of the rate by imposing a lien on the real property involved, by filing a civil action against the customer for the amount due to the city, by ceasing further garbage and trash or refuse collection service or by all of such remedies. 
(b)  All property within the city is subject to lien for nonpayment of the garbage and trash collection service charges. In addition to any other penalties prescribed in this chapter, if the owner of any improved property subject to payment of collection service charges fails to pay such charges on or before the final date set by the city for payment or fails to pay charges in advance when the service is commenced during the year, the city may impose a lien upon the property of such owner. The amount of such lien shall be based upon the total service charge due, plus eight percent interest, plus all costs, including reasonable attorney's fee, incident to filing and imposing the lien. Such lien shall be imposed against the land and may be enforced and the property sold to satisfy such lien in the manner prescribed by law. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalty prescribed by this chapter, if the owner of any improved property subject to payment of garbage and trash charges fails to pay the amount due within 60 days from the original date of billing, the city shall assess a penalty equivalent to one percent a month on the unpaid bill, plus $5.00. 
(Code 1960, §§ 10-30.1(d), 10-33; Ord. No. 25, § 34; Ord. No. 376, § 1; Ord. No. 80-40, §§ 1—12; Ord. No. 81-25, § 1; Ord. No. 81-46, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 82-1, § 1; Code 1983, § 9-45) 
State Law reference— Enforcement of statutory liens, F.S. ch. 85; foreclosure of municipal tax and special assessment liens, F.S. ch. 173.  
Secs. 70-100—70-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE COLLECTORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; noise regulations, § 46-131 et seq.; occupational license tax, § 78-91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 70-126. - Contract required. 
All persons who remove or dispose of garbage within the city shall collect such garbage pursuant to a contract with the city in the manner and methods prescribed in such contract, for the collection, transportation and disposal of garbage. 
(Code 1960, § 10-21; Ord. No. 25, § 22; Code 1983, § 9-62)  
Chapter 74 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Consumption or possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages in public places prohibited, § 6-5; parks and recreation committee, § 22-101 et seq.; special events permit requirements, § 26-31 et seq.; distribution of handbills restricted, § 46-1; noise regulations, § 46-131 et seq.; traffic, ch. 82; specific street regulations, § 82-31 et seq.; stopping, standing and parking, § 82-131 et seq.; impoundment of certain vehicles, § 82-271; utilities, ch. 86; subdivision improvements, § 126-91 et seq.; trees, § 130-31 et seq.; required setbacks for streets, § 134-1166; restrictions on garage sales, § 134-1200; off-street parking and loading, § 134-1331 et seq.; sight distance requirements, § 134-1381. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Skateboarding. 
Skateboarding by any person shall be prohibited on city sidewalks. 
(Code 1960, § 16-1.5(c); Ord. No. 315, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 378, § 1; Code 1983, § 19-1) 
Cross reference— Miscellaneous offenses, ch. 54; parks and recreation, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82.  
Sec. 74-2. - Bicycle riding. 
Bicycle riding is prohibited on the city sidewalk west of the private properties on Sunset Way between 28th Avenue and 30th Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 12-20, § 1, 9-25-12)  
Secs. 74-3—74-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OBSTRUCTIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-31. - Unlawful conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way obstruct the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public passageways of the city except as authorized by the building code, as adopted in section 98-26 and amended by the city, or by ordinance; provided, however, that alleyways in Pass-a-Grille south of 32nd Avenue that have a platted width of 15 feet or greater may have planted landscaping that reduces the width of the clear travel path to no less than 12 feet, with equal portions of landscaping on each side of the alley, with an approved right-of-way use permit issued by the city manager. Such landscaping shall not block access to any driveway and shall not reduce the visibility triangles required by division 6 of the land development regulations. The city reserves the right to trim or remove any such landscaping at its discretion, with or without notice, for any reason related to the health, safety or welfare of the community without compensation to any adjacent property owner. 
(Code 1960, § 16-17; Code 1983, § 19-16; Ord. No. 09-20, § 1, 9-21-09)  
Sec. 74-32. - Goods, boxes, benches along sidewalks and streets; permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or the agent or representative of any person to place, put or leave any goods, wares, merchandise, boxes, benches or other obstructions of any nature whatsoever on any of the sidewalks along the streets of the city outside the property line of the streets. 
(b)  Benches or seats for occupancy by persons may be placed and maintained on and along the sidewalks, provided they are maintained by the owner or occupant of the abutting property in a safe and sightly condition and no part thereof extends more than 24 inches outside of and beyond the property line of such owner. 
(c)  Goods and merchandise delivered to duly licensed merchants and operators of places of business may be deposited and left on the sidewalks immediately in front of the places of business of such merchants and operators between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. of the next morning, if any such place of business is not then open or has no storage area to receive such goods and merchandise at time of delivery. The leaving of any goods or merchandise on the sidewalks after 8:00 a.m. of the morning of delivery shall be and constitute a violation of this section by the merchant or operator of the place of business to whom such delivery is made. 
(d)  Any person may apply to the city manager for a permit which would allow an exemption from this section. The application shall be made in sufficient time to enable the city manager to investigate such facts as he deems appropriate in order to reach a determination as to whether or not to issue the requested permit. The permit shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The city manager may attach such conditions to the permit as deemed appropriate, and the permit holder shall comply with all such conditions. 
(2)  Any permit issued by the city manager shall only be valid for the date, time or place specifically set forth in the permit. 
(3)  The issuance of a permit shall be within the discretion of the city manager, and the granting of a permit in one instance shall not be construed as precedence for the issuance of any other permit, even if such conditions are identical to those for which a permit has previously been issued. 
(4)  The city manager may, without notice, terminate a permit if the holder thereof does not comply with any of the conditions of such permit or if the holder thereof is in violation of any of the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 16-18; Ord. No. 335, § 1; Code 1983, § 19-17; Ord. No. 85-6, § 1, 3-5-85)  
Sec. 74-33. - Sidewalk sale permits. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any of the sections of this chapter, the city manager shall have authority to issue a permit which would allow the holder thereof to conduct a sidewalk sale under the terms and conditions set forth in the permit. 
(b)  The procedure for the application for the granting of the permit shall be as follows: 
(1)  The applicant shall notify the city manager or his designee, in writing, of his intent to apply for a permit granting a sidewalk sale. 
(2)  The applicant shall submit to the city manager such information as the city manager deems appropriate in order to assist him in making a decision as to whether or not to grant or deny the application. 
(c)  If the application has been granted, a written permit shall be issued. The permit may be in any form determined appropriate by the city manager. 
(d)  Permits for sidewalk sales, when issued by the city manager, shall only be valid for the date and time and place specifically set forth in the permit. The issuance of a permit for a sidewalk sale shall be within the discretion of the city manager, and the granting of a permit in one instance shall not be construed as precedence for the granting of a permit in any other instance. 
(Code 1983, § 19-18; Ord. No. 85-6, § 2, 3-5-85) 
Cross reference— Special event permits, § 26-31 et seq.  
Secs. 74-34—74-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NEWSPAPER RACKS 
 
Sec. 74-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Distributor means the person or any other legal entity owning or responsible for placing or maintaining a newspaper box or vending machine in a public right-of-way. 
Newspaper rack means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit, vending machine or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, sale or distribution of newspapers or other news periodicals or advertising circulars. The term "newspaper rack" shall include the term "newspaper box" or "newspaper vending machine." 
Public property means any park, cemetery, school yard, open space adjacent thereto, all waterways and sovereign lands as designated by the state or the United States government or the city. 
Recovery area means that space as determined by the state department of transportation specifications which is measured from the edge of the roadway outward and which is required to clear of fixed objects. 
Right-of-way means all lands conveyed or dedicated to the public to be used for a street, alley, walkway, drainage facility or other public purpose. 
Roadway means that portion of a street unimproved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, including a median. 
Street means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, including a median. 
Walkway means a right-of-way intended primarily for use by pedestrians, including self-propelled vehicles. 
(Code 1983, § 19-19(b); Ord. No. 93-9, § 1, 5-18-93) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2; businesses, ch. 26.  
Sec. 74-62. - Purpose and criteria. 
The purpose and criteria of the following is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through regulation of location, installation, appearance and servicing of newspaper racks on public rights-of-way so as to: 
(1)  Provide for pedestrian, handicap and driving safety and convenience. 
(2)  Provide for free and unobstructed passage along the sidewalks of the city. 
(3)  Restrict unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrians, including disabled persons, or vehicular traffic, including ingress or egress from any residence or place of business or from the street to the sidewalk, by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles. 
(4)  Reduce unnecessary exposure of the public to personal injury or property damage. 
(5)  Provide for public and property safety during high winds associated with storms and hurricane conditions. 
(6)  Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, and access to locations used for public transportation purposes. 
(7)  Relocate and replace newspaper racks which result in a visual blight and excessive space allocation on the public right-of-way or which detract from the aesthetics of the character of the neighborhood. 
(8)  Treat all newspapers equally, regardless of size, content, circulation, or frequency of publication. 
(9)  Maintain and preserve freedom of the press. 
(10)  Cooperate to the maximum with newspaper distributors. 
(Code 1983, § 19-19(a); Ord. No. 93-9, § 1, 5-18-93)  
Sec. 74-63. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon determination by the director of community services or his designee that a newspaper rack has been installed, used or maintained in violation of this division, an order to correct the offending conditions shall be issued to the distributor of the newspaper rack. Such order shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the address required by subsection 74-64(a). The order shall specifically describe the offending condition, suggest action necessary to correct the condition and advise of removal pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Failure to promptly correct the offending condition within ten days after receipt of the order shall result in the offending newspaper rack being removed by the city. When the distributor of the offending newspaper rack is not known or identified as required by this section, a copy of the order shall be posted on the newspaper rack, and this shall be deemed sufficient notice. 
(c)  Any distributor aggrieved by a decision to remove or by the removal of a newspaper rack shall, upon written request, be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or his designee, at which time the distributor may show why the newspaper rack complies with this division or why compliance should not be required. If the distributor appeals the order to the city manager or his designee, removal of the newspaper rack shall be stayed pending final disposition of the appeal. 
(d)  Any newspaper rack removed from the public right-of-way shall be stored at the cost of the distributor. The city shall be reimbursed by the distributor for all costs incurred in the removal and storage of all newspaper racks removed from the public right-of-way by the city. Within three days after the removal of any newspaper rack from the public right-of-way, the city shall send the distributor of the newspaper rack, by certified mail, return receipt requested, notice of removal. The city is authorized to sell the newspaper rack at a public sale if the newspaper rack is not claimed by the distributor within a period of 60 days from the date of removal. Seven days prior to sale, the city shall advertise notice of the sale in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city. All unpaid removal and storage costs and advertisement costs shall be paid out of the proceeds of the sale of the newspaper racks. The remaining balance of the sale proceeds shall become the property of the city and shall be transferred to the city's general fund. 
(Code 1983, § 19-19(f); Ord. No. 93-9, § 1, 5-18-93)  
Sec. 74-64. - Identification and registration. 
(a)  Each newspaper rack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place the telephone number of a working telephone service to call to report a malfunction or to secure a refund if the coin-return mechanism malfunctions and shall also provide the name and address of the distributor to receive the notices provided for in this division. 
(b)  Although no permit or license is required prior to the placement of newspaper racks, any person who places or maintains such a newspaper rack shall notify the director or community services or his designee of the location or of a change in location. 
(Code 1983, § 19-19(d); Ord. No. 93-9, § 1, 5-18-93)  
Sec. 74-65. - Standards. 
All newspaper racks maintained or operated within a public right-of-way or other public property shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  No newspaper rack shall be placed on a roadway. Newspaper racks shall be placed on that portion of the sidewalk farthest away from the edge of a street or curb, in conformance with subsection (10) of this and other applicable sections of this division. 
(2)  No newspaper rack shall be allowed at any location whereby the clear space for the passage of pedestrians, persons in handicap devices or bicycle riders is reduced to less than five feet, pursuant to subsection (10)f of this section. 
(3)  No newspaper rack shall be placed at any site or location when the installation, use or maintenance: 
a.  Endangers the safety of persons or property; 
b.  Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians, persons in handicap or disabled person devices or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle; or 
c.  Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals, hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near the location. 
(4)  No newspaper rack shall exceed 36 inches in height, 30 inches in width or 20 inches in depth. 
(5)  No newspaper rack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property or to any permanently fixed object not owned by the distributor of the newspaper rack business—Required. 
No persons shall engage in or carry out the business of massage unless he has a valid massage business permit issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for each and every separate office or place of business conducted by such person. 
(Code 1988, ch. 4, § 8.03; Ord. No. 1982-16, § 2a, 8-19-1982)  
Sec. 22-26. - Same—Application. 
Any person desiring a massage business permit shall file a written application with the chief of police and city secretary on a form to be furnished by the city secretary. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the correct permit fee as hereinafter provided and shall, in addition, furnish the following: 
(1)  The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise; 
(2)  The name, style, and designation under which the business or practice is to be conducted; 
(3)  The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted; 
(4)  A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all masseurs and employees in the business and the name and residence addresses of the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business; 
(5)  The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant is a corporation, and concerning the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the business and/or the equipment used therein; and concerning the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business: 
a.  Name, complete residence address and telephone numbers; 
b.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
c.  Written proof of age; 
d.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex; 
e.  Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size; 
f.  The massage or similar business history and experience ten years prior to the date of application, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation; 
g.  All criminal arrests other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which arrested and the offense for which arrested and the disposition thereof; 
h.  A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the chief of police or his authorized representatives; 
(6)  Such other information, identification, and physical examination of the person as shall be deemed necessary by the police chief to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the application; 
(7)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit; 
(8)  The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county who will serve as character references. These references must be persons other than relatives and business associates; 
(9)  Written declaration of the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the city. 
(Code 1988, ch. 4, § 8.05; Ord. No. 1982-16, § 3, 8-19-1982)  
Sec. 22-27. - Same—Issuance. 
The city secretary shall issue a massage business permit within 30 days of receipt of the application unless the chief of police finds that: 
(1)  The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the city, and in the case of a check, or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation; 
(2)  The operation, as  
Chapter 78 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-186 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Additional homestead exemption for persons 65 and older. 
(a)  Any person who has the legal or equitable title to real estate and maintains thereon the permanent residence of the owner, who has attained the age of 65 years prior to January first of the year for which the exemption is sought, and whose household income does not exceed the amount stated in Section 196.075 Florida Statutes, shall be entitled to an additional homestead exemption of $25,000.00. 
(b)  The exemption granted by this ordinance applies only to ad valorem taxes levied by the city. 
(c)  Any person who claims an exemption under this ordinance shall submit to the county property appraiser, not later than March 1, a sworn statement of household income on a form prescribed by the department of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 01-33, § 1, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 02-20, § 1, 10-15-02; Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Secs. 78-2—78-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 78-26. - Tax on property insurance for benefit of firefighters' pension trust fund. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "property insurance" shall have the meaning assigned to it by F.S. § 175.032. 
(b)  There is assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer engaged in or carrying on or who shall engage in or carry on the business of property insuring and every insurance company, corporation or other insurer engaging in or carrying on or which shall engage in or carry on the business of property insurance, as shown by the records of the state department of insurance, an excise or license tax, in addition to any license tax or excise tax levied by the city, in the amount of 1.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policy holders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies with the corporate limits. 
(c)  The net proceeds of the tax assessed and collected pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be allocated to and used solely for the municipal firefighters' pension trust fund, pursuant to F.S. ch. 175. 
(Code 1960, § 20-8(a), (b); Ord. No. 29, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 193, §§ 2, 3; Code 1983, § 11-2) 
Cross reference— Firefighters retirement system, § 66-251 et seq. 
State Law reference— Tax on property insurance for benefit of firefighters' retirement fund authorized, F.S. § 175.101; property insurance authorized, F.S. § 175.032(4).  
Sec. 78-27. - Tax on casualty insurance for benefit of police officers' retirement trust fund. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "casualty insurance" shall have the meaning assigned to it by F.S. § 185.02. 
(b)  There is assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer engaged in or carrying on or who shall engage in or carry on the business of casualty insurance, as shown by the records of the state department of insurance, an excise or license tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax levied by the city, in the amount of 0.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policy holders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits. 
(c)  The net proceeds of the tax assessed and collected pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, shall be allocated to and used solely for the municipal police officers' retirement trust fund of the city, pursuant to F.S. ch. 185. 
(Code 1960, § 20-8(c), (d); Ord. No. 29, §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 193, §§ 4, 5; Code 1983, § 11-3) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; police officers pension plan, § 66-141. 
State Law reference— Tax on casualty insurance for benefit of police retirement fund authorized, F.S. § 185.08; casualty insurance defined, F.S. § 185.02(4).  
Secs. 78-28—78-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Municipal public service tax, F.S. §§ 166.231, 166.232. 
 
Sec. 78-56. - Levied; amount. 
(a)  Electricity; gas; water. There is imposed and levied by the city on each and every purchase of electricity; metered or bottled natural, liquefied, petroleum or manufactured gas; and water service within the corporate limits a tax in the amount of ten percent of the payments received by the seller of the taxable item from the purchaser for the purchase of such service. 
(b)  Telecommunications service. There is levied a seven percent tax on the purchase of telecommunications service within the city which originates and terminates in this state, excluding public telephone charges collected on site, access charges and any customer access line charges paid to a local telephone company. This tax shall be governed by F.S. § 166.231(9)(b)—(d), and the applicable provisions of F.S. § 203.01. 
(c)  Fuel oil. There is imposed and levied by the city, on each and every purchase of fuel oil within the corporate limits, a tax in the amount of $0.04 per gallon, which tax shall be collected from the purchaser of such fuel oil through payment by a purchaser to the seller at the time of the purchaser's paying the charge to the seller. 
(d)  Remittance. The seller shall remit the tax to the city not less often than monthly. 
(Code 1960, § 23-4; Ord. No. 2, § 1; Ord. No. 28, § 1; Ord. No. 158, § 1; Ord. No. 159, § 1; Ord. No. 169, § 1; Ord. No. 82-31, § 1; Code 1983, § 11-21; Ord. No. 85-53, § 1, 10-15-85)  
Sec. 78-57. - Service within city. 
The purchase of the utility service upon which a tax is imposed and levied by this article shall embrace and include any part of the transaction of purchase occurring with the corporate limits, whether the transaction is the entering into a contract for the purchase of any such utility service or otherwise. 
(Code 1960, § 23-9; Ord. No. 2, § 6; Code 1983, § 11-22)  
Sec. 78-58. - Computation of tax on aggregate purchases. 
When the seller of fuel oil; electricity or metered or bottled natural, liquefied, petroleum or manufactured gas; water service; and telecommunications service collects the charge for such service at monthly periods, the tax imposed and levied by this article may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such monthly period, provided the amount of the tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1960, § 23-8; Ord. No. 2, § 5; Ord. No. 82-31, § 4; Code 1983, § 11-23)  
Sec. 78-59. - Collection by seller. 
The seller of electricity, fuel oil, and metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied, petroleum or manufactured), water service and telecommunication service, in acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the city, shall collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax imposed and levied under this article, at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for each transaction. The seller shall report and pay over to the finance director, on or before the 15th day of each calendar month, all such taxes imposed, levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. It shall be unlawful for any seller of such utility service to collect the price of any sale of fuel oil, electricity and metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied, petroleum gas or manufactured), water service and telecommunications service without at the same time collecting the tax imposed and levied in respect to such purchase, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting it from the purchaser. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any purchase, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the tax had been actually paid to the seller. The city shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and to take all proceedings as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax. The seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected charges. If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax imposed and levied and as required on account of the purchase for which such charge is made, the seller shall have and is vested with the right, power and authority to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1960, § 23-5; Ord. No. 2, § 2; Ord. No. 412, § 45; Ord. No. 82-31, § 2; Code 1983, § 11-24)  
Sec. 78-60. - Records of seller. 
Each and every seller of electricity, fuel oil and metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied, petroleum gas or manufactured), water service and telecommunications service shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the city of such commodities or service, which records shall show the price as charged upon each purchase, the date of purchase and the date of payment, and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during business hours on all business days. The duly authorized city agents shall have the right, power, and authority to make such transcripts of such records during such time as they may desire. 
(Code 1960, § 23-6; Ord. No. 2, § 3; Ord. No. 82-31, § 3; Code 1983, § 11-25)  
Sec. 78-61. - Failure to pay tax. 
Any purchaser willfully failing, refusing, or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied in this article where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller willfully violating this article or any officer, agent, or employee of the seller violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided by section 1-14. 
(Code 1960, § 23-10; Ord. No. 2, § 7; Code 1983, § 11-27)  
Sec. 78-62. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The United States, the state and the political subdivisions and authorities thereof and county and municipal governments are exempted from payment of the tax imposed and levied by this article upon the services used by such governmental agencies. 
(b)  Recognized churches are exempt from the tax on purchases or services used exclusively for church purposes. 
(Code 1960, § 23-7; Ord. No. 2, § 4; Code 1983, § 11-26) 
State Law reference— Exemptions, F.S. § 166.231.  
Secs. 78-63—78-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, adopted April 10, 2007, amended Art. IV to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. IV was entitled, "Occupational License Tax." See also the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Cross reference— Adult entertainment establishments, § 10-26 et seq.; businesses, ch. 26; registration of businesses not subject to local license tax, § 26-1; noise regulations, § 46-131 et seq.; commercial solicitation, § 62-26 et seq.; contract required for private collectors of solid waste, § 70-126; vehicles for hire, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Local license tax, F.S. ch. 205. 
 
Sec. 78-90. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Business, profession, and occupation do not include the customary religious, charitable, or educational activities of nonprofit religious, nonprofit charitable, and nonprofit educational institutions, which institutions are more particularly defined and limited as follows: 
(1)  Religious institutions means churches and ecclesiastical or denominational organizations or established physical places for worship in this state at which nonprofit religious services and activities are regularly conducted and carried on, and also means church cemeteries; 
(2)  Educational institutions means state tax-supported or parochial, church and nonprofit private schools, colleges, or universities conducting regular classes and courses of study required for accreditation by or membership in the Southern association of Colleges and Schools, the Department of Education, or the Florida Council of Independent schools. Nonprofit libraries, art galleries, and museums open to the public are defined as educational institutions and eligible for exemption; and 
(3)  Charitable institutions means only nonprofit corporations operating physical facilities in this state at which are provided charitable services, a reasonable percentage of which are without cost to those unable to pay. 
Classification means the method by which a business or group of businesses is identified by size or type, or both. 
Local business tax means the fees charged and the method by which the city grants the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession, or occupation within its jurisdiction. It does not mean any fees or licenses paid to any board, commission, or office for permits, registration, examination, or inspection. Unless otherwise provided by law, these are deemed to be regulatory and in addition to, but not in lieu of any local business tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, syndicate, or other group or combination acting as a unit, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, trustee, executer, administrator, receiver or other. 
Receipt means the document that is issued by the city which bears the words "local business tax receipt" and evidences that the person in whose name the document is issued has complied with the provisions of this chapter relating to the local business tax. 
Taxpayer means any person liable for taxes imposed under the provisions of this article; any agent required to file and pay taxes imposed hereunder; and the heirs, successors, assignees, and transferees of any such person or agent. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-91. - Levied. 
(a)  Local business taxes in the amounts specified in section 78-110 are levied on: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within the city. 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within the city. 
(3)  Any person who does not qualify under subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce, if such business tax is not prohibited by section 8 of article I of the United States Constitution. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business upon which is levied a local business tax without first paying such tax to the city. 
(c)  A separate local business tax shall be levied on each branch establishment or location where a separate business is conducted, provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under this article shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. Each rental real property shall be deemed a branch establishment or separate place of business for the purposes of this article when there is a representative of the owner or the owner's agent on the premises who is authorized to transact business for such owner or owner's agent or there is a regular employee of the owner or of the owner's agent working on the premises. A real estate broker or agent, having a "for rent" or "for sale" sign on one or more premises within the city, shall be deemed to be doing business within the city. 
(d)  A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall not be required to obtain separate business tax receipts for conducting each of such businesses, unless otherwise provided in this article, but, when eligible, shall be issued one tax receipt for the highest amount payable for any one of the businesses and shall be charged a tax equal to one-half of the tax required for each additional business. Such additional businesses shall be specified on the face of the receipt. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-92. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The city manager shall issue business tax receipts in the name of the city to all persons qualified under this article and shall: 
(1)  Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations necessary to the operation and enforcement of this article; 
(2)  Prescribe and provide all forms and information to be given therein as to character and other relevant matter for all necessary papers; 
(3)  Require applicants to submit all affidavits and oaths necessary to the administration of this article; 
(4)  Submit all applications, in a proper case, to interested city officials for their endorsements thereon as to compliance by the applicant with all city regulations which they have the duty of enforcing; 
(5)  Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a local business tax receipt as prescribed in this article; 
(6)  Examine the books and records of any applicant or receipt holder when reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this article; and 
(7)  Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of his or her application and shall, upon the city manager's refusal to issue any receipt, at the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefor and deliver them to the applicant. 
(b)  When the issuance of a business tax receipt is denied and any action is instituted by the applicant to compel its issuance, such applicant shall not engage in the business for which the receipt was refused unless issuance of the license is ordered by final judgment of the court. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-93. - Inspections and reports. 
(a)  The city manager shall make all investigations reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this article. The manager shall have the authority to order the inspection of receipt holders, their businesses and premises, by all city officials having duties to perform with reference to such receipt holders or businesses. 
(b)  The police officers shall inspect and examine businesses located within their respective jurisdictions or beats to enforce compliance with this article. 
(c)  The fire marshal and director of community development shall have authority to order inspections or conduct inspections under the building code, the mechanical code, the plumbing code, the electrical code, the life safety code, the gas code, the fire prevention code, and any other codes adopted by the city. 
(d)  All persons authorized in this section to inspect receipt holders and businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without search warrant, at all reasonable times, the premises for which business tax receipt: 
(1)  Is required; 
(2)  Was issued and which, at the time of inspection, is operating under such receipt; or 
(3)  Has been revoked or suspended. 
(e)  Persons inspecting receipt holders, their businesses or premises as authorized in this section shall report all violations of all laws or ordinances to the city manager, and shall submit such other report as the city manager shall order. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-94. - Collection remedies. 
Any unpaid tax required by this article shall constitute a debt due the city. The city attorney shall, at the direction of the city manager, institute civil suit in the name of the city to recover any such unpaid tax. No civil judgment or any act by the city attorney, the city manager or the violator shall bar or prevent a prosecution for each and every violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-95. - Refund. 
No rebate or refund of any local business tax or part thereof shall be made because of the nonuse of the business tax receipt or because of a change of location or business rendering the use of such tax receipt ineffective. A rebate or refund of the business tax may be made only if the business tax was collected through error. Proof of grounds for rebate shall be submitted to the city manager in the form of an affidavit, and the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-96. - Business tax receipt—Required. 
No person shall engage in any business, trade or profession in the city without first obtaining a business tax receipt issued by the city manager and paying the tax required pursuant to this article. The issuance of a business tax receipt for a business on any premises within the city shall not constitute, nor be construed as, approval by the city of the land use, zoning or other developmental approval of the particular business on the premises for which such receipt was issued. Businesses operating in association with city sponsored special events may be exempted from this requirement upon approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 08-20, § 3, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 78-97. - Application procedures; proration of tax. 
(a)  Every person required to pay a tax under this article or any section of this Code or other city ordinance shall submit, if requested or required, a declaration form to the city manager. The declaration form shall: 
(1)  Be a written statement upon forms provided by the city manager. Such form shall include an affidavit to be sworn to by the applicant. 
(2)  Require the disclosure of all information necessary to complete the application form. If the applicant starts his business on or after April 1 of the year of application and prior to October 1 next succeeding, the applicant shall be required to pay only one-half of the annual tax and shall receive a license for the balance of the taxable year. 
(b)  Whenever a business tax receipt cannot be issued at the time the application for the receipt is made, the city manager shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the application fee in advance. Such receipt shall not be construed as the approval of the city manager for the issuance of a business tax receipt, and it shall not entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-98. - Fee. 
At the time an application is submitted, an business tax receipt application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code, shall be paid to the city. This fee shall be nonrefundable and in addition to the business tax in section 78-110 and any inspection fees. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-99. - Business tax receipt exemption for rental of individual room in home. 
No business tax receipt shall be required of any person where that person is renting no more than one individual room within his home where authorized under chapter 134 and such rental is not incidental to a business requiring a business tax receipt for guest accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-100. - Issuance of business tax receipt. 
(a)  The city manager shall deny business tax receipt to any business whose proposed operation would violate any law or ordinance. 
(b)  No business tax receipt shall be issued by the city to any person required by state law to be registered and issued a certificate to practice any profession or engage in any business unless such person in applying for a receipt shall submit proof of having been duly qualified to practice the profession or engage in the business under the state law. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-101. - Contents of receipt. 
Every business tax receipt shall state upon its face the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the receipt holder and any other name under which such business is to be conducted; 
(2)  The nature of each business for which such receipt is issued; 
(3)  The amount of the local business tax; 
(4)  The dates of issuance and expiration; and 
(5)  Such other information as the city manager shall determine. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-102. - Posting of receipt and insignia. 
Every business tax receipt holder shall: 
(1)  Post and maintain the business tax receipt upon the permitted premises in a place where it may be seen at all times; 
(2)  Affix any insignia delivered for use in connection with business tax receipts on the inside glass part of the window of such establishment facing the public way or on the inside glass part of the door opening on the public way. Such insignia shall be placed and maintained so as to be plainly visible from the public way. Premises not fronting on a public way at street level or having a glass door opening upon the public way shall have the insignia displayed in the door, window, or other prominent place in the nearest proximity to the principal public entrance to such establishment, and the insignia shall be placed and maintained so as to be plainly visible from such public entrance; 
(3)  Affix any insignia delivered for use in connection with a motor vehicle, for which such receipt has been issued, on the windshield of the vehicle or as may be otherwise required by the city manager or by law; 
(4)  Affix any metal or other durable type of insignia delivered for use in connection with a wagon or other vehicle, not operated by motor power, securely on the outside of such vehicle; 
(5)  Carry such receipt on his or her person when he or she has no business premises; 
(6)  Affix any insignia delivered for use in connection therewith upon the outside of any coin-operated vending or other business machine or device, so that it may be seen at all times; and 
(7)  Not allow any business tax receipt or insignia to remain posted or displayed or used after the period for which it was issued has expired or when it has been suspended or revoked or for any other reason it becomes ineffective. The receipt holder shall promptly return such ineffective receipt or insignia to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-103. - Expiration, renewal of receipt; penalties. 
(a)  Expiration. A business tax receipt issued pursuant to this article shall expire on September 30 of each year. 
(b)  Renewal. An expired business tax receipt shall be renewable beginning August 1 of each year, being due and payable on or before September 30 of each year, and shall expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax is due and payable on or before the first working day following September 30. 
(c)  Penalties for late payment. If the business tax has not been paid in accordance with this section, a ten percent penalty shall be charged for any payment made during the month of October, plus an additional five percent penalty for each subsequent month of delinquency until the tax has been paid. However, the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent of the business tax due for the person or business entity required to pay such tax. 
(d)  Failure to obtain required receipt. Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation, or profession without first obtaining a local business tax receipt, if required by this Code, shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the business tax determined to be due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(e)  Additional penalties. Any person who engages in any business, occupation or profession covered by this article who does not pay the required business tax within 150 days after the initial notice of tax and who does not obtain the required business tax receipt is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a monthly penalty of ten percent of the annual business tax, up to 50 percent of the annual business tax or $250.00, whichever is less. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city from citing any person or business entity in violation of this subsection for each day the violation occurs or is in existence, including citations made daily. Each such citation shall be separately made and constitute a single violation punishable as described in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-104. - Duplicate business tax receipts. 
A duplicate business tax receipt shall be issued by the city manager to replace any tax receipt previously issued, which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed, without any willful conduct on the part of the receipt holder, upon filing by the receipt holder of an affidavit sworn to before a notary public of this state attesting to such fact. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-105. - Transferability of business tax receipt. 
(a)  Except as may be otherwise prohibited by state law, a business tax receipt holder shall have the right to transfer the receipt to another person, provided he or she shall: 
(1)  Provide satisfactory written evidence to the city manager that there has been a bona fide sale of business; 
(2)  Execute the transfer in the manner prescribed by the city manager; 
(3)  Report the completed act of transfer to the city manager within 30 days of the sale of the business; 
(4)  Surrender any receipt and, when required by the city manager, all insignia within 30 days of sale of the business; and 
(5)  Pay a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual business tax, but not less than nor more than the amounts established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  Upon written request and presentation of the original business tax receipt, any receipt may be transferred from one location to another location in the city upon payment of a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual business tax, but not less than nor more than the amounts established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(c)  Upon the completion of a written request for transfer of a business tax receipt and compliance with this article, the city manager shall issue a new receipt and insignia to the transferee for the unexpired term of the old receipt. The new receipt issued under subsection (a) of this section shall authorize the transferee named in the new receipt to engage in the same business at the same location or at such other place as shall be approved by the city manager pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. Transfer of a business tax receipt does not exempt the transferee from complying with any and all applicable ordinances regulating the business. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-106. - Order to cease and desist; revocation or suspension of receipt. 
(a)  Order to cease and desist. 
(1)  When a violation of any law or ordinance has been observed by or reported to the department of community development (hereinafter, "the department"), the director of the department or any of his designated officials shall issue an order to cease and desist (hereinafter, "the order"). The order shall be in writing, shall be personally served upon the person or entity named in the order and shall set forth the violation for which the order was issued. Service of the order shall be made at the address set forth on the business tax receipt, and shall be directed to the person named as owner or operator of the business for which the receipt was issued. If the owner of the receipt is a corporation, partnership or other business entity, then service shall be made upon the person holding or owning the tax receipt. If the owner or operator of the business cannot be found on the premises of the business, then service may be made upon any manager or other person in charge of the premises for which the tax receipt was issued. 
(2)  The cease and desist order shall require the owner or holder of the business tax receipt to cease and desist from further violating, or from further violations of, the ordinances of the city, or from any applicable state or county statute or ordinance, applicable to the premises for which such receipt was issued, within 30 days from the date of service of the order. Provided that for good cause shown, the director may extend the time for compliance with the order. 
(3)  The person or business entity to whom the order to cease and desist has been issued pursuant to this section shall be entitled to appeal the issuance of the order in the manner provided in section 78-107. An appeal pursuant to this provision shall act as an automatic stay of the cease and desist order until the appeal has been decided. 
(b)  Revocation of suspension of receipt. If the person or business entity to whom the cease and desist order has been issued fails to comply with the order within the time set forth in this section, the director or the designated official shall be entitled to and shall have the authority to suspend or revoke the business tax receipt of the business for which the order was issued or take such action as may be appropriate to correct the problem for which the cease and desist order was issued. Upon any revocation or suspension, the owner or holder of the receipt shall immediately cease all business operating under the tax receipt. If the city is required to seek injunctive relief to enforce the provisions of this section, it shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys' fees expended in order to enforce the cease and desist order. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from pursuing any and all legal remedies available to it, including but not limited to criminal prosecution of the receipt owner, or holder or the manager of the premises for which such receipt was issued, and any employees found to be working on the premises at the expiration of the 30 days given for compliance with the order. 
(c)  Summary order. When the conduct of any receipt holder is so inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance and thus give rise to an emergency, the director or the designated official shall have the authority to issue a summary order requiring the cessation of business and the close of premises, or suspending or revoking the permit. Unless waived in writing, within 30 days after the issuance of the summary order, the director or his designated official shall conduct a special hearing for such action in respect to the summary order as may be therein determined. Notice of such hearing shall be given the affected person in the manner prescribed in this section. 
(d)  Hearing. The hearing held in accordance with this section shall be conducted by an independent hearing officer designated by the city manager and not an employee of the city, and whose decision shall be binding upon the parties. Either party may appeal the hearing officer's decision pursuant to section 78-107. 
(e)  Revocation for violation of article. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) through (d) of this section, upon conviction in a court of a violation of any provisions of this article the business tax receipt issued to the party convicted shall be immediately and automatically thereby revoked. 
(f)  Revocation for cause. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (e) of this section, the city commission reserves the right to revoke any business tax receipt for cause. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-107. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the director or his designated official made pursuant to this article, after hearing, shall have the right to appeal to the city commission by filing a written appeal with the city clerk's office within ten days following the effective date of the action or decision complained of and by paying the prescribed fee as set by resolution of the city commission in effect at the time of appeal. 
(b)  Such appeal shall set out a copy of the order or decision appealed from, and shall include a statement of the facts relied upon to reverse such order. At the time of filing any such appeal, a copy thereof shall be filed by the appellant with director or his designated official. 
(c)  All appeals shall be heard by a hearing officer designated by the city commission no later than 30 days from receipt of the appeal. Appellant shall be served with a written notice of appeals hearing stating the date, place and time of the hearing. The notice of appeals hearing shall be personally served upon the receipt holder, either to his or her attorney, if represented by counsel, or shall be made at the address set forth on the tax receipt; and shall be directed to the person named as owner or operator of the business for which the receipt was issued. If the owner of the receipt is a corporation, partnership or other business entity, then service shall be made upon the person holding or owning the tax receipt. If the owner or operator of the business cannot be found on the premises of the business, then service may be made upon any manager or other person in charge of the premises for which the tax receipt was issued. Service of the notice of appeals hearing shall be made within five business days of its issuance. The city commission shall also give such notice to the director or his designated official, and such officer shall be entitled to appear and defend such order, or to present his appeal. The findings of the city commission shall be final and conclusive, and shall be personally served upon the appellant as required in this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-108. - Records. 
A person issued a business tax receipt shall keep all records and books necessary to the computation of his business tax and to the enforcement of this article. When the receipt holder has failed to keep the books and records required in this article, the city manager shall make his own determination as to the financial statement for the business of such receipt holder. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-109. - General standards of conduct. 
Every business tax receipt holder shall: 
(1)  Permit all reasonable inspections of his business and examinations of his books by public authorities so authorized by law; 
(2)  Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations applicable to his business; 
(3)  Avoid all forbidden, improper or unnecessary practices or conditions which do or may affect the public health, morals, or welfare; and 
(4)  Refrain from operating the business for which such receipt was issued on such premises after expiration of the receipt and during the period the receipt and privilege of doing business in the city is revoked or suspended pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 4-10-07)  
Sec. 78-110. - Tax schedule. 
The occupational license taxes levied by section 78-91 shall be as follows: 
A 
(1)  Accountants. (See Public accountants, Bookkeeping. ) 
(2)  Advertising ..... $200.00 
(3)  Amusement parks ..... 225.00 
(4)  Amusement parlors. A building where the sole business is devoted to coin-operated game machines or other amusement devices ..... 200.00 
(5)  Apartment houses, hotels, motels, guest homes: 
a.  2—5 units inclusive ..... 20.00 
b.  6—10 units inclusive ..... 30.00 
c.  Each additional unit, over 10 ..... 6.00 
d.  Maximum tax ..... 300.00 
(6)  Architects ..... 150.00 
(7)  Armored car service ..... 50.00 
(8)  Artist, commercial ..... 100.00 
Portrait sketching ..... 50.00 
(9)  Auction of real estate, daily ..... 100.00 
(10)  Auction shops ..... 937.50 
(11)  Automobile and other vehicle, rental: 
a.  First vehicle ..... 50.00 
b.  Each additional vehicle ..... 5.00 
B 
(12)  Bait dealers, retail or wholesale ..... 40.00 
(13)  Bakeries ..... 50.00 
(14)  Barbershops: 
a.  First chair ..... 50.00 
b.  Each additional chair ..... 5.00 
(15)  Beauty parlors: 
a.  First booth ..... 50.00 
b.  Each additional booth ..... 5.00 
(16)  Billiard, pool or bagatelle: 
a.  First table ..... 70.00 
b.  Each additional table ..... 25.00 
(17)  Boat dealers, sales ..... 100.00 
(18)  Boat marina or storage: 
a.  1—10 slips, including dry storage ..... 50.00 
b.  11—50 slips, including dry storage ..... 50.00 
Plus each slip over 11 ..... 2.00 
c.  51—100 slips, including dry storage ..... 130.00 
Plus each slip over 51 ..... 1.00 
d.  Over 100 slips, including dry storage ..... 172.50 
Plus each slip over 100 ..... 0.50 
e.  Maximum tax ..... 300.00 
f.  In addition to slip tax charges, boat marina or dry storage businesses will be charged for bait sales, boat sales, gasoline and other categories of business when applicable. 
(19)  Boats, deep sea and pleasure boats for hire: 
a.  16 feet and under, each ..... 20.00 
b.  Over 16 feet: 
1.  First boat ..... 100.00 
2.  Each additional boat ..... 50.00 
c.  Boats, oars, outboards, or sail for hire, each concession ..... 20.00 
(20)  Bookkeeping, accountant, tax service: 
a.  Individual ..... 100.00 
b.  Firms, companies, corporations or associations of persons ..... 150.00 
(21)  Bonds, stocks, and other investments—brokers ..... 200.00 
(22)  Bondsman: 
a.  Individual ..... 100.00 
b.  Firms, companies, corporations, or associations of persons ..... 150.00 
(23)  Bottled gas and fuel oil dealers ..... 70.00 
(24)  Bowling alleys: 
Each alley ..... 20.00 
(25)  Brokers: 
a.  Business opportunities ..... 100.00 
b.  Dealer in merchandise ..... 100.00 
c.  Insurance ..... 100.00 
C 
(26)  Cabana, chair, umbrella rental ..... 20.00 
(27)  Car wash and polishing ..... 50.00 
(28)  Reserved. 
(29)  Carpet and rug cleaning establishments: 
a.  1—5 employees ..... 100.00 
b.  Over 5 employees, each additional employee ..... 4.00 
(30)  Chiropractor ..... 150.00 
(31)  Reserved. 
(32)  Reserved. 
(33)  Collection agencies ..... 70.00 
(34)  Contractors: 
a.  General contractors: 
1.  Class A ..... 225.00 
2.  Class B ..... 200.00 
3.  Class C ..... 200.00 
b.  Electrical ..... 120.00 
c.  Plumbing ..... 120.00 
d.  Cabinets and trim ..... 100.00 
e.  Concrete and stone ..... 100.00 
f.  Drainage and sanitary sewers ..... 200.00 
g.  Dredging ..... 200.00 
h.  Elevators ..... 100.00 
i.  Excavations and land clearing ..... 100.00 
j.  Fence erectors ..... 100.00 
k.  Flooring and floor sanding ..... 100.00 
l.  Framing and trim ..... 100.00 
m.  Glazing ..... 100.00 
n.  Installation, including all work requiring a city permit ..... 100.00 
o.  Insulation ..... 100.00 
p.  Heating and air conditioning ..... 100.00 
q.  House movers and wreckers ..... 100.00 
r.  Lathers ..... 100.00 
s.  Masons not having a concrete and stone license ..... 100.00 
t.  Marine contractors, docks and seawalls ..... 200.00 
u.  Painters and paper hangers ..... 100.00 
v.  Paving and road grading; streets, parking lots, etc. ..... 200.00 
Private driveway paving only ..... 100.00 
w.  Plasterers not having a lather's license ..... 100.00 
x.  Refrigeration ..... 100.00 
y.  Roofing and siding ..... 100.00 
z.  Sheet metal, installation only ..... 100.00 
aa.  Steel erectors, installation only ..... 150.00 
bb.  Swimming pools ..... 100.00 
cc.  Tile, marble, and terrazzo ..... 100.00 
dd.  Waterproofing ..... 100.00 
ee.  Well drillers ..... 100.00 
ff.  Unclassified ..... 70.00 
(35)  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, and restoriums: 
a.  1—10 beds ..... 100.00 
b.  Each additional bed ..... 2.00 
(36)  Credit bureau ..... 70.00 
(37)  Crematories ..... 200.00 
D 
(38)  Dairies, selling milk and commodities and byproducts thereof ..... 70.00 
(39)  Dance studios ..... 100.00 
(40)  Dancing: 
a.  Dancehalls ..... 200.00 
b.  Places of business where dancing permitted ..... 50.00 
(41)  Dentists ..... 150.00 
(42)  Detective agencies: 
a.  One investigator ..... 100.00 
b.  Each additional investigator ..... 50.00 
(43)  Doctors and physicians ..... 150.00 
(44)  Drafting: 
a.  Individual ..... 100.00 
b.  Firms, companies or corporations or associations of persons ..... 200.00 
(45)  Drugstores ..... 70.00 
(46)  Dry cleaning, laundries, linen service, not self-service: 
a.  1—5 employees, and proprietor ..... 100.00 
b.  Over 5 employees, each additional employee ..... 4.00 
(47)  Reserved. 
E 
(48)  Electric companies: 
a.  Business office ..... 225.00 
b.  Substations, each ..... 100.00 
(49)  Engineers; architectural, civil, counseling, electrical, industrial, management, mechanical, nuclear, refrigeration, sanitary, structural: 
a.  Individual ..... 150.00 
b.  Firms, companies, corporations, or associations of persons ..... 187.50 
(50)  Reserved. 
(51)  Reserved. 
(52)  Exterminating, pest control, fumigating ..... 100.00 
F 
(53)  Reserved. 
(54)  Florists ..... 50.00 
(55)  Reserved. 
(56)  Fortunetellers, phrenologists, palmists, astrologers, soothsayers ..... 625.00 
(57)  Fruit packing and shipping: 
a.  Proprietor ..... 60.00 
b.  Each employee ..... 5.00 
c.  Agency or branch sales only ..... 60.00 
(58)  Funeral directors and ambulance service ..... 200.00 
Ambulance service only ..... 100.00 
G 
(59)  Game machines, coin-operated, music or otherwise. To be paid by owner or by person in whose place of business the machine or ride is operated. Separate license required. 
a.  Each operator or location operator ..... 200.00 
b.  Each machine ..... 20.00 
c.  Kiddie rides. 
1.  Each operator ..... 100.00 
2.  Each device ..... 10.00 
(60)  Garages, motor vehicle repair: 
a.  Proprietor ..... 50.00 
b.  Each employee ..... 5.00 
(61)  Garbage collectors ..... 50.00 
(62)  Gasoline and oil, wholesale ..... 200.00 
(63)  Golf course: 
a.  Up to $1.00 green fee ..... 100.00 
b.  Over $1.00 green fee ..... 200.00 
c.  Miniature ..... 70.00 
d.  Driving range ..... 100.00 
(64)  Gun dealers ..... 200.00 
H 
(65)  Halls for rent ..... 70.00 
(66)  Handicrafts, jewelry, beads, and similar articles made by hand for sale ..... 50.00 
(67)  Health clubs and reducing salons ..... 100.00 
(68)  House movers, existing building ..... 150.00 
I 
(69)  Ice: 
a.  Retail stations, each ..... 10.00 
b.  Retail stations, coin-operated, each ..... 10.00 
(70)  Ice cream: 
a.  Wholesale, dealers in ..... 100.00 
b.  Retail store or drive-in ..... 60.00 
(71)  Insurance adjusters ..... 100.00 
(72)  Insurance: 
a.  General agencies ..... 100.00 
b.  Home office or branch ..... 200.00 
c.  Insurance agents or solicitors ..... 100.00 
d.  Insurance companies issuing insurance contracts or transacting insurance business with persons residing within the city, provided this license tax shall not apply if such license tax violates section 8 of article I of the United States Constitution ..... 100.00 
(73)  Interior decorators ..... 70.00 
(74)  Investment counselors ..... 100.00 
J 
(75)  Janitorial/cleaning/property maintenance: 
a.  Proprietor only ..... 50.00 
b.  Each employee ..... 5.00 
(76)  Jewelry shops and repairs ..... 70.00 
(77)  Junk and junk dealers: 
a.  Junk gatherer, each truck ..... 50.00 
b.  Yard or shop ..... 450.00 
K 
(78)  Knife and scissor sharpeners: 
a.  Hand operated ..... 10.00 
b.  Mobile unit with power equipment ..... 50.00 
L 
(79)  Laboratories; dental, analytical or chemical: 
a.  Proprietor only ..... 100.00 
b.  Each employee ..... 10.00 
(80)  Landscapers and tree surgeons. Subject to certain state law exemptions ..... 70.00 
(81)  Laundromats or self-service laundries. Washers and dryers, coin-operated or otherwise: 
a.  1—10 machines ..... 50.00 
b.  Over 10 machines, each additional machine ..... 2.00 
c.  Dry cleaning machines, each ..... 5.00 
(82)  Lawn service only ..... 10.00 
(83)  Lawn and tree spraying ..... 50.00 
(84)  Lawyers, each ..... 150.00 
(85)  Loan companies ..... 150.00 
(86)  Locksmith ..... 70.00 
(87)  Lumber companies and supply houses ..... 200.00 
(88)  Reserved. 
M 
(89)  Magazines, newsstands, post cards ..... 50.00 
(90)  Mail order business ..... 30.00 
(91)  Manufacturing: 
a.  Proprietor only ..... 70.00 
b.  Each employee ..... 5.00 
(92)  Marine ways, with or without dry docks: 
a.  Proprietor ..... 70.00 
b.  Each employee ..... 5.00 
(93)  Masseurs ..... 70.00 
(94)  Merchants and merchandising: 
a.  Retail up to $5,000.00 stock, including stock on hand, in storage and held on consignment ..... 50.00 
b.  Each additional $1,000.00 ..... 2.00 
Provided, however, that the maximum occupational license tax to be charged under subsections (94)a and (94)b of this section shall not exceed $450.00. 
(95)  Messenger or delivery service ..... 50.00 
(96)  Motion picture theaters ..... 70.00 
(97)  Motorcycles, motorbikes, and motor scooters: 
a.  Sales, repair and rental ..... 70.00 
b.  Repair only ..... 30.00 
c.  Rental only ..... 30.00 
(98)  Multigraphing and mimeographing and printing ..... 50.00 
(99)  Music studios ..... 70.00 
N 
(100)  Newspapers and publications, applicable for main office or branch office for route distribution, excepting religious, educational, charitable, fraternal or veteran sponsored and civic association publications: 
a.  Daily ..... 100.00 
b.  Weekly ..... 50.00 
(101)  Nursery schools and private kindergartens ..... 50.00 
O 
(102)  Old gold, silver, platinum and other precious metals and stones dealers ..... 200.00 
(103)  Opticians and optometrists ..... 150.00 
(104)  Osteopaths ..... 150.00 
P 
(105)  Patrols, night patrols, or watchmen ..... 40.00 
(106)  Pawnbrokers ..... 450.00 
(107)  Pet shop and supplies ..... 70.00 
(108)  Photographers: 
a.  Each photographer ..... 50.00 
b.  Sidewalk photographer: 
1.  First camera ..... 200.00 
2.  Each additional camera ..... 100.00 
c.  Photographic studio and supplies ..... 70.00 
(109)  Produce stands ..... 70.00 
(110)  Promoters ..... 200.00 
(111)  Psychologists ..... 150.00 
(112)  Public accountants—C.P.A., bookkeeping and tax service, each ..... 100.00 
(113)  Public relations: 
a.  Individual ..... 100.00 
b.  Firms, companies, corporations or associations of persons ..... 200.00 
(114)  Public stenographers ..... 30.00 
R 
(115)  Radio and television stations, broadcasting studios: 
a.  Television and radio ..... 500.00 
b.  Radio only ..... 300.00 
c.  Television only, including cable TV ..... 300.00 
(115-A)  Radio and television service, excluding sales and not serviced in repair shops ..... 50.00 
(116)  Real estate: 
a.  Brokers ..... 70.00 
b.  Salesman ..... 30.00 
(117)  Repair shops, other than garage and machine: 
a.  Proprietor only ..... 50.00 
b.  Each employee ..... 5.00 
(118)  Restaurants: 
a.  1—100 seats ..... 70.00 
b.  101 seats and over ..... 150.00 
(119)  Rinks, bicycle, skating or other devices ..... 100.00 
S 
(120)  Savings and loan associations, computed on the basis of the total resources as of December 31 of the previous year: 
a.  $25,000.00 to 
$250,000.00 ..... 100.00 
b.  $250,000.00 to 
$5,000,000.00 ..... 150.00 
c.  $5,000,000.00 to 
$10,000,000.00 ..... 200.00 
d.  $10,000,000.00 to 
$20,000,000.00 ..... 187.50 
e.  $20,000,000.00 to 
$30,000,000.00 ..... 225.00 
f.  $30,000,000.00 to 
$40,000,000.00 ..... 262.50 
g.  $40,000,000.00 and over ..... 300.00 
h.  Branch offices ..... 200.00 
(121)  Schools, privately operated for profit. Schools for students under 18 years of age, but older than nursery or kindergarten ..... 70.00 
(122)  Secondhand stores: 
a.  Dealer in clothing ..... 50.00 
b.  Dealer in other commodities ..... 100.00 
(123)  Secretarial service ..... 30.00 
(124)  Service stations for automobiles and boats: 
a.  1 nozzle ..... 20.00 
b.  Each additional nozzle ..... 6.00 
c.  Repair service, minor. Applicable to stations with mechanic on duty and stations performing any or all of the following services: motor tuneup, brakes, ignition, carburetor, and road service. For general repairs such as motor overhauling, transmission repair, body work and painting see Garages, Motor Vehicle Repair ..... 15.00 
(125)  Sewing—tailor: 
a.  Dressmaking and alterations ..... 20.00 
b.  Drapes and slipcovers, individuals ..... 20.00 
c.  Plus, each employee ..... 5.00 
(126)  Shoe repair: 
a.  Proprietor only ..... 30.00 
b.  Each employee ..... 5.00 
(127)  Shooting gallery ..... 200.00 
(128)  Signs, painters, etc.: 
a.  Individual ..... 50.00 
b.  Firms, companies, corporations or associations of persons ..... 100.00 
c.  Neon signs ..... 150.00 
(129)  Soft water service ..... 50.00 
(130)  Reserved. 
(131)  Surveyors, individual or firm ..... 130.00 
(132)  Swimming pools, club use or open to public ..... 100.00 
T 
(133)  Taxidermist ..... 30.00 
(134)  Telephone answering service ..... 50.00 
(135)  Telephone companies: 
a.  Branch office ..... 225.00 
b.  Substations, each ..... 100.00 
(136)  Telephone solicitation: 
a.  Any person soliciting by telephone, business for others ..... 375.00 
b.  Solicitation by telephone for business or customers ..... 187.50 
(137)  Title companies ..... 150.00 
(138)  Transit-mix cement companies: 
a.  First vehicle ..... 50.00 
b.  Each additional vehicle ..... 20.00 
(139)  Travel bureau ..... 60.00 
(140)  Tropical fish shop ..... 50.00 
U 
(141)  Unclassified businesses. Every business, occupation, profession or exhibition, substantial, fixed or temporarily engaged in by any person within the city and for which no license has been ordained and not specifically designated in this section. All home occupations which are permitted by the zoning regulations ..... 60.00 
(142)  Used and new car lots ..... 100.00 
V 
(143)  Vending machines, each machine, to be paid by owner of machine or operator of place of business wherein machine is placed ..... 10.00 
(144)  Veterinarians ..... 150.00 
W 
(145)  Reserved. 
(146)  Reserved. 
(147)  Wood dealer ..... 30.00 
(Code 1983, § 11-74; Ord. No. 89-15, § 1, 8-1-89) 
State Law reference— Limitations on occupational license tax, F.S. § 205.043(1).  
ARTICLE V. - HISTORIC PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION 
 
Sec. 78-111. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of St. Pete Beach Historic Property Tax Exemption Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-112. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent of the city commission to foster the preservation and renovation of historic properties in the city by providing incentives to restore, renovate or rehabilitate historic structures through the implementation of F.S. §§ 196.1997 and 196.1998 relating to the exemption of certain ad valorem taxes for historic properties. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-113. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Applicant means the owner of record of a property or the authorized agent of the owner. 
Application means the two-part historic preservation property tax exemption application, DOS Form No. HR3E101292, effective 1-31-94. This form may be obtained through the city planning department, or by writing the Bureau of Historic Preservation, 500 South Bronough Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0250, or from the local historic preservation office. 
Assessed value means the total value of a tax parcel (including structures, land and other rights appurtenant thereto) as determined by the county property appraiser and shown on the property tax bill sent to the owner of record by the county. 
Board of county commissioners means the Pinellas County Board of County Commissioners. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a written authorization by the county administrator to the owner(s) of a designated property, or any building, structure or site within a designated historic district, allowing a proposed alteration, relocation, or the demolition of a building, structure, or site. A certificate of appropriateness is required for any proposed work that will result in the alteration, demolition, relocation, reconstruction, new construction or excavation of a designated historic resource. 
City commission means the City Commission of the City of St. Pete Beach. 
Contributing property means and includes any building, structure or site which contributes to the overall historic significance of a designated historic district and was present during the period of historic significance and possesses historic integrity reflecting the character of that time or is capable of yielding important information about the historically significant period or independently meets the criteria for designation as an historic resource. 
Covenant means the historic preservation tax exemption covenant required to be recorded with the deed for the property in the official records of the county to obtain an exemption pursuant to this ordinance. 
Designation means action by the city commission to approve an historic preservation overlay zoning district for (a) parcel(s) of land or district. 
Division of historical resources means the Division of Historical Resources of the State of Florida. 
Exemption means the ad valorem tax exemption for historic properties authorized pursuant to this ordinance. 
Historic district means an area designated as historic pursuant to Section 28 of the City of St. Pete Beach Land Development Code or that is listed in the National Register of Historic Places. 
Historic property means a property that is designated as an historic property, or as a contributing property to an historic district, by the historic preservation regulations found in Section 28 of the City of St. Pete Beach Land Development Code, or is listed in the National Register of Historic Places. 
Improvements means changes in the condition of real property brought about by the expenditure of labor or money for the restoration, renovation or rehabilitation of such property. Improvements include additions and accessory structures (i.e. a garage) necessary for efficient contemporary use. 
Local historic preservation office means the Planning Department of the City of St. Pete Beach. 
National Register of Historic Places means the list of historic properties significant in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture, maintained by the Secretary of the Interior, as established by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (Public Law 89-665:80 STAT. 915; 16 U.S.C. 470), as amended. 
Renovation or rehabilitation means the act or process of returning a property to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the property which are significant to its historical, architectural, cultural and archaeological values. 
Restoration means the act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work. 
Usable space means that portion of the space within a building which is available for assignment or rental to an occupant, including every type of space available for use of the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-114. - Property and improvements eligible for tax exemption; area embraced. 
(a)  This article shall govern and be applicable to all property located in the City of St. Pete Beach provided that the property meets the following qualifications: 
(1)  The property is individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended; or 
(2)  The property is a contributing property to a National Register-listed-district; or 
(3)  The property is designated as an historic property, or as a contributing property to an historic district, by the historic preservation regulations found in Division 28 of the St. Pete Beach Land Development Code. 
(b)  In order for an improvement to qualify a property for an exemption, the improvement must: 
(1)  Be consistent with the United States Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation; and 
(2)  Be determined by the local historic preservation office to meet criteria established in rules adopted by the Department of State, Chapter 1A-38, F.A.C.; and 
(3)  Be completed within two years from the date of approval of a complete preconstruction application. A preconstruction application approval shall automatically be revoked if the property owner has not submitted a request for review of completed work within two years following the date of approval of a preconstruction application. The local historic preservation office may grant an extension to this provision for up to six months if such request is made in writing prior to the expiration of the initial period; and 
(4)  Contain a minimum of $2,500.00 worth of improvements to the exterior of the property, unless it has been documented that no improvements to the exterior of the property are needed; and 
(5)  Meet the certificate of appropriateness requirements for a qualifying restoration, renovation, or rehabilitation, if applicable, under the conditions of Division 28 of the St. Pete Beach Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-115. - Duration and amount of tax exemptions. 
Any tax exemption granted by this ordinance shall remain in effect for ten years regardless of any change in the authority of the city commission to grant such exemptions or any change in the ownership of the property, except as set forth in section 111-8 and in section 111-10(b) of this article. Improvements which qualified the property for an exemption must be maintained over the period for which the exemption is granted. The tax exemption amount will be determined by the assessed value of the improvements as determined by the county property appraiser's office and will be fixed in amount for the length of the exemption period based on the assessed value of the improvements at the year the improvements are completed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-116. - Applicable taxes. 
The tax exemption allowed herein are only ad valorem taxes assessed by the Pinellas County Board of County Commissioners and the City of St. Pete Beach City Commission and include the following: 
(1)  Pinellas County Government; 
(2)  Pinellas County Health; 
(3)  Pinellas County Mosquito Control; 
(4)  Pinellas Planning Council; 
(5)  Pinellas County Municipal Services Taxing District; 
(6)  City of St. Pete Beach Operating 
The exemptions do not apply to taxes levied for the payment of bonds or to taxes authorized by a vote of the electors pursuant to Section 9(b) or Section 12, Article VII of the Florida Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-117. - Ad valorem tax exemptions for improvements to historic property authorized: limitations. 
The city commission may authorize an exemption from ad valorem taxation equal to 100 percent of the assessed value of all improvements to historic properties which result from the restoration, renovation or rehabilitation of such properties. The exemption applies only to improvements to real property. In order for the property to qualify for the exemption, any such improvements must be made on or after the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-118. - Ad valorem tax exemptions for historic properties open to the public. 
If a property is used for nonprofit or governmental purposes, and is regularly and frequently open for the public's visitation, use and benefit, as defined in Chapter lA-38, F.A.C., the city commission may exempt 100 percent of the assessed value of the property as improved from ad valorem taxes levied by the city commission provided that the assessed value of the qualifying improvement is equal to at least 50 percent of the total assessed value of the property as improved. This section applies only if the qualifying improvements are made by or for the use of the existing property owner. In order for the property to qualify for the exemption provided in this section, any such improvements must be made on or after the effective date of this ordinance. 
A property is considered used for nonprofit or governmental purposes if the occupant or the user of at least 65 percent of the useable space of the building is an agency of the federal, state, or local government or a nonprofit corporation whose articles of incorporation have been filed by the Department of State in accordance with F.S. § 617.0125. A property is considered regularly and frequently open to the public if public access to the property is provided not less than 52 days a year on an equitably spaced basis, and at other times by appointment. This exemption does not prohibit the owner from charging a reasonable nondiscriminatory admission fee. If a property that qualifies for this exemption is no longer regularly and frequently open to the public, or if ownership is transferred, then this exemption shall be subject to the revocation proceedings of section 78-114 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-119. - Application. 
(a)  Preconstruction application. Any person, firm, or corporation that desires an ad valorem tax exemption for the improvement of an historic property must submit to the local historic preservation office a preconstruction application on a form prescribed by the Department of State. The preconstruction application must receive approval prior to the start of construction. An improvement or any portion thereof initiated prior to approval of the preconstruction application shall not be eligible for the exemption. The application must include the following information: 
(1)  The name of the property owner and the location of the historic property; and 
(2)  A description of the improvements to real property for which an exemption is requested and the anticipated date of commencement of construction of such improvements. This includes an estimate of the cost of the improvements that will be done to the exterior of the property or documentation that no improvements to the exterior of the property are necessary; and 
(3)  Proof, to the satisfaction of the local historic preservation office, that the property that is to be restored, renovated, or rehabilitated is an historic property under this ordinance; and 
(4)  Proof, to the satisfaction of the local historic preservation office, that the improvements to the property will be consistent with the United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and will be made in accordance with guidelines developed by the Department of State, Chapter 1A-38, F.A.C.; and 
(5)  Other information identified in appropriate Department of State regulations; and 
(6)  Other information requested by the local historic preservation office or requested by the city commission; and 
(7)  If necessary, a completed application for a certificate of appropriateness for the qualifying restoration, renovation, or rehabilitation. On completion of the review of a preconstruction application, the local historic preservation office shall notify the applicant in writing of the results of the review and shall make recommendations for correction of any planned work deemed to be inconsistent with section 111-4(b) of this article. Any changes made to the improvement after approval of the preconstruction application must receive prior approval of the local historic preservation office to ensure compliance with the criteria set forth in this ordinance. Failure to obtain prior approval may result in denial of the exemption. 
(b)  Request for review of completed work application. A request for review of completed work application shall be submitted to the local historic preservation office upon completion of the improvements. The form of said application shall be prescribed by the Department of State and shall include all information referenced in subsection (a) of this section. The local historic preservation office shall review the request for review of completed work application and provide to the board of county commissioners a written recommendation of either approval or denial of the application. The review by the local historic preservation office will be conducted in accordance with rules adopted by the Department of State, Chapter 1A-38, F.A.C. The local historic preservation office reserves the right to inspect the completed work to verify that it is in compliance with the work described in the approved preconstruction application. In order for an improvement to an historic property to qualify the property for an exemption, the improvement must meet the requirements of section 111-4(b) of this article. 
(c)  Interior inspection. Upon receipt of a preconstruction application or a request for review of completed work application involving an improvement project in which some of the work is in the interior of the property, the local historic preservation office reserves the right to make arrangements with the applicant for an interior inspection. The purpose of the interior inspection is to ascertain the effect, if any, of the improvement project on significant historical or architectural interior features. In order to determine the assessed value of an improvement project in which some of the work is in the interior of the property, the county property appraiser's office reserves the right to make arrangements with the applicant for an interior inspection after a tax exemption has been granted by the city commission. 
(d)  Reapplication. A property owner previously granted an exemption may undertake additional improvements during the exemption period or apply for additional exemptions for additional improvements following the expiration of the exemption period. A property owner may not reapply for an exemption for an improvement which has been denied by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-120. - Required covenant. 
(a)  To qualify for an exemption, the property owner must enter into a covenant with the city commission for the term for which the exemption is granted. The form of the covenant must be approved by the Department of State. The covenant shall provide that the property owner shall maintain and repair the property so as to preserve and maintain the historic architectural qualities or historical or archaeological integrity of the property during the period that the exemption is granted. If the exemption is granted, the property owner shall have the covenant recorded with the deed for the property in the official records of the county prior to the effective date of the exemption and shall provide a certified copy of the recorded covenant to the city manager within 30 days of city commission approval or said approval by the city commission shall be void. The covenant shall be binding on the current property owner, transferees, and their heirs, successors, or assigns. Violation of the covenant results in the property owner being subject to the payment of the differences between the total amount of taxes which would have been due in March in each of the previous years in which the covenant was in effect had the property not received the exemption and the total amount of taxes actually paid in those years, plus interest on the difference calculated as provided in F.S. § 212.12(3). 
(b)  If the property changes ownership during the exemption period, the requirements of the covenant must be transferred to the new owner. The new property owner may sign a waiver which discontinues the exemption on the property with no penalty to the property owner. The exemption may not be reinstated after the waiver has been delivered to the city manager. A copy of the waiver will be delivered to the county property appraiser's office. For waivers received prior to July 1 by the property appraiser's office, the exemption will be discontinued in that tax year. For waivers received after July 1 by the property appraiser's office, the exemption will be discontinued in the following tax year. 
(c)  One historic property tax exemption covenant may be executed by the property owner to include both the City of St. Pete Beach and Pinellas County. The property owner must provide a certified copy of the recorded covenant to both the city manager and to the county administrator, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-121. - City commission review and action. 
On completion of any municipal action on an application, the local historic preservation office shall deliver a copy of the application, their recommendation to grant or deny the tax exemption and the reasons therefore to the city commission. The city commission may then approve, modify, defer, or deny an application for tax exemption by resolution. If approved by the city commission, such tax exemption shall take effect on the January 1 following the resolution approving the tax exemption. Said approval shall be conditioned upon receipt by the city manager, or his or her designee, of a certified copy of the recorded covenant. The resolution approving the tax exemption shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The name of the owner and the address of the historic property for which the exemption is granted. 
(2)  The period of time for which the exemption will remain in effect and the expiration date of the exemption. 
(3)  A finding that the historic property meets the requirements of this ordinance. 
(4)  Any conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-122. - Notice to Pinellas County Board of Commissioners. 
The city commission shall deliver to the Pinellas County Board of Commissioners a copy of each approved application for an historic property ad valorem tax exemption within five working days of said approval. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-123. - Notice to property appraiser. 
The city commission shall deliver to the county property appraiser a copy of each application for an historic property ad valorem tax exemption approved in the previous calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 78-124. - Revocation proceedings. 
The city commission may revoke an exemption at any time in the event that the property owner, or any subsequent owner or successor in interest to the property, violates the covenant, fails to maintain the qualifying property according to the terms, conditions and standards of the covenant, the historic character of the property and improvements which qualified the property for the exemption are not maintained, or if the property has been damaged by accidental or natural causes to the extent that the historic integrity of the features, materials, appearances, workmanship and environment, or archaeological integrity which made it eligible for listing or designation have been lost or damaged so that restoration is not possible. The city manager shall provide notice of such proceedings to the owner of record of the property. The city commissioner shall determine whether, and under what conditions the exemption shall be revoked, and whether and in what amount the property owner owes back taxes pursuant to section 111-10(a) of this article. The city commission shall provide written notice of the decision to the owner of record and to the county property appraiser. The local historic preservation office of the City of St. Pete Beach shall notify the county administrator's office, or his or her designee, of the proceedings and the reasons therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-9-04)  
Chapter 82 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Consumption or possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages in public places prohibited, § 6-5; identification of commercial vehicles required, § 26-2; emergency procedures during hurricanes, § 34-1; distribution of handbills restricted, § 46-1; noise regulations, § 46-131 et seq.; motor vehicle noise restrictions, § 46-147; skateboards and motorized vehicles restrictions in parks and recreation areas, § 58-6; streets and sidewalks, ch. 74; skateboarding prohibited, § 74-1; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; permits required for vehicles on the beach, § 94-73. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law, F.S. ch. 316; restrictions on power of municipality to regulate traffic, F.S. §§ 316.006—316.008. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 82-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Commuter vehicle" means a motor vehicle parked in a residential area by a person who is not a resident of the designated residential area. 
"Controlled parking residential area" means a contiguous or nearly contiguous area containing streets or parts thereof primarily abutted by property which has a specific residential zone designation on the official zoning map and which is designated for restricted residential parking by the city manager, pursuant to criteria and procedures established in this chapter. 
"Dwelling" means a room or group of rooms forming a single independent habitable unit used for or intended to be used for living, sleeping, sanitation, cooking, and eating purposes by one family only; for owner occupancy or for lease; and containing independent kitchen, sanitary and sleeping facilities. A dwelling does not include motels, hotels, and other transient accommodation uses. 
"Resident" means a person who owns or leases real property within the city, as evidenced by a form listed in section 82-2. 
"Residential parking permit" means a special permit issued under this chapter for the privilege of parking on a street designated as a "controlled parking residential area." 
(Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 82-2. - Requirements for issuance of parking permits. 
The following shall be required at the time of issuance: 
(1)  A valid driver's license. 
(2)  Proof of residency in one of the following forms shall be required for all annual parking permits: 
a.  Voter registration card; 
b.  Real estate tax bill; 
c.  Lease agreement for a period of at least six consecutive months within the year of issuance; 
d.  Driver's license with current address; 
e.  Utility bill with current address; or 
f.  Three pieces of mail with current address. 
(3)  Proof of employment in one of the following forms shall be required for all annual parking permits for employees and owners of businesses in accordance with section 82-202: 
a.  A current paycheck stub with the applicant's name. 
b.  A letter signed by the owner of the business stating the applicant is currently employed at that location. 
c.  A current business tax license issued by the City of St. Pete Beach that contains the applicant's name. 
(d)  In the event that a resident cannot produce any of the above documents, the resident will immediately be referred to a supervisor who will assist the resident by looking for other possible ways to provide satisfactory proof of residency that may be approved by the community development director. 
(e)  Current vehicle registration shall also be required for issuance of all annual parking permits. Hang tags shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(f)  Payment in accordance with appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 82-3. - Penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided, anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished according to the penalties set out in F.S. § 316.655. 
(Code 1960, § 24-1; Ord. No. 216, § 10; Code 1983, § 21-4) 
Editor's note— With the codification of Ord. No. 2016-04 in §§ 82-1 and 82-2 and at the direction of the city, the existing §§ 82-1 and 82-2 have been renumbered as §§ 82-3 and 82-4, as herein set out.  
Sec. 82-4. - Unattended motor vehicles. 
No person driving or in charge of any motor vehicle, except a licensed delivery truck or other delivery vehicle making deliveries, shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the key. No vehicle shall be permitted to stand unattended upon any perceptible grade without stopping the engine and effectively setting the brake thereon. 
(Code 1960, § 24-28(a); Ord. No. 216, § 4; Ord. No. 275, § 1; Ord. No. 399, § 2; Code 1983, § 21-22) 
Editor's note— With the codification of Ord. No. 2016-04 in §§ 82-1 and 82-2 and at the direction of the city, the existing §§ 82-1 and 82-2 have been renumbered as §§ 82-3 and 82-4, as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 316.1975.  
Secs. 82-5—82-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 74. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 82-30. - Traffic control devices. 
All traffic control devices erected and in place on all city streets within the city as of April 1, 2006 shall be deemed valid for all purposes in the location where the same have been erected, and the violation of any such device by any person shall be deemed a violation of the applicable state control law pertaining to such device. 
(Ord. No. 06-14, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 82-31. - One-way streets. 
The following streets, roadways and avenues shall be designated as a one-way: 
(1)  East Maritana Drive between 35th Avenue and 36th Avenue. 
(2)  22nd Avenue west bound between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way. 
(3)  16th Avenue west bound between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way. 
(4)  15th Avenue east bound between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way. 
(5)  9th Avenue east bound between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way. 
(6)  El Centro south bound between 37th Avenue and 35th Avenue. 
(7)  10th Avenue westbound between Pass-a-Grille Way and Gulf Way. 
(8)  Alley between 16th Avenue and 17th Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 98-76, § 1, 12-15-98; Ord. No. 99-40, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 06-16, § 1, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 10-30, § 1, 9-28-10)  
Secs. 82-32—82-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SPEED LIMITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 2002, repealed former §§ 82-61—82-65, which pertained to posting; fifteen miles per hour; twenty miles per hour; twenty-five miles per hour; thirty-five miles per hour. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted provisions designated as § 82-61 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Speed limits generally, F.S. §§ 316.183—316.1906; municipal authority as to speed limits, F.S. §§ 316.007, 316.008(1)(j), 316.189. 
 
Sec. 82-61. - Speed limits. 
(a)  The applicable speed limit for all city streets within the city shall be 30 miles per hour for all commercial areas and 25 miles per hour for all residential areas, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) hereof, the following speed limits shall be applicable on the following city streets: 
20 mph: 	
Gulf Way 	From 1st Avenue to 22nd Avenue 
44th Avenue 	From Gulf Boulevard to Poinsettia Drive 
41st Avenue 	From Belle Vista Drive to Poinsettia Drive 
Belle Vista Drive 	From 39th Avenue to Oleander Way 
 
(c)  The city manager shall post appropriate speed limit signs that meet the requirements of state law for all speed limits established in this section. All speed limits in effect at the time of adoption of this section shall remain effective unless amended hereby or hereafter by ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any person to exceed any speed limit established under this section. 
(Ord. No. 02-08, § 2, 2-19-02; Ord. No. 06-14, § 2, 4-25-06)  
Secs. 82-62—82-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WEIGHT LIMITS 
 
Sec. 82-95. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bus means any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of persons, other than an ordinary automobile, station wagon, camper, motor home, truck as defined in this section or van with a capacity of carrying persons, rather than property, provided, further, that the carrying of luggage is not consistent with this definition. 
Bus route means certain streets, as designated in this division, over and along which buses shall operate within the city during designated hours. 
Deviating truck means any truck in the restricted vehicle classification which travels over a street other than a designated truck route. 
Truck means any vehicle designed for the transportation of property in the following classifications: 
(1)  Unrestricted vehicles (light/medium trucks) means pickups, vans and panels with a maximum length of 21 feet and a maximum gross vehicle weight (GVW) of 8,000 pounds and single-unit, single-rear-axle trucks with a maximum length of 35 feet and a maximum GVW of 35,000 pounds. 
(2)  Restricted vehicles (heavy trucks) means single-unit, multi-rear-axle trucks with a maximum length of 40 feet and a maximum GVW of 60,000 pounds, including dumptrucks and concrete mixers, and all tractor-trailer and semi-trailer combinations with a maximum length of 55 feet and a maximum GVW of 80,000 pounds. 
Truck route means certain streets, as designated in this division, over and along which trucks in the restricted vehicle classification shall operate within the city during designated hours. 
(Code 1960, § 24-7; Ord. No. 273, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 294, § 1; Ord. No. 313, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-49, § 1; Code 1983, § 21-3(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 82-96. - Truck routes and bus routes established; map. 
There is established within the city a system of truck routes and bus routes as shown on a map on file in the office of the city clerk. Streets indicated as truck routes on the map, and no others, shall be used for truck traffic. The streets indicated as bus routes on the map, and no others, shall be used for bus traffic. 
(Code 1960, § 24-7; Ord. No. 273, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 294, § 1; Ord. No. 313, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-49, § 1; Code 1983, § 21-3(b))  
Sec. 82-97. - Posting of truck and bus routes; signs. 
For the purpose of this division, the city manager shall cause truck routes to be clearly posted and shall cause bus routes to be clearly posted. The city manager is authorized to install appropriate signs along designated roadways to control truck operations and to control bus operations, in accordance with this division. Signs will conform to those shown in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and their use shall be as designated therein. 
(Code 1960, § 24-7; Ord. No. 273, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 294, § 1; Ord. No. 313, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-49, § 1; Code 1983, § 21-3(f))  
Sec. 82-98. - Enforcement; penalties. 
Any person who shall violate this division shall be subject, upon conviction, to fine or imprisonment as provided in section 1-14. Such moneys, excluding those previously committed, shall be held in trust by the city for use in signing and for physical improvements to the city and to maintain facilities on the truck route system and on the bus route system. 
(Code 1960, § 24-7; Ord. No. 273, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 294, § 1; Ord. No. 313, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-49, § 1; Code 1983, § 21-3(g))  
Sec. 82-99. - Observance of truck routes and bus routes; exceptions. 
(a)  All buses and all trucks in the restricted vehicles classification within the city shall be operated only over and along the bus routes and truck routes established pursuant to section 82-96. 
(b)  This division shall not prohibit operation on streets of destination if authorized truck routes and bus routes are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point and such destination is proven upon request through possession of a valid and current delivery ticket or other dispatch order. 
(c)  Authorized emergency vehicles are exempt from this division. 
(d)  Detoured trucks on an officially established detour, if such trucks could lawfully be operated upon the street for which the detour is established, are exempted from this division. 
(Code 1960, § 24-7; Ord. No. 273, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 294, § 1; Ord. No. 313, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-49, § 1; Code 1983, § 21-3(c))  
Sec. 82-100. - Manner of utilization of bus routes and truck routes. 
(a)  Bus traffic and truck traffic of outside origin. Bus traffic and truck traffic of outside origin shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Inside destination point. All restricted buses and trucks entering the city for a destination point in the city shall proceed only over an established bus or truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which the traffic is permitted, nearest the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck or bus shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(2)  Multiple inside destination points. All restricted buses and restricted trucks entering the city for multiple destination points shall proceed only over established bus routes or truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which bus traffic or truck traffic is permitted, nearest the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point, a deviating truck or deviating bus shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction and only over truck routes or bus routes. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck or deviating bus shall return to the truck route or the bus route by the shortest permissible route. 
(b)  Truck traffic or bus traffic of inside origin. Truck traffic or bus traffic of inside origin shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Outside destination point. All restricted trucks or restricted buses on a trip originating in the city and travelling in the city for a destination point outside the city shall proceed to the nearest intersection of a designated bus route or a designated truck route and travel from that point to the city limits only over designated truck routes or designated bus routes. 
(2)  Inside designated points. All restricted buses or restricted trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for destination points in the city shall proceed only over designated truck routes or designated bus routes. 
(Code 1960, § 24-7; Ord. No. 273, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 294, § 1; Ord. No. 313, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-49, § 1; Code 1983, § 21-3(d))  
Sec. 82-101. - Hours of operation; time of day restrictions. 
Trucks and buses shall be able to travel upon truck routes or bus routes at all hours of the day unless duly authorized signs are installed limiting the hours of use on a particular street or portion of a street for either buses or trucks. Those streets which are designated as partially restricted bus routes or truck routes shall be off limits to trucks or buses in the restricted classification during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Any restricted truck or restricted bus attempting to utilize a partially restricted truck route or partially restricted bus route during a restricted time period shall be regarded as a deviating truck or as a deviating bus. 
(Code 1960, § 24-7; Ord. No. 273, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 294, § 1; Ord. No. 313, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 82-49, § 1; Code 1983, § 21-3(e))  
Secs. 82-102—82-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority relative to stopping, standing and parking, F.S. §§ 316.007, 316.008(1)(a); stopping, standing and parking generally, F.S. §§ 316.1945—316.1967. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 82-131. - Parking at Don Vista Community Center. 
(a)  The parking lot at the Don Vista Community Center shall be used for parking only by permit issued to persons who are using the community center. Persons not having a permit and using the community center are prohibited from parking in the center's parking lot. 
(b)  The city shall post signs which provide, in some manner or form, that the parking lot at the Don Vista Community Center is reserved for parking for a vehicle whose operator has a permit and is using the community center. The signs may also provide for no parking for persons not using the community center. 
(Code 1960, § 24-35; Ord. No. 341, §§ 1—3; Code 1983, § 21-21)  
Sec. 82-132. - Special restrictions for buses and taxicabs. 
The operator of a bus, including a tour bus of any kind, nature or description, wherein passengers are carried through the city or a taxicab shall not stop, stand or park upon any street in any district at any place or at any time other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively. However, this section shall not prevent the operator of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping, standing or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while engaging in the expeditious unloading or loading of passengers. 
(Code 1960, § 24-28(b); Ord. No. 216, § 4; Ord. No. 275, § 1; Ord. No. 399, § 2; Code 1983, § 21-23)  
Sec. 82-133. - Parking on unimproved property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on the unimproved property of another person where such property has been posted with a notice prohibiting parking. Any person who parks any motor vehicle on the unimproved property of another person shall have the burden of proving that permission or consent therefor has been granted, either by the owner of the property or by the city manager. 
(b)  Penalties for violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be assessed in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Code 1983, § 21-29; Ord. No. 84-35, §§ 1, 2, 7-17-84)  
Sec. 82-134. - Parking within marked parking stalls. 
(a)  Parking restrictions. The following shall apply wherever the city has provided marked parking stalls, either upon city streets or upon city-maintained parking areas, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  All vehicles shall only be permitted to park within the marked stalls which have been provided on such streets or parking areas. 
(2)  No vehicle shall be entitled to be parked in more than one stall at any one time, unless its overall length is greater than the length of one stall. 
(3)  A vehicle must be parked with all of its wheels inside the parked stall unless, due to overall length as provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section, the vehicle's overall length is greater than the overall length of the provided stall. 
(4)  Only two vehicles shall be parked within a single stall at any one time. 
a.  When the stall is metered parking, only a single meter fee is required; however, both occupants shall be responsible to ensure that the meter fee is paid. 
b.  This subsection shall apply to both parallel and diagonal parking stalls. 
(5)  The city manager may waive the restrictions of this section in order to allow permitted special events or under such other circumstances as are deemed appropriate in the sole discretion of the city manager. 
(b)  Exceptions. The city maintains a municipal boatramp situated at West Maritana and Casablanca, in the area between 30th and 35th Avenues, where the city has marked single vehicle parking stalls and installed metered parking. The restrictions provided in subsection (a) of this section shall not be applicable to metered stalls situated in this area for vehicles towing an attached boat trailer. One vehicle with attached boat trailer may occupy two marked parking stalls and pay only a single meter fee subject to the following: 
(1)  The vehicle and trailer are physically connected in the manner normally used for towing. 
(2)  The vehicle and the trailer occupy no more than two adjacent parking stalls. 
(3)  The regular meter fee shall be paid into the meter installed where the motor vehicle is parked. When the owner or operator of a motor vehicle with a boat trailer in tow complies with subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section, no additional simultaneous meter fee would be required for the meter serving the stall occupied by the boat trailer. 
(4)  This exception shall apply only to parallel parking stalls. 
(Code 1983, § 21-30; Ord. No. 84-60, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-84; Ord. No. 90-11, § 1, 6-19-90)  
Sec. 82-135. - Parking in commercial district. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the commercial business area is defined as Eighth Avenue in its entirety, east to west. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day in any commercial business area for a period of longer than two hours where signs are officially posted. However, the city manager shall be authorized to further limit, restrict or prohibit parking within this area by the posting of official signs. The changing of the parked position of a vehicle from one parking space directly to another parking space within either side of the same street or roadway shall be deemed one continuous parking period. Vehicles displaying a valid "D" pursuant to section 82-239 of this chapter, city code permits are exempt from the limit of two hours. 
(c)  The parking of any vehicle longer than the legal period of time as posted on official signs shall be unlawful and a violation of this section. No person shall cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle to be parked beyond the lawful or legal period of time permitted by subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 21-31; Ord. No. 87-25, § 1, 7-21-87; Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 82-136. - Parking of boats, campers and recreational and commercial vehicles on city rights-of-way. 
The parking of boats, trailers, campers, recreational vehicles, commercial vehicles and trucks in excess of one ton cab weight shall be prohibited on any city rights-of-way between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. The city manager may waive this prohibition on a temporary basis where it is determined that such waiver is necessary. 
(Code 1983, § 21-31; Ord. No. 95-34, § 1, 8-15-95; Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 8-19-03)  
Sec. 82-137. - Posted restricted parking zones. 
(a)  The following city streets shall require a "D" permit for parking from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. every day on one side of the street, as designated on the city parking maps: 
1st Avenue between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way; 
12th Avenue thru 14th Avenue between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way; 
17th Avenue thru 20th Avenue between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way; 
22nd Avenue between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way; 
25th Avenue between Sunset Way and Pass-a-Grille Way; 
27th Avenue thru 30th Avenue between Sunset Way and Pass-a-Grille Way; 
Sunset Way between 23rd Avenue and 24th Avenue; 
Sunset Way between 28th Avenue and 30th Avenue; 
1st Avenue West between 31st Avenue and 32nd Avenue; 
32nd Avenue between Sunset Way and the beach; and 
Pass-a-Grille Way between 7th Avenue and 3rd Avenue. 
(b)  The following city streets shall require a "D" permit for parking from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. every day on each side of the street, as designated on the city parking maps: 
2nd Avenue to 5th Avenue; 
Sunset Way between 24th Avenue and 25th Avenue; 
Sunset Way between 22nd Avenue and 23rd Avenue; 
32nd Avenue between 1st Street West and the beach; and 
One parking space on the west side of Casablanca Avenue at Cabrillo Avenue. 
(c)  The following city streets shall require a "D" permit for parking at any time every day on one side of the street, as designated on the city parking maps: 
10th Avenue between Gulf Way and the alley before Pass-a-Grille Way; 
11th Avenue between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way; 
21st Avenue between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way; 
23rd Avenue between Sunset Way and Pass-a-Grille Way; and 
4 parking spaces on the south side of West Maritana Drive east of Casablanca Avenue. 
(d)  The following city streets shall require a "D" permit for parking at any time every day on each side of the street, as designated on the city parking maps: 
6th Avenue between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way; and 
7th Avenue between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way. 
(e)  The following city streets shall require a "B" permit for parking at any time every day on each side of the street, as designated on the city parking maps: 
42nd Avenue between Belle Vista Drive and Poinsettia Drive; and 
43rd Avenue between Belle Vista Drive and Moody Street. 
(f)  The following city streets shall require a "B" permit for parking from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. every day on one side of the street, as designated on the city parking maps: 
18 parking spaces on the west side of Beach Plaza between 70th Avenue and 71st Avenue. 
(g)  The following city streets shall require an "E" permit for parking from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. every day on one side of the street, as designated on the city parking maps: 
67th Avenue between Beach Plaza and Sunset Way; and 
Eighteen parking spaces on the west side of Beach Plaza between 70th Avenue and 71st Avenue. 
(h)  The following city streets shall require an "E" permit for parking from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. every day on each side of the street, as designated on the city parking maps: 
68th Avenue to 70th Avenue between Beach Plaza and Sunset Way; and 
Beach Plaza between 70th Avenue and 71st Avenue and 
70th Avenue between Gulf Boulevard and Sunset Way. 
(i)  Parking in the locations designated on the following city streets shall be limited to 30 minutes, as designated on the city parking maps: 
3 parking spaces on the west side Pass-a-Grille Way south from 9th Avenue; 
3 parking spaces on the north side of 10th Avenue west from Pass-a-Grille Way; 
1 parking space on the east side of the 800 block of Gulf Way; 
1 parking space on the east side of 1300 block of Gulf Way; 
1 parking space on the south side of 26th Avenue west of Pass-a-Grille Way; 
3 parking spaces on the north side of 32nd Avenue west of Pass-a-Grille Way; and 
The north side of the Don Vista Center. 
(j)  Parking on each side of the following city street shall be limited to three hours, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. every day, as designated on the city parking maps: 
8th Avenue between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way. Vehicles displaying a valid "D" Permit are exempt from the limit of three hours. 
(k)  Parking in the main Don Vista Center parking lot shall be prohibited unless an event is scheduled by the city at the Don Vista Center. 
(l)  Parking on the west side of Gulf Way between 9th Avenue and 10th Avenue shall be limited to employees of the public concession stand at the beach. 
(m)  Parking on one side of the following city streets shall be prohibited at any time, as designated on the city parking maps: 
1st Avenue between Gulf Way and Pass-A-Grille Way; 
10th Avenue to 22nd Avenue between Gulf Way and Pass-A-Grille Way; 
23rd Avenue to 30th Avenue between Sunset Way and Pass-A-Grille Way; 
32nd Avenue between 1st Street West and Pass-A-Grille Way; 
El Centro at the Don Vista Center; 
West Maritana Drive between Alhambra Street and South Maritana Drive; 
South Maritana Drive between West Maritana Drive and Granada Street, including East Maritana; 
Alhambra Street between West Maritana and West Debazan Avenue; 
West Debazan Avenue between East Debazan and South Maritana; 
Debazan Avenue between Casablanca and Alhambra Street; 
East Debazan between Alhambra Street and South Debazan Avenue; 
Alfonzo Street between West Maritana Drive and West Debazan Avenue; 
Granada Street between East Debazan Avenue and East Maritana Drive; 
Barcelona Street between Debazan Avenue and East Maritana Drive; 
Casablanca Avenue between 37th Avenue and Pinellas Bayway; 
East Maritana Drive between 37th Avenue and Pinellas Bayway; 
Belle Vista Drive between 41st Avenue and Belle Vista Drive East; 
36th Avenue between El Centro and East Maritana Drive; 
41st Avenue between Belle Vista Drive east to the end of the street; 
46th Avenue between Gulf Boulevard and the east end of Lido Park; 
49th Avenue; 
51st Avenue between Gulf Boulevard and the beach; 
51st Avenue between Gulf Boulevard and the east end; 
55th Avenue between Aloha Drive and Leilani Drive; 
Boca Ciega Isle Drive at the entrance; 
58th Avenue between Gulf Boulevard and 2nd Street East; 
64th Avenue between Gulf Winds Drive and 430 64th Avenue; 
Gulf Winds Drive between 2nd St. East and 71st Avenue; 
64th Avenue to 73rd Avenue between Sunset Way and Gulf Boulevard; 
Sunset Way between 23rd Avenue and 24th Avenue; 
Sunset Way between 25th Avenue and 26th Avenue; 
Sunset Way between 29th Avenue and 30th Avenue; 
Sunset Way between 64th Avenue and 67th Avenue; 
1st Street West between 31st Avenue and 32nd Avenue; 
Casablanca Avenue between 37th Avenue and Cabrillo Avenue; and 
78th Avenue to 87th Avenue between Blind Pass Road and Boca Ciega Drive; and Corey Circle. 
(n)  Parking on each side of the following city streets shall be prohibited at any time, as designated on the city parking maps: 
Pass-A-Grille Way between 13th Avenue and 32nd Avenue; 
14th Avenue to 20th Avenue between Pass-A-Grille Way and the east end; 
30th Avenue between Sunset Way and the beach; 
31st Avenue between Sunset Way and Pass-A-Grille Way; 
2nd Street West; 
Cabrillo Avenue; 
West Maritana Drive between Casablanca Avenue and Alhambra Street; 
Belle Vista Drive between 44th Avenue and 41st Avenue; 
37th Avenue between Gulf Blvd. and east Maritana; 
44th Avenue between Gulf Boulevard and Moody Street; 
45th Avenue between Gulf Boulevard and 2nd Street East; 
Lido Drive between 1st Street East and 2nd Street East; 
Punta Vista Drive; 
Boca Ciega Isle Drive between Plaza Way and 520 Boca Ciega Isle Drive; 
52nd Avenue between Gulf Boulevard and the beach; 
55th Avenue between Gulf Boulevard and Aloha Drive; 
Aloha Drive; 
59th Avenue between Gulf Boulevard and Bimini Way; 
Gulf Winds Drive between 2nd St. East and Gulf Blvd.; 
64th Avenue between 1st Palm Point Street and 425 64th Avenue; 
64th Avenue between Gulf Blvd. and Gulf Winds Drive; 
67th Avenue between Gulf Blvd. and Gulf Winds Drive; 
Sunset Way between 70th Avenue and 71st Avenue; 
1st Street East between Lido Drive and 45th Avenue; 
2nd St. East between Lido Drive and 45th Avenue; and 
2nd St. East between 60th Avenue and Gulf Winds Drive. 
(o)  Parking on one side of the following city streets shall be limited to the time for which payment of the parking fee has been made, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. every day, as designated on the city parking maps: 
Pass-a-Grille Way between 1st Avenue and 7th Avenue; 
Casablanca Avenue between Pinellas Bayway and Cabrillo Avenue; 
51st Avenue between Gulf Boulevard and the beach; 
67th Avenue between Beach Plaza and Sunset Way; 
Sunset Way between 68th Avenue and 70th Avenue; 
Gulf Winds Drive between 64th Avenue and 2nd St. East; 
64th Avenue between Gulf Blvd. and Sunset Way; 
Sunset Way between 64th Avenue and 66th Avenue; and 
66th Avenue between Gulf Blvd. and Sunset Way. 
(p)  Parking on each side of the following city streets shall be limited to the time for which payment of the parking fee has been made, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. every day, as designated on the city parking maps: 
Gulf Way; 
Pass-a-Grille Way between 7th Avenue and 12th Avenue unless otherwise posted; and 
Beach Plaza between 67th Avenue and 70th Avenue. 
(q)  Parking on the north side of 10th Avenue between Gulf Way and Pass-a-Grille Way shall require a "D" permit for parking at any time every day, or shall be limited to patrons of the museum, unless otherwise posted, as designated on the city parking maps. 
(r)  Parking on the following city streets and parking lots shall be limited as hereafter designated, as shown on the city parking maps: 
Lazarillo Park - Parking shall be for park users only; 
Lido Park - 45th Avenue Lot - Parking shall be for park users only; 
Lido Park - 46th Avenue Lot - Parking shall be for park users only, with the exception of four parking spaces designated "B" permit required from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.; 
Don Boat Ramp - "D" permit or "B" permit required with attached boat trailer, or any vehicle with attached boat trailer subject to payment of designated parking fee from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.; 
County Park - Parking is subject to payment of designated parking fee at any time; 
44th Avenue parking lot - Five parking spaces designated "B", "D", or "E" permit required; two parking spaces designated "B" permit required "3" hour limit; one parking space designated "3" hour limit; 
Ron McKenney Park - Parking shall be for park users only; 
Sunset Park - "B" permit required from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. on the waterfront side; 
Egan Park/Captiva Circle: 
North side: No parking. 
East side: Two waterfront parking spaces designated "Car parking only 24-hour limit"; 16 waterfront parking spaces designated "Vehicle with attached boat trailer only" and subject to payment of designated parking fee at any time. Parking fee and vehicle with boat trailer attached restriction waived during adult softball games for the six southernmost waterfront spaces. 
South side, east end of Captiva Circle: Four parking spaces designated "No vehicle with boat trailer attached parking at any time." 
South side of Captiva Circle - Designated "No Parking Anytime." 
Egan Park gravel parking lot - "B" permit required for vehicle with attached boat trailer. 
Don Vista parking lot: 
South side: Don Vista parking only; and 
North side: 15 spaces, Don Vista parking only. 
(s)  Parking in the locations designated on the following city streets shall be limited to 15 minutes, as designated on the city parking maps: 
Corey Avenue parking spaces directly in front of the post office. 
(t)  The following city streets shall require a "B" permit for parking from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Saturdays, Sundays and holidays on one side of the street, as designated on the city parking maps: 
Gulf Winds Drive between 64th Avenue and Bay St; and 
64th Avenue between Gulf Winds Drive and First Palm Point. 
(u)  The following city streets shall require a "B" permit for parking from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Saturdays, Sundays and holidays on each side of the street, as designated on the city parking maps: 
64th Avenue between 425 64th Avenue and the east end of 64th Avenue; 
67th Avenue between Gulf Winds Drive and Bay St.; 
Bay St. between Gulf Winds Drive and 64th Avenue; and 
First through Fourth Palm Points Streets. 
(v)  The following city streets shall require a "C" permit for parking at any time every day on one side of the street, as designated on the city parking maps: 
East Maritana Drive between 37th Avenue and Pinellas Bay way; 
Casablanca Avenue between 37th Avenue and Pinellas Bay way; 
Casablanca Avenue at Cabrillo Avenue; 
36th Avenue between Gulf Blvd. and East Maritana Drive; 
37 th Avenue between Gulf Blvd. and El Centro; 
Alhambra South Maritana Drive between West Maritana Drive and Granada Street; 
Alhambra Street between West Maritana and West Debazan Avenue; 
West Debazan Avenue between East Debazan and South Maritana; 
Debazan Avenue between Casablanca and Alhambra Street; 
East Debazan between Alhambra Street and South Debazan Avenue; 
Alfonzo Street between West Maritana Drive and West Debazan Avenue; 
Granada Street between East Debazan Avenue and East Maritana Drive; and 
Barcelona Street between Debazan Avenue and East Maritana Drive. 
(Ord. No. 07-18, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 07-35, §§ 1—8, 10-23-07; Ord. No. 08-43, §§ 1—3, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 09-08, §§ 1, 2, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 10-07, §§ 1—5, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 10-19, §§ 1—3, 7-27-10; Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 1-25-11; Ord. No. 11-11, § 1, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 12-07, §§ 1—7, 5-22-12; Ord. No. 12-09, § 1, 6-26-12; Ord. No. 14-03, § 1, 4-22-14; Ord. 14-07, §§ 1—4, 9-10-14; Ord. No. 15-03, § 11, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2016-04, § 3, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 1, 10-11-16; Ord. No. 2017-04, § 2, 4-25-17; Ord. No. 19-06, § 2, 3-26-19)  
Secs. 82-138—82-165. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 82-166. - Separate offenses for overtime or prohibited parking. 
Any overtime parking or parking prohibited violation shall constitute a separate offense for every two hours that the motor vehicle remains in violation of such parking regulation. Any officer may ticket a motor vehicle parked in violation of this article or other city parking ordinances for each successive two-hour violation. 
(Code 1960, § 24-28(d); Ord. No. 216, § 4; Ord. No. 275, § 1; Ord. No. 399, § 2; Code 1983, § 21-24)  
Sec. 82-167. - Notice on illegally parked vehicle. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked, stopped or standing in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user. The officer shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation or notice in writing for the driver to answer the charge within such time specified on the traffic citation or notice and at such place as designated on the traffic citation or notice. 
(b)  Any person issued a parking ticket by an officer shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal violation and shall comply with the directions on the ticket. A civil penalty in the amount set forth in section 82-171 of this chapter shall be imposed against the person issued the ticket. If payment is not received or a response to the ticket is not made within the time period specified on the ticket, the city shall notify the registered owner of the vehicle which was cited, by mail to the address given on the motor vehicle registration, of the ticket. Mailing the notice to this address shall constitute notification. Upon notification, the registered owner shall comply with the city's directive. Any person who fails to satisfy the city's directive shall be deemed to waive the right to pay the applicable civil penalty. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may take any action deemed necessary to collect any outstanding civil penalties against any person, in any manner allowed by law. The city manager or his/her designee may dismiss parking citations under certain extenuating circumstances. These circumstances may include, but are not limited to, an improperly displayed permit or meter receipt when a valid permit or receipt is later produced, disabled vehicle, verified official city business, ambulance transport, police department undercover vehicles, utility service providers, or verified meter malfunction. 
(c)  Any person who elects to appear before a designated official to present evidence shall be deemed to have waived his right to pay the civil penalty provisions of the ticket. The official, after a hearing, shall make a determination as to whether a parking violation has been committed and may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $100.00 plus court costs. Any person who fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed by the court shall be deemed to have been convicted of a parking ticket violation, and the court shall take appropriate measures to enforce collection of the fine. 
(Code 1960, §§ 24-28(c), 24-29; Ord. No. 216, §§ 4, 5; Ord. No. 275, § 1; Ord. No. 399, § 2; Ord. No. 80-35, § 1; Code 1983, § 21-25; Ord. No. 85-25, § 1, 5-7-85; Ord. No. 2004-27, § 1, 11-23-04) 
State Law reference— Parking tickets, F.S. §§ 316.1967, 316.650.  
Sec. 82-168. - Evidentiary presumption. 
(a)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any section of this article or any ordinance governing the stopping, standing, parking or operating of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or operated in violation of any such ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking or operating the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who stopped, stood, parked or operated such vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such violation occurred. 
(b)  The owner of a vehicle is responsible and liable for payment of any parking ticket violation unless the owner can furnish evidence that the vehicle was, at the time of the parking violation, in the care, custody, or control of another person. In such instances, the owner of the vehicle is required, within a reasonable time after notification of the parking violation, to furnish to the city an affidavit setting forth the name, address, and driver's license number of the person who leased, rented or otherwise had the care, custody or control of the vehicle. The affidavit submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be admissible in a proceeding charging a parking ticket violation and shall raise the rebuttable presumption that the person identified in the affidavit is responsible for payment of the parking ticket violation. The owner of a vehicle is not responsible for a parking ticket violation if the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care, custody or control of some person who did not have permission of the owner to use the vehicle. 
(Code 1960, § 24-30; Ord. No. 216, § 6; Code 1983, § 21-26) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 316.1967(1).  
Sec. 82-169. - Parking violation hearings. 
(a)  A hearing may be requested by the person receiving a citation under this division of the cited vehicle's registered owner for the purpose of presenting evidence before a traffic hearing officer concerning an alleged parking violation. Any person requesting a hearing shall execute a statement on a form prepared by the city indicating his or her willingness to appear at such hearing at a time and place specified thereon. If a hearing is not requested, in writing, within 15 days of the issuance of the citation, the right to a hearing shall be deemed waived and no further hearing on the violation shall be required. The city commission shall designate one or more hearing officers from time to time to conduct hearings as provided herein. Said hearing officers shall be attorneys, members in good standing of the Florida Bar and shall have been practicing law in the State of Florida for at least five years. 
(b)  All hearings under this section shall be conducted insofar as practical in accordance with the Florida Evidence Code. However, the general nature of the hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner. All irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded, but all other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable and prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a trial in the courts of Florida. Any part of the evidence may be received in written form and all testimony of parties and witnesses shall be made under oath. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding, unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. Any interested party or person may make application and upon good cause shown may be allowed by the hearing officer, in the reasonable exercise of such officer's discretion, to intervene in a pending proceeding. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may dismiss the citation or issue an appropriate fine in accordance with this division. All orders shall be in writing and shall be signed and dated by the hearing officer. Such fine may be collected by the city in any manner allowable by law. An order of the hearing officer may be appealed by any party receiving an adverse ruling by filing a petition for writ of certiorari in the circuit court within 30 calendar days from the date the order was issued. 
(Code 1960, § 24-31; Ord. No. 216, § 7; Code 1983, § 21-28; Ord. No. 04-27, § 2, 11-23-04)  
Sec. 82-170. - Notice of excessive parking violations to state. 
The clerk of the court or the traffic violations bureau shall supply the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles with a magnetically encoded computer tape reel or cartridge or send by other electronic means data which is machine readable by the installed computer system at the department, listing persons who have three or more outstanding parking violations, including violations of F.S. § 316.1955 or F.S. § 316.1956. The state department of highway safety and motor vehicles shall mark the appropriate registration records of persons so reported. The provisions of F.S. § 320.03(8) shall apply to each person whose name appears on such list. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt, F.S. § 316.1967(6).  
Sec. 82-171. - Fines for violations. 
The following fines shall be charged for certain parking violations: 
		After 
15 days 
(1) Overtime parking 	$50.00 	$65.00 
(2) Improper parking 	$50.00 	$65.00 
(3) Double parking 	$60.00 	$75.00 
(4) No parking zone 	$50.00 	$65.00 
(5) Motor running unattended 	$50.00 	$65.00 
(6) Keys in ignition 	$50.00 	$65.00 
(7) Other 	$50.00 	$65.00 
(8) Parking in space reserved for disabled persons 	$255.00 	$270.00 
(9) Parking in front of fire hydrant 	$100.00 	$115.00 
(10) Parking on streets or lots restricted to specific permit parking 	$60.00 	$75.00 
 
(Code 1960, § 24-28.1; Ord. No. 409, § 1; Ord. No. 82-43, § 1; Code 1983, § 21-27; Ord. No. 84-41, § 1, 9-5-84; Ord. No. 84-59, § 1, 12-4-84; Ord. No. 85-35, § 1, 8-6-85; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1, 6-3-86; Ord. No. 86-49, § 1, 10-21-86; Ord. No. 99-45, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 01-40, § 1, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 09-27, § 1, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 11-27, § 1, 9-27-11; Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 7-24-18) 
State Law reference— Parking in space reserved for disabled person, F.S. §§ 316.1955, 316.1956.  
Secs. 82-172—82-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - METERED PARKING 
 
Sec. 82-201. - Time limits. 
When parking meters are erected on any public thoroughfare giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any metered parking zone for a period of time longer than designated by the parking meters upon the deposit of a coin of United States currency of the designated denomination. 
(Code 1960, § 24-27; Ord. No. 216, § 3; Code 1983, § 21-41(a); Ord. No. 85-47, § 1, 9-17-85)  
Sec. 82-202. - Parking decals. 
(a)  "B" parking decals, exempting the holder from parking meter fees, may be issued to the following persons: 
(1)  Any resident of the city, as defined in section 82-1, or nonresident owning property within the city may purchase a parking decal for a fee established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(2)  City employees, board members and volunteers shall be provided with one free parking decal for their personal use by the city manager. Nonresident city employees may purchase one additional decal at the resident rate. 
(b)  Not more than two parking decals shall be issued per dwelling for any class of persons described in subsection (a) of this section. Decals shall not be transferrable. 
(c)  Parking decals shall be valid from January 1 through December 31 of each year. The purchase price of a parking decal shall not be prorated or reduced if the parking decal is purchased after January 1. 
(d)  The city manager shall establish rules and regulations regarding the use of parking decals. 
(e)  "E" hang tag permits. Parking permits for Gulf Winds Condominium, Friendly Native Condominium, Ramar Apartments, Starlight Towers Condominium and residents of the city, as defined in section 82-1, between Gulf Boulevard and Sunset Way, shall be obtained as follows: 
(1)  Issuance of permits shall be subject to the following: 
a.  The record title owner of a condominium unit at the Gulf Winds Condominium or Friendly Native Condominium or the lessee under written lease with a term of not less than one year for a unit at the Gulf Winds Condominium, Friendly Native Condominium, Ramar Apartments, or Starlite Towers Condominium may purchase one permit per each bedroom of the unit exempting the holder thereof from the payment of parking meter fees within the Upham Beach area and shall allow the holder to park within spaces marked "B permit parking only" anywhere within the Upham Beach area, defined as the following: 6700-6900 Sunset Way; 6700-7000 Beach Plaza; 67th, 68th, 69th and 70th Avenues. 
b.  Not more than two "E" hang tags shall be issued per dwelling on 70th Avenue between Gulf Boulevard and Sunset Way. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 83-15; Code 1983, § 21-43; Ord. No. 85-60, § 1, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 16-13, § 2, 10-11-16; Ord. No. 19-06, § 3, 3-26-19) 
State Law reference— User fee authorized, F.S. § 166.201.  
Sec. 82-203. - Parking permits. 
(a)  Gulf Way and Eighth Avenue. "A" hang tag permits may be issued for Gulf Way and Eighth Avenue as follows: 
(1)  Each owner of real property legally used as a residence or lodging in Pass-a-Grille, which abuts a street upon which the city has installed parking meters along the frontage of that real property or Eighth Avenue, is entitled to purchase a permit exempting the holder thereof from the payment of parking meter fees anywhere within the Pass-a-Grille area. 
(2)  Incorporated by reference in this subsection is exhibit B to this section, which was first adopted by Ordinance 2009-28. It is on file in the city clerk's office and is a survey of "permits needed" for houses and apartments having street addresses on Gulf Way from First Avenue to 22nd Avenue and Eighth Avenue. Each owner of real property as set forth in exhibit B shall be entitled to purchase, at a cost established by resolution of the city and listed in appendix A to this Code, the following: 
a.  A number of permits equal to one-half of the number of the indicated "permits needed" per house or apartment. 
b.  Additional permits up to the total number of units. 
c.  If a street address has only one unit, a permit may be purchased for that unit. 
d.  Notwithstanding the provisions of exhibit B as cited above, each property on Gulf Way is entitled to a minimum of two permits. 
(3)  These permits shall be controlled in such a way to restrict their use only to the property owners and bona fide guests residing on the property subject to receipt of the permits. 
(4)  Permits shall be valid for the period from January 1 through December 31 of each year or any part thereof. Permits shall be renewed annually, and the city official administering this subsection shall maintain books and records on the collection of fees and issuance of permits. 
(5)  Only vehicles displaying a permit obtained under this subsection shall be exempt from parking meter fees in the areas designated by this subsection. Vehicles displaying the permits issued under this subsection shall be entitled to park without payment of meter fees at parking metered spaces within Pass-a-Grille only. 
(6)  The city may adopt reasonable rules and regulations necessary for the administration and enforcement of this subsection and may amend the survey referred to in subsection (a)(2) of this section from time to time as may be necessary or appropriate. 
(b)  Vehicles utilized by persons attending services at the Pass-a-Grille Community Church shall be exempt from parking meter fees on 16th Avenue in Pass-a-Grille on Sundays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., and at such other times as specifically authorized by the city manager. 
The Pass-a-Grille Community Church may also purchase temporary "B" hang tags at the cost of $2.00 per permit. These permits shall exempt persons attending services at the Pass-a-Grille Community Church from parking fees at meters on Sundays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. 
Permits shall be valid for the period from January 1 through December 31 of each year or any part thereof. Only vehicles displaying a permit obtained under this subsection shall be exempt from parking meter fees at metered spaces and shall be valid at parking meters between First Avenue and Twenty-First Avenue. 
(c)  "B" parking permits for employees of on-premises businesses in Pass-a-Grille shall be issued as follows: 
(1)  The owner or his agents of any business operated on premises located only in the Pass-a-Grille area and south of 31st Avenue or the owner or his agents of any business operated on premises having frontage on Beach Plaza shall be entitled to purchase parking permits for full-time or part-time employees in the form of a decal. The cost of the permit shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(2)  Permits shall be valid from the date of purchase through December 31 of the same year. They shall not be prorated. The date of purchase shall be plainly stamped on each permit. 
(3)  Permits shall be displayed in accord with regulations adopted by the city, and when so displayed shall exempt the holder thereof from parking meter fees only during those hours when the holder is actively engaged in his employment on the eligible premises. 
(4)  The city shall adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary to administer and to enforce this subsection. 
(5)  To be eligible to obtain a parking permit in accord with this subsection, the applicant shall furnish the required documents listed in subsection 82-2(c). 
(6)  Any owner or his agent who permits use of the parking permits authorized in this subsection in violation of this subsection or in violation of any administrative rules or regulations shall be denied eligibility to purchase such permits for a period of one year following a finding of such violation, after hearing before the city manager. 
(d)  "M" hang tag permits for watersport businesses at Merry Pier. Operators of commercial watersports business, who possess a current and valid occupational license for such business at the Merry Pier, may purchase one-day parking permits from the city for resale at the same price to their legitimate customers. The cost of the permits shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to this Code. Proper display of such permit will only exempt the permit holder from payment of parking meter fees in Pass-a-Grille when engaged in a commercial watersport through a vendor at the Merry Pier for the date which appears on the face of the permit. The parking permit must be properly displayed. 
(e)  "E" hang tag permits for Gulf Winds Condominium, Friendly Native Condominium and Ramar Apartments and Starlight Towers Condominium. Parking permits for Gulf Winds Condominium, Friendly Native Condominium, Ramar Apartments and Starlight Towers Condominium shall be obtained as follows: 
(1)  Issuance of permits shall be subject to the following: 
a.  The record title owner of a condominium unit at the Gulf Winds Condominium or Friendly Native Condominium or the lessee under written lease with a term of not less than one year for a unit at the Gulf Winds Condominium, Friendly Native Condominium, Ramar Apartments, or Starlite Towers Condominium may purchase one permit per each bedroom of the unit exempting the holder thereof from the payment of parking meter fees within the Upham Beach area and shall allow the holder to park within spaces marked "B permit parking only" anywhere within the Upham Beach area, defined as the following: 6700-6900 Sunset Way; 6700-7000 Beach Plaza; 67th, 68th, 69th and 70th Avenues. 
(2)  The record title owner of a unit entitled to issuance of permits under this subsection may purchase permits at a cost established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(3)  The holder of a permit shall allow it to be used only by himself or by his bona fide guests. 
(4)  Permits shall be valid for the period from January 1 through December 31 of each year. The purchase price shall not be prorated. 
(5)  The city may adopt reasonable rules and regulations deemed necessary for the administration and the enforcement of this subsection. 
(6)  The parking spaces which are marked "B permit parking only" shall be restricted to the use by appropriate holders of the permits issued under this subsection between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. every day. 
(7)  Any person who violates this subsection shall be penalized pursuant to section 1-14 relating to violations of city ordinances and relating to violations of persons illegally parked. Additionally, vehicles improperly parked may be towed and stored at the expense of the owner. 
(f)  "B" hang tag permits for Pass-a-Grille businesses. Business owners with valid occupational licenses in the Pass-a-Grille area will be permitted to purchase two hang tag permits per year. These permits will be used by patrons of the businesses only during actual business hours. Fees for such permits are provided for in appendix A, Fee Schedule. 
(Code 1960, § 2-27.1; Ord. No. 427, §§ 1—4; Code 1983, § 21-44; Ord. No. 84-38, §§ 1—3, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 85-3, §§ 1—3, 2-5-85; Ord. No. 85-18, §§ 1—3, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 85-41, § 1, 8-20-85; Ord. No. 85-58, § 1, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 86-3, § 1, 3-4-86; Ord. No. 86-17, § 1, 6-17-86; Ord. No. 86-32, § 1, 8-19-86; Ord. No. 87-6, § 1, 3-3-87; Ord. No. 88-28, § 1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 90-23, § 1, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 91-14, § 1, 6-4-91; Ord. No. 94-36, § 1, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 97-24, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 03-05, § 2, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 09-28, § 1, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 2016-04, § 4, 4-12-16) 
State Law reference— User fees authorized, F.S. § 166.201.  
Sec. 82-204. - Waiver on Gulf Way and west side of Beach Plaza. 
The city manager is authorized to waive the prohibition against parking at meters between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. along Gulf Way and the west side of Beach Plaza when the city manager determines that such waiver is necessary to carry out a nonprofit civic or charitable event. 
(Code 1983, § 21-45; Ord. No. 85-38, § 1, 8-20-85)  
Sec. 82-205. - Rates generally. 
Parking meter rates charged at all city parking meters shall be established by resolution of the city commission and are listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 24-26; Ord. No. 80-36, § 2; Code 1983, § 21-42; Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 5-7-85; Ord. No. 90-23, § 1, 9-18-90) 
State Law reference— User fees authorized. F.S. § 166.201; exemption for certain vehicles transporting handicapped persons, F.S. § 316.1964.  
Sec. 82-206. - Use of U.S. coins; damaging meters. 
It is unlawful for any person to deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking meter anything other than a lawful coin of the United States or any coin that is bent, cut, torn, battered or otherwise misshaped. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove, deface, tamper with, open, willfully break, destroy or damage any parking meter, and no person shall willfully manipulate any parking meter in such a manner that the indicator will fail to show the correct amount of unexpired time before a violation. 
(Code 1960, § 24-27; Ord. No. 216, § 3; Code 1983, § 21-41(c); Ord. No. 85-47, § 1, 9-17-85)  
Sec. 82-207. - Manner of parking vehicle. 
Every vehicle shall be parked wholly within the metered parking space for which the meter shows parking privilege has been granted and with the front end of such vehicle immediately opposite the parking meter for such space. 
(Code 1960, § 24-27; Ord. No. 216, § 3; Code 1983, § 21-41(b); Ord. No. 85-47, § 1, 9-17-85)  
Sec. 82-208. - Free parking for special events. 
The city commission may, by resolution, allow free parking at any or all of the metered parking spaces during special events or special occasions. The allowing of free parking for one special event or special occasion shall not constitute precedence for allowing free parking at any other time or for any other reason. 
(Code 1960, § 24-27; Ord. No. 216, § 3; Code 1983, § 21-41(d); Ord. No. 85-47, § 1, 9-17-85)  
Secs. 82-209—82-235. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMITS 
 
Sec. 82-236. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-04, adopted Apr. 12, 2016, deleted § 82-236 entitled "Definitions", which derived from: Code 1983, § 21-47; Ord. No. 84-44, § 2, adopted Sept. 5, 1984; and Ord. No. 95-41, § 1, adopted Oct. 17, 1995; inasmuch the definitions have been relocated and codified as § 82-1.  
Sec. 82-237. - Findings of fact; declaration of public interest. 
The city commission finds and declares that: 
(1)  It is in the best interests of the residents of the city to reduce vehicular congestion on residential streets and to facilitate the efficient movement of traffic by providing for residential parking preference during certain hours of the day, within certain areas of the city which meet the criteria set forth in this division; 
(2)  Residential permit parking regulation is necessary to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city by providing adequate parking spaces adjacent to or close by the places of residence of such residents; 
(3)  It is in the public interest to: 
a.  Reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of streets located within congested residential areas for the parking of vehicles by persons using such residential areas to gain access primarily to the sand beaches, but also to other places; 
b.  Protect those areas from excessive noise; 
c.  Protect the residents of those areas from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences; 
d.  Preserve the character of those areas as residential districts; 
e.  Promote efficiency in the maintenance of these streets in a clean and safe condition; 
f.  Preserve the value of the property in those areas; 
g.  Preserve the safety of children and other pedestrians; and 
h.  Promote traffic safety, clean air and the comfort, health, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 21-46; Ord. No. 84-44, § 1, 9-5-84)  
Sec. 82-238. - Penalties. 
Whoever violates this division shall be penalized pursuant to section 1-14 relating to violation of city ordinances, and persons illegally parked pursuant this division shall be fined in the manner provided in this chapter for illegal parking and their vehicles may be towed and stored at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1983, § 21-53; Ord. No. 84-44, § 8, 9-5-84)  
Sec. 82-239. - Designation of controlled parking residential areas. 
The city manager, through his authorized representative in the police department, is authorized to designate "controlled parking residential areas" by appropriate signs and the recording thereof on an appropriate city map or plat in which the parking of vehicles may be restricted on public streets at certain times during the day only to vehicles bearing a valid residential parking permit issued pursuant to this division. This authority shall be in addition to any other authority of the city to regulate the times and conditions of motor vehicles parking on public streets. 
(Code 1983, § 21-48; Ord. No. 84-44, § 3, 9-5-84)  
Sec. 82-240. - Eligibility and criteria for establishment of controlled parking residential areas. 
(a)  A residentially zoned area shall be deemed eligible for designation as a controlled parking residential area for residential permit parking if parking therein is impacted by commuter vehicles during any hours of any day. 
(b)  The following objective criteria are established to be used in evaluating the need for restricted parking in a residentially zoned area in accordance with this section. For an area, however big or small, to be eligible for residential permit parking, that area must meet the following criteria: 
(1)  During any period of the day, the number of vehicles legally or illegally parked or standing on the streets in the area is equal to 50 percent or more of the legal on-street parking capacity of the area. For purposes of this criterion, a legal parking space shall be 20 linear feet, measured parallel to the curb or pavement edge. 
(2)  During the same period as in subsection (b)(1) of this section, 25 percent or more of the vehicles parking or standing on the streets in the area are not registered in the name of persons residing in the area. For purposes of this criterion, the latest available information from the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles regarding registration of motor vehicles shall be used. 
(3)  In determining whether an area identified as impacted and eligible for residential permit parking shall be designated as a controlled parking residential area, the following factors shall be considered: 
a.  The local needs with respect to clean air and environment in residential areas. 
b.  The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in the city. 
c.  The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal parking and related health and safety hazards. 
d.  The proximity of public transportation to the residential area. 
e.  The desire and need of the residents for residential permit parking. 
f.  The need for parking regulation to maintain the residential character of the neighborhoods. 
(Code 1983, § 21-49; Ord. No. 84-44, § 4, 9-5-84; Ord. No. 91-10, § 1, 5-7-91)  
Sec. 82-241. - Procedure for determining controlled parking residential areas. 
(a)  ln order to determine whether a particular area should be designated as a controlled parking residential area, the city commission can request or the city manager may conduct, upon his own initiative or upon a petition of a majority of the households on a proposed residential block addressed to the city manager, a study to determine if the proposed area meets the criteria set forth in section 82-240. Following the study, the city manager shall determine whether to designate the proposed area under consideration as a controlled parking residential area or to remove the designation of a previously established controlled parking residential area. The city commission may also request the city manager to designate an area as a controlled parking residential area based upon a study previously conducted, if the criteria set forth in section 82-240 are met. 
(b)  If the city manager finds the criteria to designate have been met in a controlled parking residential area during the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., he shall cause the regulation to be recorded upon an appropriate map of the city and retained permanently in the office of the city clerk. If the city manager finds the criteria to designate have been met in a controlled parking residential area between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., the findings shall be submitted to the city commission for approval by resolution, and the city manager shall then cause the regulation to be recorded upon an appropriate map of the city and retained permanently in the office of the city clerk. In addition, the city manager shall cause parking signs to be erected upon public streets in the area, indicating the times, locations and conditions upon which parking shall be by permit only. When an area has been approved, designated and posted as a controlled parking residential area, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to park a vehicle in an area restricted to decal parking only, without having a valid residential parking permit displayed according to the administrative regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 21-50; Ord. No. 84-44, § 5, 9-5-84; Ord. No. 85-59, § 1, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 91-10, § 1, 5-7-91)  
Sec. 82-242. - Special parking permits. 
(a)  Following the official designation of a controlled parking residential area, the city, through the police department, shall issue appropriate residential parking permits. Upon application, a permit shall be issued only to the owner or operator of a motor vehicle who resides in the controlled parking residential area in which he resides. 
(b)  The application for a permit shall contain the name of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle; the residential address; and the motor vehicle's make, model and registration number. The motor vehicle's registration may, at the discretion of the police department, be required at the time of making application in order to verify the contents. If the vehicle is registered at an address other than the local residence, the applicant shall provide other sufficient proof, acceptable to the police department, showing residency within the controlled residential parking area. The permit shall be valid for a calendar year and shall be renewed for each successive calendar year. A fee established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code, payable at the office designated by the city, shall be charged for the annual permit. Permits shall expire on December 31. After the initial permit has been issued, any renewal thereof shall be affixed to the vehicle no later than January 1 of the calendar year for which the renewal permit is issued. 
(Code 1983, § 21-51; Ord. No. 84-44, § 6, 9-5-84; Ord. No. 87-23, § 1, 7-7-87)  
Sec. 82-243. - Privileges and restrictions on permits. 
(a)  The holder of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or park a motor vehicle displaying the permit and operated by him in any designated residential controlled parking area during such times and places as the parking of motor vehicles therein is permitted. While a vehicle for which a residential parking permit has been issued is so parked, such permit shall be permanently affixed on the left rear bumper of the vehicle. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder of the permit a parking space within a designated controlled parking residential area. 
(b)  A residential parking permit shall not authorize the holder to stand or park a motor vehicle in such places or during such times as the stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle is prohibited or set aside for specified types of vehicles, nor shall it exempt the holder from the observance of any traffic regulation within the controlled parking residential area. 
(c)  No person, other than the permittee named on the permit, shall use the residential parking permit or display it on a vehicle operated or parked, and any such use or display by a person other than the permittee shall constitute a violation of this division by the permittee and by the person who so used or displayed such parking permit. 
(d)  It shall constitute a violation of this division for any person to falsely represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to furnish any false information in an application to obtain a residential parking permit. 
(e)  The city, through the police department, is authorized to revoke the residential parking permit of any permittee found to be in violation of this division and, upon written notification thereof, the permittee shall surrender such permit to the police department. Failure, when so requested, to surrender a residential parking permit so revoked shall constitute a violation of this division. 
(f)  Any permit issued under this division is nontransferable to another person or another vehicle. 
(g)  The city, through the police department, is authorized to adopt rules for the issuance of temporary parking permits to bona fide visitors and commercial service vehicles of residents of a designated controlled parking residential area. The fee for a temporary parking permit shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(h)  The city shall be authorized to adopt all reasonable rules and regulations necessary for the enforcement and administration of this division, including rules and regulations providing for specific time and day parking restrictions. 
(Code 1983, § 21-52; Ord. No. 84-44, § 7, 9-5-84)  
Sec. 82-244. - "D" residential parking permits. 
A controlled parking residential area is hereby established, to include the streets listed in subsections 82-137(a)—(d), generally described as the residential side streets in Pass-a-Grille and the surrounding area. 
(1)  Any resident of the city, as defined in section 82-1, who resides on a "D" street as defined in subsections 82-137(a)—(d) and who has a vehicle registered in their name shall be allowed to purchase a "D" parking permit for those vehicles, in the form of a decal, for a fee established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(2)  Each dwelling shall also be allowed to purchase two temporary "D" hang tags per month for their visitors, not to exceed three consecutive months. 
(3)  Temporary "D" hang tags shall be valid for 30 days from the date of purchase, and shall not be purchased more than three months in advance. The date of purchase shall be plainly stamped on each permit. 
(4)  "D" parking decals shall be valid from the date of purchase through December 31 of the same year. The purchase price of a parking decal shall not be prorated or reduced if the parking decal is purchased after January 1. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04, § 5, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 2017-04, § 3, 4-25-17)  
Sec. 82-245. - "C" residential parking permits. 
(a)  A controlled parking residential area is hereby established, to include the streets listed in subsection 82-137(v), generally described as the residential side streets on East Maritana Drive and Casablanca Avenue between 37 th Avenue and Pinellas Bayway, 37 th Avenue west of Gulf Boulevard, El Centro Street from 37 th Avenue to 35 th Avenue, and the streets of Alhambra, Alfonso, Barcelona, Granada, East DeBazan, West Debazan, South DeBazan, East Maritana, and South Maritana. 
(b)  Any resident of the city, as defined in section 82-1, who resides on and who has a vehicle registered to a "C" street as defined in subsection 82-137(v) shall be allowed to purchase a C" parking permit, in the form of a decal, for a fee established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(c)  "C" parking decals shall be valid from January 1 through December 31 of each year. The purchase price of a parking decal shall not be prorated or reduced if the parking decal is purchased after January 1. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04, § 5, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 3, 10-11-16; Ord. No. 2017-04, § 4, 4-25-17)  
Secs. 82-246—82-259. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - GENERAL PARKING PERMITS 
 
Sec. 82-260. - Metered and non-metered parking space permits. 
The city manager shall be authorized to issue daily or monthly parking permits, which shall authorize the parking of a motor vehicle without the payment of meter fees at any city metered parking space except the "county beach access lot" or any non-metered city parking space requiring the display of a "B" permit on the date(s) indicated on the permit. A "metered parking space" means any parking space for which payment is required by a parking meter or parking pay station. In order for the permit to be valid, it must be displayed prominently in the driver-side front window and be visible to the city enforcement officer. The fee for said permit shall be as provided in appendix A to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-48, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 7-24-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, adopted July 24, 2012, changed the title of § 82-260 from day parking permits to Metered and non-metered parking space permits.  
Secs. 82-261—82-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT OF CERTAIN VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 82-271. - Authorized. 
(a)  Members of the police department are authorized to remove a vehicle from the public property or a right-of-way to a place of impoundment maintained or contracted by the city when: 
(1)  Any illegally parked vehicle is left unattended and constitutes an obstruction to traffic or a hazard to the public. 
(2)  Any illegally parked vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or a hazard to the public and the person in charge of the vehicle, being present, refuses or fails to reasonably correct the situation by safely moving or having the vehicle safely moved. 
(3)  Any vehicle is illegally parked in an area clearly posted "tow away zone" in such a way that it is clear that the penalty for illegal parking is towing and impoundment of the vehicle. 
(4)  A vehicle is found in unsafe condition or without current registration tag or license plate. 
(5)  Removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because of fire, flood, storm or other emergency. 
(6)  The operator of any vehicle is taken into custody by the police department and such vehicle would thereby be left unattended. 
(7)  The person in charge of any vehicle is incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(8)  Any vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative. 
(b)  When any vehicle has been left continuously parked and unmoved for a period of seven days, it may be presumed that such vehicle is being stored on public property, provided that such vehicle does not bear a current vehicle registration and valid city parking permit, showing an address immediately adjacent to the location where the vehicle is parked. Such storage is prohibited, and the vehicle may be impounded. The police department shall place a parking citation charging "vehicle stored on public property—will be impounded after 24 hours," on the vehicle for a period of 24 hours prior to actual impoundment. 
(Code 1960, § 24-32(a); Ord. No. 216, § 8; Ord. No. 276, § 1; Ord. No. 398, § 1; Ord. No. 80-14, § 1; Ord. No. 83-37, § 1; Code 1983, § 21-56; Ord. No. 88-2, 2-2-88; Ord. No. 91-44, § 1, 1-7-92) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 316.194.  
Sec. 82-272. - Notice. 
(a)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle as authorized in this article and the officer knows or is able to ascertain the name and address of the owner of the vehicle, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. If any such vehicle is stored in an authorized garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(b)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle under this article, the officer shall within 24 hours send or cause to be sent a report of such removal by electronic communication to the department of highway safety and motor vehicles and shall notify the proprietor of any authorized garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal, and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
(Code 1960, § 24-33; Ord. No. 216, § 9; Code 1983, § 21-57) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Reporting of unclaimed vehicles, F.S. § 715.05.  
Sec. 82-273. - Fees. 
There shall be levied a storage charge upon all motor vehicles impounded by the city and stored by the city on city-owned property. The fee shall be in an amount established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code. In addition, a towing charge shall be levied on such vehicle. 
(Code 1960, § 24-34(a); Ord. No. 268, § 1; Code 1983, § 21-58)  
Sec. 82-274. - Release. 
No vehicle impounded in an authorized garage as provided in this article shall be released therefrom until the charges for towing such vehicle into the garage and storage charges have been paid. The charge for towing or removal of any such vehicle and storage charges shall be fixed by the city commission. Such charges shall be based upon a computation of all actual expenses entering into the current cost of such services. Such charges shall be posted for public inspection in the traffic violations bureau and in any authorized garage. 
(Code 1960, § 24-32(b); Ord. No. 216, § 8; Ord. No. 276, § 1; Ord. No. 398, § 1; Ord. No. 80-14, § 1; Code 1983, § 21-59) 
Editor's note— The towing charge is established pursuant to a contract between the city and a private wrecker company.  
Sec. 82-275. - Sale of impounded vehicles. 
(a)  If the owner of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this article fails or refuses to pay the towing or storage charge within 30 days of making claim to such property, title to such property shall vest in the city. The city may, after giving public notice, hold an auction in front of a municipal building. The city shall sell the motor vehicle to the highest bidder and thereafter shall apply the proceeds of the sale toward the indebtedness due to the city. 
(b)  The city shall be entitled to hold a public auction in order to sell the motor vehicle at any time after 90 days has passed from the date that the motor vehicle was first impounded and stored on city-owned property as provided in F.S. § 705.104. 
(Code 1960, § 24-34; Ord. No. 268, §§ 2, 3; Code 1983, § 21-60; Ord. No. 85-23, § 1, 5-7-85) 
State Law reference— Procedure for abandoned or lost property, F.S. §§ 705.103, 705.104.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-16, § 3, adopted June 14, 2011, repealed the former art. V, §§ 82-276—82-282, which pertained to traffic light safety and derived from Ord. No. 11-09, §§ 1, 2, adopted Apr. 12, 2011. 
 
Secs. 82-276—82-300. - Reserved.  
Chapter 86 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Cable communication systems, ch. 30; solid waste, ch. 70; streets and sidewalks, ch. 74; public service tax on certain utilities, § 78-56 et seq.; concurrency management system, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 86-1. - Combined billing for sewer, garbage and trash charges. 
(a)  Sewer, water and reclaimed water bills may be charged to the consumer on the same bill. 
(b)  The billing of sewer, water and reclaimed water shall be done on a bimonthly basis. 
(Code 1983, § 24-1) 
Editor's note— The county owns and operates the water distribution system in the city. By agreement, billing of water, sewer and reclaimed water charges are now performed by the county.  
Sec. 86-2. - Annual review and administration of St. Petersburg Wholesale Rate Agreement. 
(a)  The city shall annually review the proposed wholesale wastewater rates for service as developed by the City of St. Petersburg for compliance with the rate determination provisions and methodology as contained in accordance with the methodology definition the wholesale wastewater agreement between the two parties for wastewater treatment and effluent disposal services. 
(b)  The city shall annually review the true-up rate adjustment determined by the City of St. Petersburg which is based upon the calculation of the wholesale wastewater rates recognizing the actual cost incurred to provide service with such rate methodology being defined in the wholesale wastewater agreement. 
(c)  In order to evaluate the rate calculations in accordance with the wholesale wastewater rate agreement between the city and the City of St. Petersburg, the city will utilize an independent certified public accountant firm or individual (the "independent rate consultant") experienced in utility ratemaking and cost of service matters. The purpose of the rate review will be to evaluate compliance with the rate determination methodology as reflected in the wholesale wastewater agreement. The independent rate consultant will review compiled billing, financial, and supporting cost information and perform the necessary analyses and evaluations to ascertain that the rates as billed to the city by the City of St. Petersburg are in compliance in all material respects to the provisions of the wholesale wastewater agreement. The independent rate consultant shall annually prepare a report documenting its analyses conducted, findings and conclusions, and recommendations relative to the rates charged by the City of St. Petersburg and whether such rates are in compliance in all material respects relative to the wholesale wastewater agreement. 
(d)  The independent rate consultant shall review the annual rates and corresponding true-up adjustments no greater than 60 days from the date of initial notification of the rate to be charged by the City of St. Petersburg in order to determine compliance with the wholesale wastewater agreement. 
(e)  The independent rate consultant shall provide St. Petersburg with a written estimate of St. Pete Beach's wastewater flows as required by paragraph six of the wholesale wastewater agreement. 
(f)  As required from time-to-time by the city, the independent rate consultant shall assist the city in the evaluation of the city's wastewater rates for service, including the recovery of the cost of wholesale wastewater service provided by the City of St. Petersburg in order to comply with prudent utility and financial rate-making standards. If requested by the city, the independent rate consultant will assist in the development of a pass-through rate adjustment clause for wholesale wastewater purchases from the City of St. Petersburg, including the development of a true-up calculation on behalf of the city which would be applied to its retail customers. 
(g)  The independent rate consultant shall not provide utility rate consulting services to the City of St. Petersburg unless previously agreed to by the city. This provision shall not preclude the independent rate consultant from providing other consulting services to the City of St. Petersburg which would not be in conflict with the evaluation of rates charged between the two parties. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 1-15-02)  
Secs. 86-3—86-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 86-31. - Sewer use charges established. 
(a)  Customer using the sewer utility system shall be the same as the customer defined by the potable water provider. 
(b)  Residential unit shall mean any building or portion thereof designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a complete, independent living facility for the exclusive use of one family, including permanent full provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. A dwelling unit shall have no more than one kitchen and shall provide complete internal access to all rooms in the unit. The minimum number of residential units shall be one. 
(c)  Customer shall respond within 30 day to requests for information from the City of St. Pete Beach as to the number of residential units associated with customer's potable water bill. 
(d)  City of St. Pete Beach may use any reasonable method to estimate the number of residential units associated with customer's potable water bill if customer fails to provide said information within 30 days. 
(e)  The city manager or his/her designee shall review wastewater rates annually during fiscal year budget preparation and recommend any needed adjustments to city commission to ensure revenue is secured to pay all needed wastewater enterprise fund expenditures. 
(Code 1983, § 24-16; Ord. No. 86-30, § 1, 8-5-86; Ord. No. 96-34, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 99-11, § 1, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 06-15, § 1, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 07-37, § 1, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 08-49, §§ 1—3, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 2-14-12; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 1, 9-12-12) 
State Law reference— User fee authorized, F.S. § 166.201.  
Sec. 86-32. - Due date for sewer use charges. 
Sewer use charges shall be due 20 days from the date rendered. 
(Code 1983, § 24-17; Ord. No. 06-15, § 2, 5-9-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-15, § 5, adopted May 9, 2006, provides for an effective date of August 1, 2006.  
Sec. 86-33. - Fee for tap-in location. 
Any person requesting that a sanitary sewer tap-in be identified or located by a city employee shall be required to pay a fee for such service. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 24-18; Ord. No. 84-61, § 1, 12-4-84)  
Secs. 86-34—86-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER SHORTAGE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 86-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
District means the Southwest Florida Water Management District. 
Water resource means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground, including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds or diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
Water shortage condition means sufficient water is not available to meet present or anticipated needs of persons using the water resource or conditions are such as to require temporary reduction in total water usage within a particular area to protect the water resource from serious harm. A water shortage usually occurs due to drought. 
Water shortage plan means chapter 40D-21, Florida Administrative Code, the codification of the water shortage plan adopted and published by the Southwest Florida Water Management District July 1983. 
(Code 1983, § 24-32; Ord. No. 85-26, § 1, 5-21-85) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2; civil emergencies, ch. 34.  
Sec. 86-62. - Application of article. 
This article shall apply to all persons using the water resource, whether from public or privately owned water utility systems, private wells, or private connections with surface water bodies. This article shall not apply to persons using treated effluent or saltwater. 
(Code 1983, § 24-33; Ord. No. 85-26, § 2, 5-21-85)  
Sec. 86-63. - Water users to accept article. 
No water service shall be furnished to any person by a public or private utility unless such person agrees to accept all the provisions of this article. The acceptance of water service shall be in itself the acceptance of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 24-31; Ord. No. 85-26, § 6, 5-21-85)  
Sec. 86-64. - Declaration of water shortage; water shortage emergency. 
The declaration of a water shortage or water shortage emergency within all or any part of the city by the city commission or the executive director of the district shall invoke this article. Upon such declaration all water use restrictions or other measures adopted by the district pursuant to chapter 40D-21, Florida Administrative Code, applicable to the city or any portion thereof shall be subject to enforcement action pursuant to section 86-65. Any violation of chapter 40D-21, Florida Administrative Code, or any order issued pursuant thereto shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 24-34; Ord. No. 85-26, § 3, 5-21-85)  
Sec. 86-65. - Enforcement. 
Every police officer shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce this article. In addition, the city manager may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this article to city agencies and departments in accordance with state and local law. 
(Code 1983, § 24-35; Ord. No. 85-26, § 4, 5-21-85)  
Sec. 86-66. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person in violation of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First violation, $25.00. 
(2)  Second and subsequent violations, as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  Each day a person is in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. In the initial stages of a water shortage, law enforcement officials may attempt to provide violators with no more than one written warning. 
(Code 1983, § 24-36; Ord. No. 85-26, § 5, 5-21-85)  
Secs. 86-67—86-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RECLAIMED WATER SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Availability means the date upon which connection can be made to the reclaimed water system and service received. 
Billing means the charge made for reclaimed water service. The charge may be included on the bimonthly utility bill. 
Connection fee means the charge made for connecting to the reclaimed system. The city connection fee is not related to separate fees which may be charged by the county for modifications or inspections of its potable water system, nor is it related to the fees charged for the plumbing hookup to the actual point of use. 
Cross connection means any physical connection or arrangement which could allow the movement of fluids between the potable water system and any other piping system, such as the reclaimed water system. 
Customer means the actual user of the reclaimed water. 
Department means the city department responsible for the reclaimed water system. 
Discontinuation of service means cessation of a service or an appropriate method to ensure that no service can be received. 
Distribution mains means those conduits used to supply reclaimed water to service lines from trunk lines. 
Dual check device means a device composed of two single independently active checkvalves. 
Master control valve means the manually operated valve which controls total reclaimed water flow to the customer's property. 
Meter means a flow measuring device to monitor the total reclaimed water flow to the customer's property. 
PVC pipe means polyvinyl chloride pipe. 
Rates means those charges which will be made on a monthly, bimonthly or quarterly basis and which are subject to change as approved by the city rate ordinance from time to time in relation to the costs of providing services. 
Reclaimed water means water that has received at least advanced secondary treatment and is reused after flowing out of a wastewater treatment facility. 
Reuse means the deliberate application of reclaimed water, in compliance with the state department of environmental protection and district rules, for a beneficial purpose. 
Service line means that conduit for reclaimed water from the distribution main to the property line. 
Trunk mains means those conduits used to supply reclaimed water from the pumping station or treatment plant to the distribution mains. 
(Code 1983, § 24-41; Ord. No. 92-4, § 1, 3-23-92; Ord. No. 10-17, § 1, 6-22-10) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-97. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Potable irrigation meters. The use of potable water for irrigation through second meters on property where reclaimed water distribution facilities are within 100 feet shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Irrigation wells. The installation of new irrigation wells or the rehabilitation of existing irrigation wells where reclaimed water distribution facilities are within 100 feet of the proposed or existing wells shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Chemical injections. Reclaimed water system customers are prohibited from injecting any chemicals into the reclaimed water system. 
(Code 1983, § 24-42; Ord. No. 92-4, § 3, 3-23-92)  
Sec. 86-98. - Identification. 
Under this article, all pipes and aboveground cross connection control devices accepted into systems existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall be adequately identified by color according to which system it is being added. Coloration standards shall be as specified by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 24-54; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(D), 3-23-92)  
Secs. 86-99—86-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RECLAIMED WATER USE 
 
Sec. 86-126. - Service area. 
Reclaimed water service shall be provided for properties located within the city which comply with the provisions for such service as set forth in this article. Reclaimed water shall be available to properties within the city as the distribution system is extended and reclaimed water becomes available. 
(Code 1983, § 24-51; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(A), 3-23-92)  
Sec. 86-127. - Public easement requirements. 
No facilities shall be installed under this article and accepted by the city for maintenance unless they are in a dedicated public right-of-way or a dedicated public easement. Any new easement shall be adequately sized to accommodate construction and maintenance of any reuse system component. No obstruction of whatever kind shall be planted, built or otherwise created within the limits of the easement or right-of-way without written permission of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Code 1983, § 24-52; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(B), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 10-17, § 2, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 86-128. - Ownership. 
All reclaimed water facilities and appurtenances within dedicated public easements, when constructed or accepted by the city, shall become and remain the property of the city. No person shall by payment of any charges provided in this article or by causing any construction of facilities accepted by the city acquire any interest or right in any of these facilities or any portion thereof, other than the privilege of having his property connected thereto for reclaimed water service in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1983, § 24-53; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(C), 3-23-92)  
Sec. 86-129. - Minimum size of mains. 
The minimum size of reclaimed water mains installed in the city shall be two inches in diameter. 
(Code 1983, § 24-55; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(E), 3-23-92)  
Sec. 86-130. - Extension approval. 
Reclaimed water extensions for improvements shall be accepted by the city upon the appropriate approval of the city manager or his/her designee. Applications for reclaimed water extension shall be submitted to the city prior to construction. 
(Code 1983, § 24-56; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(F), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 10-17, § 3, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 86-131. - Right to refuse service. 
No payment of any costs, submittal of any petition or any other act to receive reclaimed water service shall guarantee such service. The city shall have the right, at all times, to refuse to extend service on the basis of a use detrimental to the system, inadequate supply of reclaimed water, lack of payment of required fees, or for any other reason which, in the judgment of the city manager or his/her designee, shall cause the extension not to be to the benefit of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 24-57; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(G), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 10-17, § 4, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 86-132. - Fire protection. 
Hydrants shall be installed on reclaimed water mains constructed within the city at such locations as deemed appropriate by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Code 1983, § 24-58; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(H), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 10-17, § 5, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 86-133. - Extent of city maintenance. 
(a)  All reclaimed water facilities that have been accepted by the city shall become the property of the city and shall be operated and maintained by the city. No person shall perform any work or be reimbursed for any work or in connection with any work on the system unless written authorization from the city is received prior to the work being accomplished. 
(b)  The city shall make a reasonable effort to inspect and keep its facilities in good repair but assumes no liability for any damage caused by the system that is beyond the control of normal maintenance or due to situations not previously reported to the department. This shall include damage due to breaking of pipes, poor quality of water caused by unauthorized or illegal entry of foreign material into the system, faulty operation of fire protection facilities, or other reasons. 
(Code 1983, § 24-59; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(I), 3-23-92)  
Sec. 86-134. - Maintenance by customer. 
Under this article, the property owner and customer shall be responsible for the maintenance of all irrigation lines and appurtenances on the property served by the city. The city reserves the right to disconnect the service to any property on which the system is not maintained. In addition, if the customer requires reclaimed water at different pressures or different quality or in any way different from that normally supplied by the city, he/she shall be responsible for the necessary devices to make these adjustments and obtaining approval by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Code 1983, § 24-60; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(J), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 10-17, § 6, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 86-135. - Common service lines. 
Common service lines for reclaimed water shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1983, § 24-61; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(K), 3-23-92)  
Sec. 86-136. - Discontinuing service by city. 
The city may discontinue reclaimed water service to any customer due to an infraction of the procedures and regulations in this article, for nonpayment of bills, for tampering with any service, for plumbing cross connections with another water source or for any reason that may be detrimental to the system. The city has the right to cease service until the condition is corrected and all costs due the city are paid. These costs may include delinquent billings, connection charges, and payment for any damage caused to the system. If discontinued service shall be turned on without authorization, the city shall remove the service and impose an additional charge for the removal. 
(Code 1983, § 24-62; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(L), 3-23-92)  
Sec. 86-137. - Discontinuing service by customer. 
There shall be a fee for discontinuing reclaimed water service. A written request to discontinue service must be received by the city at least 14 days prior to discontinuation. All current bills shall be paid by the customer, including a bill for the use during the period current billing prior to discontinuation of service. All disconnection fees and reconnection fees shall be equal to the connection fee. However, disconnection is not allowed during the first five years of service, either by the original customer or subsequent customers of the reclaimed water system. 
(Code 1983, § 24-63; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(M), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 10-17, § 7, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 86-138. - Service interruption. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to temporarily discontinue service to any portion of or the entire reclaimed water system as deemed necessary by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(b)  The city manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to establish schedules which restrict the use of the water reuse system at certain times in order to reduce maximum pressure demands on the system and to regulate usage during periods of limited reuse water availability. 
(Code 1983, § 24-64; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(N), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 10-17, § 8, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 86-139. - Application for connection to adjoining reclaimed water distribution main. 
Connection to an adjoining reclaimed water distribution main shall be applied for by completing and signing an application form. 
(Code 1983, § 24-65; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(O), 3-23-92)  
Sec. 86-140. - Location of service line. 
Application for all reclaimed water services within the city-, county- or state-maintained rights-of-way shall include a dimensional plan showing the location of the requested service line relative to the nearest street intersection, etc., as required by the state department of transportation or the city commission, when alleviation from the planned service connection location is requested. 
(Code 1983, § 24-66; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(P), 3-23-92)  
Sec. 86-141. - Service application prerequisite; customer responsibility. 
Before an application for reclaimed water service shall be approved, the customer must have a suitable irrigation system. The irrigation system shall consist of an underground system provided by the customer or a city-provided belowground hose bib contained in a locked valve box. No system with a cross connection to the potable water system shall be considered for connection to the reclaimed water system. The systems shall not include devices, aboveground faucets, or other connections that could permit the reclaimed water to be used for any purpose other than irrigation unless such uses and systems have been approved in writing by the city manager or his/her designee. All new irrigation systems constructed in areas where the city has determined to make reclaimed water available shall require a permit and shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications and regulations established by the city. The owner shall provide the city with a schematic drawing of the irrigation system. 
(Code 1983, § 24-67; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(Q), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 10-17, § 9, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 86-142. - Meter requirements. 
(a)  The city may require irrigation meters for any reclaimed water customer. 
(b)  Larger irrigation users may be required to provide an appropriate sized flowmeter. All meters for the reclaimed water system shall be installed by the city. An estimate for the installation cost shall be prepaid by the city manager or his/her designee and submitted to the applicant for payment prior to installation. A refund or additional billing shall be made after installation to ensure the applicant pays the actual cost of installation. 
(Code 1983, § 24-68; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(R), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 10-17, § 10, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 86-143. - Cross connection control. 
(a)  In all premises where reclaimed water service is provided, the public or private potable water supply shall be protected by an approved cross connection control assembly. All devices and material installed for cross connection control must be approved by the city manager or his/her designee and the county administrator or his/her designee. Where any cross connection is found, it shall be disconnected. Before reconnection of that service, the public potable water system shall be protected against the possibility of future cross connections, and additional devices may be required as specified by the county administrator or his/her designee and installed at the customer's expense. 
(b)  To determine the presence of any potential hazards to the public potable water system, the county health department and the city shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any customer receiving reclaimed water. Each customer of reclaimed water service shall, by application, give written consent to such entry upon his premises. 
(Code 1983, § 24-69; Ord. No. 92-4, § 2(S), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 10-17, § 10, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 86-144. - Rates and charges. 
A schedule of rates and charges for the use of the city reclaimed water system is established as provided in this section. 
(1)  Connection fee. A $75.00 connection fee shall be paid at the time of application to connect to the city reclaimed system. The disconnection fee and reconnection fee shall be equal to the connection fee. 
(2)  Equivalent residential unit (ERU). An equivalent residential unit is defined as 3,150 square feet. All single-family properties shall be considered one equivalent residential unit. The equivalent residential units of all two-family, multi-family, commercial, and public-use properties shall be calculated by dividing the permeable parcel area by 3,150 square feet and rounding up to the nearest whole digit number. For parcels fronting upon the Gulf of Mexico, any land gulfward of the dune preservation zone or submerged land shall not be included in the permeable parcel area calculated. The equivalent residential unit for billing purposes shall not be less than one unit. 
(3)  Monthly user fee. A user of the reclaimed water system shall pay to the city a monthly use fee as provided herein. All two-family, multi-family, commercial and public use properties shall pay to the city a monthly use fee for the first ERU and for each ERU thereafter. Reclaimed water customers shall be billed based on the size of the permeable parcel served, expressed as a whole number of equivalent residential units. The monthly use fee shall be as follows: 
Monthly Reclaimed Water User Fees 
1. 	Basic service 	$14.38 effective October 1, 2010 
$16.39 effective October 1, 2011 
2. 	Multi-family, commercial, and public use property 	Effective October 1, 2010 $14.38 for the first ERU and $12.50 for each additional ERU. 
Effective October 1, 2011 $16.39 for the first ERU and $14.25 for each additional ERU. 
 
(Code 1983, § 24-71; Ord. No. 92-5, § 1, 3-23-92; Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 9-2-92; Ord. No. 92-33, § 1, 1-5-93; Ord. No. 96-15, § 1, 3-19-96; Ord. No. 00-48, § 1, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 10-17, § 11, 6-22-10; Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 2-22-11)  
Sec. 86-145. - Billing and other procedures. 
(a)  The monthly use fee for reclaimed water may be billed to the consumer on a combined bill with other city or county services, such as potable water. The billing shall be done on a bimonthly basis. 
(b)  If a customer fails to pay the amount due the city, the city may enforce collection of the rate by imposing a lien on the real property involved and by filing a civil action against the customer for the amount due to the city. 
(Code 1983, § 24-72; Ord. No. 92-5, § 2, 3-23-92; Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 9-2-92; Ord. No. 00-48, § 2, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 10-17, § 12, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 86-146. - Obligation to remain user for a five-year period. 
All users who connect to the reclaimed water system shall be required to remain with the reclaimed water system and pay all appropriate fees in connection therewith for a period of no less than five years from the date of the initial connection. The city shall be entitled to seek mandatory injunctive relief for violation of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 24-73; Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 9-2-92)  
ARTICLE V. - FATS, OILS AND GREASE MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 86-147. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and policy. This article sets forth uniform requirements for food service establishments and automotive related enterprises located within the City of St. Pete Beach and to food service establishments and automotive related enterprises located outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the wastewater collection system, herein after referred to as the WWCS. This article enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.). This article further establishes uniform permitting, maintenance and monitoring requirements for controlling the discharge of fats, oils and grease from food service establishments and automotive related enterprises discharging to the City of St. Pete Beach WWCS. 
(b)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To preclude the introduction of excessive amounts of fats, oils and grease into the City of St. Pete Beach wastewater collection and transmission system; and 
(2)  To prevent obstruction or blockage of the city's sanitary sewer lines due to grease build-up, attributing to sanitary sewer backups and overflows or releases of wastewater that reach waters of the United States, publicly and privately-owned properties, streets, and residential and commercial buildings, resulting in potential environmental and civil liability to the city; and 
(3)  To protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of and visitors to the City of St. Pete Beach, the integrity of the environment, and regulate the use of the city's wastewater collection and transmission system as required by law; and 
(4)  To set forth the procedures to be followed in administering this article and to provide penalties for violations thereof; and 
(5)  To implement a procedure to recover the costs incurred by the city, including staff time and equipment used, in cleaning and maintaining wastewater collection system lines and disposing of grease blockages; and 
(6)  To implement a procedure to recover costs for any liability incurred by the city for damages caused by grease blockages resulting in the flooding of streets, residences, or commercial buildings and to prevent similar recurrences; and 
(7)  To issue commercial wastewater discharge permits (CWDPs) to food service establishments and automotive related enterprises requiring grease trap, grease interceptor, and/or oil/water interceptor installation, maintenance, monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; and 
(8)  To establish administrative review procedures and reporting requirements; and 
(9)  To establish fees for the recovery of costs resulting from the program established herein; and 
(10)  To establish enforcement procedures for violations of any part or requirement of this article. 
(c)  Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of the public services department (director), or other such persons as delegated by the city manager, shall assign the administration of the FOG management program to designated staff for implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this article, up to and including fines for non-compliance. 
(d)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply to all existing food service establishments and automotive related enterprises and to all food service establishments and automotive related enterprises that commence operation on or after the effective date of this article that are located within the municipal boundaries of the City of St. Pete Beach and to all existing food service establishments and automotive related enterprises and to all food service establishments and automotive related enterprises that begin operations on or after the effective date of this article located outside the municipal boundaries of the city, and who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the WWCS owned, operated, and maintained by the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. 
(e)  Severability. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection of these regulations shall be adjudged invalid for any reason whatsoever, such judgment shall not affect, repeal or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection thereof found to be invalid. 
(f)  Disclaimer of liability. These regulations shall not be construed or interpreted as imposing upon the city, its officials or employees: 
(1)  Any liability or responsibility for damages to any property; or 
(2)  Any warranty that any system, installation, or portion thereof that is constructed or repaired under permits and inspections required by these regulations will function properly. In addition, any employee charged with enforcement, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of their duties, shall not thereby be personally liable and is hereby relieved from personal liability for damage that may occur to any person or property as a result of any act required by these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 86-148. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
(a)  General definitions . Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases used in this article shall have the meaning hereinafter designated as follows: 
(1)  "Automotive related enterprise". An establishment where automotive vehicles are serviced, greased, repaired, or washed and which contribute wastes containing petroleum (hydrocarbon) based oils and greases. Automotive related enterprises shall include, but shall not be limited to, automotive repair garages, gasoline stations with grease racks, and commercial vehicle wash facilities. 
(2)  "Automotive related enterprise owner" or "owner". In the case of an individual automotive related facility, the owner or proprietor of the automotive related operation. Where the automotive related facility is a franchise operation, the owner of the franchise is the responsible person or entity. Where the automotive related facility is owned by a corporation, the corporate representative is the responsible entity. 
(3)  "Best management practices" or "BMP". Techniques used throughout the food service industry, and have proven effective when implemented properly and consistently. 
(4)  "Black water". Wastewater from sanitary fixtures such as toilets and urinals. 
(5)  "City". The City of St. Pete Beach, Florida, or the Board of City Commissioners of St. Pete Beach, Florida and all authorized representatives. 
(6)  "Commercial wastewater discharge permit (CWDP)". A permit issued by the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida, authorizing the discharge of wastewater to the city's WWCS from a food service establishment or an automotive related enterprise. 
(7)  "Control authority". The City of St. Pete Beach, Florida through the director of the public services department. 
(8)  "Director". The Director of the City of St. Pete Beach Public Services Department, or such other persons designated by the city manager. 
(9)  "Expand". Anytime a food service establishment increases the flow-through rates and requires additional grease capacity in the grease trap/interceptor. 
(10)  "Food service establishment" or "establishment" or "FSE". Any business or food service facility, which prepares, processes, and/or packages food for sale or consumption, on- or off-site, with the exception of private residences. Food service establishments shall include, but are not limited to: food courts, food manufacturers, food packagers, restaurants, grocery stores, delicatessens, bakeries, retail and wholesale meat markets, retail and wholesale seafood markets, lounges, hospitals, nursing homes, assisted congregate living facilities, churches, schools, and all other food service facilities not specifically listed above. For the purpose of this article, food service establishment shall not include a facility that only prepares beverages; an establishment that only sells prepackaged foods, or an establishment that is currently classified as a significant industrial user by and permitted through the city's industrial pretreatment program. 
(11)  "Food service establishment owner" or "owner". In the case of individual food service establishments, the owner or proprietor of the food service operation. Where the food service establishment is a franchise operation, the owner of the franchise is the responsible person or entity. Where the food service establishment is owned by a corporation, the corporate representative is the responsible entity. Where two or more food service establishments share a common grease interceptor, the owner shall be the individual who owns or assumes control of the grease interceptor or the property on which the grease interceptor is located. 
(12)  "Garbage". Solid waste resulting from the domestic or commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce, meats, and seafood. 
(13)  "Garbage disposal" or "garbage grinder". A device which shreds or grinds up waste material into smaller portions prior to discharge into the city's wastewater collection and transmission system. 
(14)  "Gray water". All of the liquid contained in a grease interceptor that lies below the floating grease layer and above the food solids layer. 
(15)  "Grease". A material, either liquid or solid, containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit, composed primarily of fats, oils or grease from animal or vegetable sources. The phrases "fats, oils and grease", "FOG", "oil and grease," or "oil and grease substances" shall be included in this definition. 
(16)  "Grease interceptor". A device located underground and outside of a food service establishment designed to collect, contain, or remove food waste solids and grease from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste ("gray water") to discharge to the city's wastewater collection and transmission system by gravity flow or to a privately-owned collection and transmission system, which discharges to the city's wastewater collection and transmission system. Grease interceptors are required whenever and wherever grease waste is produced in quantities that could otherwise cause line stoppage or hinder sewage disposal and shall be in conformance with the provisions of the most current edition of the Florida Plumbing Code and all other federal, state and local regulations. 
(17)  "Grease trap". A device located inside a food service facility or under a sink designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes and grease from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste ("gray water") to discharge to the city's wastewater collection and transmission system by gravity flow or to a privately-owned collection and transmission system, which discharges to the city's wastewater collection and transmission system. Grease traps shall be in conformance with the provisions of the most current edition of the Florida Plumbing Code. 
(18)  "Grease waste hauler". A person who collects the contents of a grease interceptor or grease trap and transports it to an approved grease recycling or grease disposal facility. A grease waste hauler may also provide other services to a food service establishment related to grease interceptor maintenance. 
(19)  "Oil/water separator". A device designed and installed to segregate oil and water to prevent the discharge of oils to the WWCS. Oil/water separators are required where oils are discharged in quantities that could hinder the operation of the WWCS as determined by the city, including, but not limited to, facilities where automotive vehicles are serviced, greased, repaired or washed. 
(20)  "Registered grease waste hauler list". A list of grease waste haulers registered with the City of St. Pete Beach in accordance with the provisions outlined in section 86-151 of this article and authorized to collect grease and operate a grease waste hauling business in the city. 
(21)  "Renovate". Anytime a food service establishment increases the flow-through rates and requires additional grease capacity in the grease trap/interceptor. 
(22)  "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive. 
(23)  "Significant industrial user". 
a.  All users subject to categorical standards under Rule 62-625.410, FAC and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, which has been adopted by reference in Rule 62-660, FAC; and 
b.  Any other industrial user that: 
1.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the WWCS (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); or 
2.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the WWCS; or 
3.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WWCS's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement in accordance with Rule 62-625.500(2)(e), FAC. 
(24)  "Wastewater". The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial establishments, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any solids or other pollutants which may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the WWCS. 
(25)  "Wastewater collection and/or transmission systems" or "WWCS". Sewer, pipelines, conduits, manholes, pumping stations, force mains, and all other facilities used for the collection and transmission of wastewater from individual service connections to the wastewater treatment plant intended for the purpose of providing treatment prior to release to the environment. 
(b)  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings as follows: 
(1)  BMP—Best management practices. 
(2)  CWA—Clean Water Act. 
(3)  CWDP—Commercial wastewater discharge permit. 
(4)  FAC—Florida Administrative Code. 
(5)  FDEP—Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(6)  FOG—Fats, oils, and greases. 
(7)  FSE—Food service establishment. 
(8)  NOV—Notice of violation. 
(9)  WWCS—Wastewater collection and/or transmission system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 86-149. - Grease traps, grease interceptors, and oil/water separators. 
(a)  Requirements. All food service establishments and automotive related enterprises are required to have a grease trap or grease interceptor, or an oil/water separator, respectively, properly installed in accordance with any and all applicable requirements of the most current edition of the Florida Plumbing Code. 
(1)  New establishments. On or after the effective date of this article, all food service establishments and automotive related facilities, which are proposed or newly constructed, or existing food service establishments and automotive related facilities, which will be expanded or renovated, to include a food service establishment or automotive related facilities, where such an establishment or facility did not previously exist, shall be required to install a grease interceptor(s), grease trap(s) or oil/water separator in accordance with the requirements of the most current edition of the Florida Plumbing Code or higher standard, and to operate and maintain the grease interceptor(s), grease trap(s) or oil/water separator in accordance with the requirements outlined in this article. Grease interceptors, grease traps, and oil/water separators shall be installed and permitted prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city's building department. 
(2)  Existing establishments. All food service establishments and automotive related shall be required to upgrade or replace their existing grease interceptor, grease trap, and/or oil/water separator, if it's determined by the control authority that the existing systems, is not in compliance with the Florida Building Code, (Plumbing) within 180 days of notification. 
Exception: 
In lieu of upgrading or replacing their existing grease interceptor, grease trap and/or oil/water separator, the establishment may submit an action plan to the control authority to reflect how modifications and/or additional measures can insure that their system is not contributing fats, oils, and greases in quantities sufficient to cause wastewater collection system line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance on the city's wastewater collection and transmission system. The action plan shall be in compliance with both the "Design and Performance Criteria for Grease Traps, Grease Interceptors and Water/Oil Separators' and Best Management Practices Manual. The action plan must be submitted within 45 days from notification and must be implemented within 45 days from approval by the control authority. 
When applying for a permit as required by subsection 86-150(a) the owner of the food service establishment or auto related enterprise shall obtain the services of a licensed plumber to submit along with the application the following information; 
1.  Site plan and/or floor plan depicting all grease traps, grease interceptors, and oil/water separators. 
2.  The size of all grease traps, grease interceptors, and oil/water separators (system(s)). 
3.  Calculations showing the type and capacity required by the Florida Building Code, Plumbing. The calculations can either utilize the flow-through rates (GPM) or volume (seating/gallons/hours and load factor). 
4.  If the calculations show that the existing system(s) are deficient, then plans must be submitted to show how the system will be brought into compliance. 
(b)  Compliance. At any time after any food service establishment and automotive related facilities are brought into compliance based on subsection (a) above the city shall require an existing food service establishment or an automotive related facility to install a new oil and grease removal system or provide action plan as outlined in (a)(2) which may include a grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator that complies with the requirements of the most current edition of the Florida Plumbing Code or to modify, repair, or replace any noncompliant plumbing or existing grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator within 30 business days of written notification by the control authority when any one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The establishment does not have a grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator; or 
(2)  The establishment is found to be contributing fats, oils, and greases in quantities sufficient to cause wastewater collection system line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance on the city's wastewater collection and transmission system; or 
(3)  The establishment has an irreparable, or defective grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator; or 
(4)  Renovation of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system is performed, which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by the City of St. Pete Beach; or 
(5)  There is a change in the intended use of the establishment; or 
(6)  The facility has not operated as a food service facility for six consecutive months prior to receiving a CWDP application form; or 
(7)  The existing establishment does not have plumbing connections to a grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator in compliance with the requirements of this article 
(c)  Plumbing connections. Grease interceptors, grease traps, or oil/water separators shall be installed in accordance with the most current edition of the Florida Plumbing Code, which requires that such grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator be located in the food service establishment's or automotive related facility's lateral service line between all fixtures which may introduce fats, oils or greases into the sewer system and the connection to the city's wastewater collection and transmission system. Wastewater from sanitary facilities (black water) and other similar fixtures shall not be introduced into the grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator under any circumstance and is strictly prohibited. 
(d)  Grease traps. Grease traps shall be installed in accordance with the most current edition of the Florida Plumbing Code and the FSE shall operate and maintain its grease trap in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Inspection, cleaning and maintenance. Each FSE shall be solely responsible for the cost of the grease trap's proper installation, inspection, cleaning and maintenance. Each FSE may contract with a grease waste hauler who is currently permitted by Pinellas County, Florida, or may perform its own grease trap cleaning and maintenance. All grease traps shall be opened, inspected, cleaned and maintained at a minimum of once per week. In addition to the required weekly cleaning, each FSE shall determine an additional cleaning frequency at which its grease trap(s) shall be cleaned according to the performance standards outlined in the city's guidance document entitled "Design and Performance Criteria for Grease Traps, Grease Interceptors, and Oil/water Separators". 
(2)  Control authority inspection. Grease traps shall be periodically inspected by the control authority, upon the presentation of proper credentials and identifications, as necessary to assure compliance with this article and to assure proper cleaning and maintenance schedules are being adhered to. 
(3)  Repairs and replacement. The FSE shall be solely responsible for the cost and scheduling of all repairs to and/or replacement of its grease trap(s). Repairs or replacement required by the control authority shall be completed by a specified date of the written notice of required repairs or replacement is received by the establishment. The control authority may authorize an extension of time to achieve compliance, if requested by an FSE. If additional time is necessary to come into compliance with the provisions of this article, the FSE may submit an action plan as outlined in (a)(2) establishing a schedule for bringing the FSE into compliance on a reasonably agreed upon date. 
(4)  Disposal. Grease and solid materials removed from a grease trap shall be containerized and appropriately disposed of in the FSE's solid waste disposal system. 
(5)  Record keeping. The FSE shall maintain records of the date, time and signature of all cleaning and maintenance for each grease trap in a logbook and shall make this logbook available for inspection by the control authority upon request. 
(e)  Grease interceptors. Grease interceptors shall be designed and installed in accordance with the most current edition of the Florida Plumbing Code. Each FSE shall operate and maintain its grease interceptor in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Inspection, pumping and maintenance. Each FSE shall be responsible for all costs associated with the proper installation, inspection, pumping, cleaning and maintenance of its grease interceptor. All FSE's that have grease interceptors shall utilize a contracted grease hauler who has been permitted by Pinellas County, Florida. Pumping services shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater and bottom sludge and solids from the interceptor. 
(2)  Pumping frequency. Each FSE shall have its grease interceptor(s) pumped at a minimum frequency of once every calendar month. There shall be a minimum period of three weeks between each required pumping. In addition to required monthly pumping, each control authority shall determine an additional or reduced frequency at which its grease interceptor(s) shall be pumped according to the performance standards outlined in the city's guidance document entitled "Design and Performance Criteria for Grease Traps, Grease Interceptors, and Oil/water Separators". 
(3)  Control authority inspection. Grease interceptors shall be periodically inspected by the control authority, upon the presentation of proper credentials and identifications, as necessary to assure compliance with this article and to determine if proper cleaning and maintenance schedules are being adhered to. If, upon inspection, an interceptor is found to exceed the standards outlined in the city's guidance document entitled "Design and Performance Criteria for Grease Traps, Grease Interceptors, and Oil/water Separators", the FSE shall be required to have the interceptor pumped out within 72 hours of the inspection date. Failure to pump-out the interceptor shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(4)  Repairs and replacement. The FSE shall be solely responsible for the cost and scheduling of all repairs to and/or replacement of its grease interceptor(s). Repairs or replacement required by the control authority shall be corrected by a specified date contained in the same written notice that requires the repairs or replacement. The control authority may authorize an extension of time to achieve compliance for an additional 60 calendar days if requested by an FSE. If additional time is necessary to come into compliance with the provisions of this article, the FSE may submit an action plan establishing a schedule for bringing the FSE into compliance on a reasonably agreed upon date. 
(5)  Disposal. Wastes removed from each grease interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive and treat such wastes. Neither grease nor solid materials removed from the interceptors shall be returned to any grease interceptor, publicly or privately-owned sewer line, publicly or privately-owned manhole, publicly or privately-owned pump station, or any portion of the city's wastewater collection and transmission system or wastewater treatment facility. 
(6)  Record keeping. Each FSE shall maintain records of cleaning and maintenance of the system, details of any repairs required, and dates of repair completion, and any other records pertaining to the interceptor. These records shall be made available for review upon request by the control authority, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The as-built drawing of the establishment's plumbing system; 
b.  A copy of the current commercial wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Receipts from grease pumpers, plumbers, parts suppliers, etc.; 
d.  Log of pumping, cleaning, and maintenance activities; and 
e.  Grease waste hauler information. 
The file shall be available at all times for inspection and review by the control authority. 
(f)  Oil/water separators. Oil/water separators shall be designed and installed in accordance with the most current edition of the Florida Plumbing Code. Each automotive related facility shall operate and maintain its oil/water separator in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Inspection, pumping and maintenance. Each automotive related facility shall be responsible for all costs associated with the proper installation, inspection, pumping, cleaning, and maintenance of its oil/water separator. All automotive oil and grease generators that have oil/water separators shall utilize a contracted waste oil hauler. 
(2)  Pumping frequency. Each automotive related facility shall have its oil/water separator(s) pumped at a minimum frequency of once every 180 days, or more frequently as needed to prevent carry-over of oil and grease into the city's WWCS, which shall be determined by the control authority. 
(3)  Control authority inspection. Oil/water separators shall be periodically inspected by the control authority, upon the presentation of proper credentials and identifications, as necessary to assure compliance with this article and to determine if proper cleaning and maintenance schedules are being adhered to. If, upon inspection, an oil/water separator is found to exceed the standards outlined in the city's guidance document entitled "Performance Criteria for Grease Traps, Grease Interceptors, and Oil/water Separators", the automotive related enterprise shall be required to have the separator pumped out within 72 hours of the inspection date. Failure to pump-out the oil/water separator shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(4)  Repairs and replacement. The automotive related enterprise shall be solely responsible for the cost and scheduling of all repairs to and/or replacement of its oil/water separator(s). Repairs or replacement required by the control authority shall be corrected by a specified date of written notice of requiring the repairs or replacement is received by the facility. The control authority may authorize an extension of time to achieve compliance if requested by an automotive related enterprise. If additional time is necessary to come into compliance with the provisions of this article, the automotive related enterprise may submit a compliance schedule establishing a schedule for bringing the automotive related enterprise into compliance on a reasonably agreed upon date. 
(5)  Disposal. Wastes removed from each oil/water separator shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive and treat such wastes. Neither oil nor solid materials removed from the separator shall be returned to any oil/water separator, publicly or privately-owned sewer line, publicly or privately-owned manhole, publicly or privately-owned pump station, or any portion of the city's wastewater collection and transmission system or wastewater treatment facility. 
(6)  Record keeping. Each automotive related enterprise shall maintain records of cleaning and maintenance of each oil/water separator, details of any repairs required, and dates of repair completion, and any other records pertaining to the oil/water separators. These records shall be made available for review upon request by the control authority, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The as-built drawing of the facility's plumbing system;, 
b.  A copy of the current commercial wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Receipts from pumpers, plumbers, parts suppliers, etc.; 
d.  Log of pumping, cleaning, and maintenance activities; and 
e.  Waste oil hauler information. 
The file shall be available at all times for inspection and review by the control authority. 
(7)  Additives. Any chemicals, enzymes, emulsifiers, live bacteria, or other grease cutters, dissolving agents, or additives used for the purpose of oil and grease reduction shall be prohibited unless such use has been approved by the control authority prior to their addition to grease traps, grease interceptors or oil/water interceptors by the FSE, the automotive related enterprise or the grease hauler. Material safety data sheets (MSDS) and any other applicable information concerning the composition, frequency of use, and mode of action of the proposed additive shall be sent to the city together with a written statement outlining the procedures for the proposed use of the additive(s). Based upon the information received and any other information solicited from the potential user or supplier, the control authority shall permit or deny the use of the additive in writing. Permission to use any specific additive may be withdrawn by the control authority at any time. 
(8)  Alternative grease removal devices or technologies. Alternative device and technologies such as automatic grease removal systems shall be subject to written approval by the control authority prior to installation. Approval of the device shall be based on demonstrated (proven) removal efficiencies and reliability of operation. The control authority may approve these types of devices depending on manufacturer's specifications on a case by case basis. The establishment may be required to furnish analytical data demonstrating that oil and grease discharge concentrations to the city's wastewater collection and transmission system will not exceed the limitation established in chapter 86, article III of the City of St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 86-150. - Permitting and inspection program. 
(a)  Permitting requirements. All FSE and automotive related enterprises shall be required to apply for and obtain a "commercial wastewater discharge permit" (CWDP) from the city. The control authority shall approve, deny, or approve with special conditions all applications for CWDPs in accordance with the policies and regulations established in this article. The CWDP shall be in addition to any other permits, registrations, or local business taxes which may be required by federal, state or local law. It shall be a violation of this article for any FSE or automotive related enterprise identified by the control authority to discharge wastewater containing fats, oils and grease to the City of St. Pete Beach wastewater collection and transmission system without a current CWDP. 
(b)  Application form. The control authority shall provide an application form for a CWDP. The appropriate form shall be sent to all FSE and automotive related enterprise owners identified by the control authority. All establishments required under the terms of this program to obtain a CWDP shall submit a completed application form for a CWDP to the control authority at the address shown on the form within 30 calendar days of receipt of the form. 
(c)  Pre-permit inspection procedure. Once a completed application form has been received, the FSE or automotive related facility shall be inspected by the control authority prior to the issuance of the CWDP. During the pre-permit inspection, the information contained in the application form will be verified. The grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator will be inspected. If all information is verified and the grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator is in proper working condition, a CWDP will be issued. Additionally, for FSE's, a copy of the control authority's information document entitled "Best Management Practices for the Control of Fats, Oils, and Grease", hereby incorporated by reference, will be issued. If the grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator requires any maintenance or repairs, or incorrect information has been submitted in the application, the control authority shall provide a written notice to correct any deficiencies, including a required time schedule for repairs to be completed prior to a second pre-permit inspection. (Second pre-permit inspections shall be performed after sufficient time to make corrections is provided to allow for corrective action by the establishment to occur. If the facility is not in compliance at the second pre-permit inspection or any subsequent pre-permit inspection,, a charge as outlined in "appendix A" of the city's fee scheduled will be assessed. During the pre-permit inspection process program staff will record all pertinent information required to justify the recuperation of costs incurred by the city for re-inspections. 
(d)  Commercial wastewater discharge permit (CWDP). The following criteria shall apply to all CWDPs: 
(1)  Each CWDP shall be effective for a period not to exceed two years and shall have an effective and an expiration date; 
(2)  The CWDP must be displayed in a conspicuous place where it can be seen by the staff of the establishment; 
(3)  The CWDP shall be issued to a specific user for a specific operation. CWDP's may vary in content and requirements depending on the classification of the FSE or automotive related enterprise and the type(s) of oil and grease removal device(s) installed. A CWDP shall not be transferred or sold to a new owner under any circumstances. A new owner of a FSE or automotive related enterprise is required to apply for a new CWDP; 
(4)  The control authority shall provide the establishment with a CWDP renewal application 60 days prior to the existing permit expiration date; 
(5)  An application for renewal of the CWDP shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration date of the existing CWDP by each applicant wishing to continue to discharge into the city's WWCS. Failure to submit an application in a timely manner shall be in violation of this article; 
(6)  The terms and conditions of the CWDP are subject to modification by the control authority during the term of the permit, if conditions or requirements in this article are modified. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in the issued permit at least 60 days prior to the effective date of the change(s). Any changes or new conditions in the CWDP shall include a reasonable schedule for achieving compliance; and 
(7)  If the establishment changes or expands its scope of service, which will result in a discharge flow change, then a new permit application shall be filed. 
(e)  Right of entry. Each FSE and automotive related enterprise shall allow the control authority and other duly authorized employees or agents of the city, bearing proper credentials and identifications, access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, records examination, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The refusal of any FSE or automotive related enterprise to allow the control authority entry to or upon the facility's premises for purposes of system inspection, sampling effluents, or inspecting and copying records or performing such other duties as shall be required by this article shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(f)  Inspection. All FSE's and automotive related facility's shall be inspected as follows: 
(1)  Pre-permit inspection. Pre-permit inspections shall be conducted by the control authority as outlined in subsection (c) above. 
(2)  Routine inspections. The control authority shall inspect FSE's and automotive related facility's on both an unscheduled and unannounced basis or on a scheduled basis after a CWDP has been issued to verify continued compliance with the requirements of this article. The control authority shall also determine if the practices contained in the "Best Management Practices for the Control of Fats, Oils, and Grease", issued to food service establishments, have been implemented. Inspections may include all equipment, food processing and storage areas and may include a review of the processes that produce wastewater discharged from the facility through the grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator. The control authority shall also inspect the grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator and may check the level of the grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator contents and/or take samples as necessary. The control authority shall record all observations in a written report. Any deficiencies shall be noted, including but not limited to: 
a.  Failure to properly maintain the grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator in accordance with the provisions of the CWDP and this article; or 
b.  Failure to report changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; or 
c.  Failure to keep copies of pumping manifests or receipts; or 
d.  Failure to maintain logs, files, records, or access for inspection or monitoring activities; or 
e.  Failure to obtain or renew the CWDP in a timely manner; or 
f.  Inability of existing grease trap, grease interceptor, or oil/water separator to prevent the discharge of oil and grease into the city's collection and transmission system as evidence by the build-up of oil and grease downstream of the grease trap, grease interceptor, or oil/water separator or the unit is not properly sized; or 
g.  Any other inconsistency with this article that requires correction by the FSE or automotive related enterprise. 
If any deficiencies are recorded by the control authority during an inspection, the control authority shall provide the establishment a written notice to correct the deficiency within a specified time frame, and a tentative date for a first re-inspection. 
(3)  Re-inspections. The control authority shall re-inspect establishments which received deficiency notices after the original inspection. The control authority shall inspect any repairs or other deficiencies and shall provide written notice of compliance or non-compliance as the case may be. A first re-inspection shall be performed after a specified time frame has elapsed to allow for corrective action by the establishment to be completed. In the event of continuing non-compliance, successive re-inspections will be scheduled and shall be charged in accordance with the city's pre-established fee rates as identified in appendix A to the establishment for the second re-inspection, and all successive re-inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 86-151. - Grease waste hauler requirements. 
(a)  Pinellas County's "Grease Hauler Program". Any person, firm, or business desiring to collect, pump, or haul grease wastes from FSEs serviced by the City of St. Pete Beach WWCS shall hold and maintain an active and current Pinellas County "grease waste hauler permit". 
Note: The City of St. Pete Beach WWCS does not accept grease waste. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any identified grease waste hauler to clean or pump out grease interceptors within the city's sanitary sewer service area without a current Pinellas County "grease waste hauler permit" that is currently on file. 
(b)  Grease waste hauler requirements. Grease waste haulers collecting, pumping, or transporting grease interceptor waste from FSEs located within the city's sanitary sewer area shall adhere to the following: 
(1)  All grease interceptors shall be pumped completely empty. Excessive solids shall be scraped from the walls and baffles, and inlet, outlet, and baffle ports shall be cleared. The re-introduction of gray water shall be strictly prohibited. 
(2)  No grease or gray water will be accepted at the city-owned WWCS. The grease waste hauler shall contract with other privately or publicly-owned, permitted facilities to properly dispose of grease and food solids at their own cost. 
(3)  Compliance with all federal, state and local regulations regarding the pumping of grease interceptors and the transporting and disposal of their contents is required. 
(c)  Spill reporting. Any accident, spill, or other discharge of grease or gray water, which occurs within the city's sanitary sewer service area, shall be reported to the city by the grease waste hauler as soon as possible, but in no case, not longer than 24 hours after the incident. The grease waste hauler shall be solely responsible for clean-up procedures and costs and shall comply with all procedures contained in federal, state and local regulations. 
(d)  Record keeping. Grease waste haulers shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records related to grease interceptor maintenance and pumping and grease disposal from FSEs located within the City of St. Pete Beach wastewater collection and transmission service area. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period may be extended by request of the control authority at any time. Failure to provide information to the control authority within 14 calendar days of a written request shall be a violation of this article. The control authority may require additional record keeping and reporting, as necessary, to ensure compliance with the conditions of this article. 
(e)  Vehicle inspection. Grease waste haulers shall permit city staff, at any time while performing service to grease interceptors located within the city's sanitary sewer service area, to inspect the grease waste hauler's registered vehicles, cleaning procedures, and hauling records identifying final disposal destination. 
(f)  Disposal. Waste removed from each grease interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive and treat such waste. Neither grease nor solid materials removed from a grease interceptor shall be returned to any grease interceptor, privately-owned collection and transmission system, or to any portion of the city's wastewater collection and transmission system or wastewater treatment plant. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 86-152. - Charges. 
Charges and billing. The charges provided for in this article are utility charges as that term is used in section 86-10 of the Code of Ordinances and are separate and distinct from any and all other utility charges chargeable by the city. Such charges shall be due, payable, collectable, and enforceable as provided in section 86-10 the Code of Ordinances. Charges applicable to this article are as follows: 
All FSEs and AREs will be billed per appendix "A". 
(Ord. No. 2017-23, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 86-153. - Enforcement, fines, remedies. 
(a)  Code enforcement actions. 
(1)  Violations of this article shall be enforced as code violations under article IX, chapter 22 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  The director, operations manager, and project manager of the public works department are designated code inspectors for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(b)  Duties of the control authority. 
(1)  Administrative rules. The director shall establish administrative rules for the enforcement of this article consistent with this article which shall be contained in the department's enforcement response plan for commercial user non-compliance (ERP). The ERP and any amendments to the ERP shall be approved by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Recommended compliance periods. The director or their designee shall establish recommended compliance periods by which various types and categories of violations must be corrected. 
a.  The recommended compliance periods shall be used by code inspectors to calculate the date by which a violation must be corrected. Code inspectors are authorized to deviate from the recommended compliance periods in cases of emergency, where unique conditions and circumstances warrant otherwise, when necessary to protect public health or safety, the environment or the WWCS, or when no recommended compliance period has been established for the violation. In such cases the code inspector shall consider the seriousness of the violation, the immanency of any threat to public health or safety, the environment or the WWCS, and the length of time it would reasonably require to correct the violation in determining the compliance period and establishing a date when the violation must be corrected. 
b.  The recommended compliance periods shall be used by any person prosecuting a violation of this article before the special magistrate in making a recommendation to the board regarding an appropriate period of time to allow a violator to remedy a violation. A person prosecuting a violation of this article before the code enforcement board is authorized to deviate from the recommended compliance periods in cases of emergency, where unique conditions and circumstances warrant otherwise, when necessary to protect public health or safety, the environment or the WWCS, or when no recommended compliance period has been established for the violation. In such cases the person prosecuting a violation of this article shall consider the seriousness of the violation, the immanency of any threat to public health or safety, the environment or the WWCS, and the length of time it would reasonably require to correct the violation in determining the compliance period to recommend to the board. 
(3)  Schedule of recommended fines. The director shall establish a schedule of recommended fines for violations under this article. The schedule of recommended fines shall be contained in the department's ERP, and shall be approved by resolution of the board of commissioners. In establishing a schedule of recommended fines, the director shall consider the seriousness of the violation, whether the violation poses a threat to public health or safety, the environment or the WWCS, the immanency of any such threat, and whether the violation is a repeat violation. The schedule of recommended fines shall be used by any person prosecuting a violation of this article in making a recommendation to the code enforcement board regarding the appropriate fine to assess against a violator. A person prosecuting a violation of this article is authorized to deviate from the schedule of recommended fines in cases of emergency, where unique conditions and circumstances warrant otherwise, when necessary to protect public health or safety, the environment or the WWCS, or when no recommended fine has been established for the violation. In such cases the person prosecuting a violation of this article shall consider the factors set forth in this section in determining the fine to recommend. 
(c)  Violations. A notice of violation (NOV) may be issued to an establishment for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to properly maintain the grease interceptor, grease trap, or oil/water separator in accordance with the provisions of the CWPD and this article; or 
(2)  Failure to report significant changes in operation, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; or 
(3)  Failure to maintain a file of records on-site at all times; or 
(4)  Failure to maintain a record of pumping activities; or 
(5)  Failure to provide logs, files, records, or access for inspection or monitoring activities; or 
(6)  Failure to apply for or renew a CWDP as required by this article in a timely manner; or 
(7)  Any other failure to comply with the requirements of this article or conditions of a CWDP. 
(d)  Notice of violation. A notice of violation under this article shall: 
(1)  State the date the violation was discovered; 
(2)  State the address where the violation occurred; 
(3)  State a clear description of the violation; 
(4)  State the specific sections of this article which are being violated; 
(5)  Describe in clear terms of the actions necessary to correct or contest the violation; 
(6)  State the date by which the violation must be corrected; 
(7)  State the name and address of the person issuing the notice; and 
(8)  Advise the violator of potential fines and penalties which can be imposed if the violation is not corrected and enforcement actions which the department can pursue if the violation is not corrected within the compliance period. 
A notice of violation may refer to more than one violation. 
(e)  Compliance schedule. 
(1)  If a violator requests additional time to correct the violation or otherwise achieve compliance after receipt of a NOV, he or she shall submit a compliance schedule to the code inspector on or before the date for compliance set forth in the NOV. The compliance schedule shall describe what actions the violator proposes to take to achieve compliance and prevent its reoccurrence and the date that these actions will be accomplished. The code inspector shall evaluate the request to determine if it is reasonable. In determining the reasonableness of the request, the code inspector shall consider the seriousness of the violation and, the good faith efforts of the violator to correct the violation. 
(2)  If the code inspector determines that the request is reasonable, he or she shall issue a written short-term compliance schedule to the violator describing the actions required to correct the violation and prevent its reoccurrence and the dates by which such actions shall be accomplished. The code inspector may modify the compliance actions or dates requested by the violator as deemed necessary when issuing a short-term compliance schedule. Failure of the violator to comply with the short-term compliance schedule shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(3)  If the code inspector determines that the request is unreasonable, he or she shall so notify the violator in writing and request a hearing before the special magistrate. 
(f)  Cease and desist orders. 
(1)  When the director or his designate finds that an FSE or an automotive related enterprise is violating the provisions of this article and that such violation poses an imminent and significant threat to public health or safety, the environment or the WWCS, he or she may issue a cease and desist order to the violator directing that the violator immediately cease and desist all such violations and take such other actions as are reasonably necessary to promptly alleviate the threat. 
(2)  The cease and desist order shall be in writing and describe the violation and the steps necessary to alleviate the violation. The cease and desist order shall be served on the violator by facsimile, hand delivery or certified mail. 
(3)  Failure of the violator to promptly comply with the cease and desist order shall be grounds for the director to immediately suspend the violator's utility service. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the director or his designate from taking any other action against the violator authorized by this article. 
(g)  Emergency suspension of discharge. 
(1)  The director or his designate may immediately suspend the right of an FSE or an automotive related enterprise to discharge into the WWCS when necessary to stop an immanent and significant threat to the public health or safety, the environment or the WWCS. 
(2)  An FSE or an automotive related enterprise notified of an emergency suspension by the director or his designate shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution to the WWCS. In the event the FSE or automotive related enterprise fails to immediately stop discharging into the WWCS, the director is authorized to take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the utility service, to prevent damage or harm to the public health or safety, the environment or the WWCS. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the director or his designate from taking any other action against the violator authorized by this article. 
(h)  Permit revocation. 
(1)  Any CWDP issued under the provisions of this article is subject to modification, suspension, or revocation in whole or in part during the effective period for cause shown including, but not limited to, any one of the following: 
a.  Falsification of any information submitted as part of the application for the CWDP; or 
b.  Failure to comply with any requirement or regulation concerning discharges to the city's WWCS as provided in chapter 86 of [the] city Code, or any amendments thereto; or 
c.  Failure to comply with any requirement or regulation contained in this article; or 
d.  Failure to pay charges required by this article, fines, or any assessed surcharges in a timely manner; or 
e.  When necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare and the integrity of the environment. 
(2)  In the event the control authority determines it is necessary to modify, suspend or revoke in whole or in part a CWDP, the control authority shall provide notice and an explanation of its intended action to CWDP holder by personal service or registered mail. Such notice shall advise the CWDP holder that he or she has 14 days from the date of the notice to file a written appeal of the decision of the control authority to the city manager. The written appeal shall set forth the reason or reasons the CWDP holder contends that the control authority's decision is unwarranted or unjustified. As soon as practicable, the city manager shall schedule a formal hearing with the CWDP holder to provide the CWDP holder an opportunity to be heard on the decision of the control authority. Thereafter, the city manager shall issue a written decision which may affirm, deny or modify the decision of the control authority. 
(3)  A CWDP holder who's CWDP has been revoked or suspended shall not be allowed to discharge wastewater from a regulated process until a new CWDP has been issued. The new CWDP may subject the CWDP holder to additional requirements and inspections as determined by the control authority. 
(i)  Recovery of damages, costs and expenses. An FSE, automotive related facility, person or entity shall be liable to the city for any damages, costs or expenses sustained or incurred by the city as the result of a violation of this article. The director shall first seek reimbursement of such damages, costs and expenses from the FSE, automotive related facility, person or entity causing such damages, costs or expenses. If reimbursement is not received within a reasonable time, the director shall request that the city attorney take such measures as deemed appropriate, including the filing of a civil suit, to recover such damages, costs or expenses. 
(j)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The city may take any, all, or any combination of lawfully permitted actions against a noncompliant establishment, including termination of services. Additionally, the city is authorized to file a civil action, including an action for injunctive relief, in circuit court against a noncompliant establishment. 
(k)  Liability for regulatory fines imposed against the city. If noncompliance by an establishment causes the city's WWCS to exceed the standards of its domestic wastewater operating permit or otherwise causes the city to be liable for fines or penalties imposed by a state or federal regulatory agency, the establishment shall be liable to the city for such costs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Secs. 86-154—86-175. - Reserved.  
Chapter 90 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; distribution of handbills restricted, § 46-1; noise regulations, § 46-131 et seq.; occupational license tax, § 78-91 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; water taxis, § 94-131 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driver means any person who physically operates or drives any public conveyance over, upon or along the streets, avenues or highways of the city. A driver may or may not be an operator. 
Operator means any person owning, leasing or controlling any public conveyance. An operator may or may not be a driver. 
Public conveyance means any motor or other vehicle, by whatever name called, including but not limited to a taxicab or vehicle for hire, used or operated for the purpose of general transportation of passengers on occasional trips, whether or not on a regular schedule or between fixed termini or over regular routes, and for fee, hire or compensation, or in connection with a business operation, whether or not such transportation is the principle source of business revenue and whether or not fares are charged to the passengers, and shall include transportation for tips or for no compensation from the passengers upon or along the city streets, avenues or highways from any point within the city, excepting those vehicles as follows: 
(1)  Motor vehicles used exclusively in transporting children to and from schools. 
(2)  Hearses and ambulances when operated by licensed embalmers, morticians, or ambulance service companies or their agents or employees in this state. 
(3)  Motor vehicles operated by a governmental agency. 
(4)  Public conveyances whose primary business (over 50 percent of trips within each calendar year) is interstate transportation. The owner or operator of such vehicle, upon 30 days' request from the licensing official, shall produce for inspection by the city adequate records to show that within the preceding calendar year such vehicle qualified as an exempt vehicle under this subsection. The existence and production of such records shall be a requirement of the exemption. 
(5)  Regularly established bus lines. 
Taxicab means every motor vehicle of nine-passenger capacity or less, including the driver, engaged in the general transportation of persons for specified compensation on occasional trips, not on a regular schedule or between fixed termini or over regular routes. 
Vehicle for hire means any vehicle other than a taxicab engaged in transportation of persons or property for specified compensation over the public highways that holds his service out to the public and provides transportation over regular or irregular routes. 
(Code 1960, § 14-1; P.G. Ord. No. 59, § 1; Code 1983, § 23-1; Ord. No. 85-7, § 1, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-2. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator to operate or permit to be operated upon the public, streets of the city any public conveyance until such operator shall first have complied with this chapter. 
(Code 1960, § 14-2; P.G. Ord. No. 59, § 7; Code 1983, § 23-2; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-3. - Rates generally. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator or driver of any vehicle subject to this chapter to charge more or less than the fares shown and disclosed by the tariff or schedule of rates posted in such motor vehicle and by the schedule or tariff of rates on file with the city or to alter or amend the rate schedule posted in such public conveyance until such operator or driver shall first have filed with the city his amended or changed schedule of rates. 
(Code 1960, § 14-9; P.G. Ord. No. 59, §§ 10, 11; Code 1983, § 23-3; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Secs. 90-4—90-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-31. - Rate schedule posted in vehicle. 
Every operator shall have posted inside of his public conveyance in a conspicuous place the detailed rate or tariff charged or to be charged for transportation within the city, if such charges are applicable. This schedule of rates or tariff shall be printed in a size easily readable by persons sitting in the rear seat of the public conveyance and shall conform to and be an exact duplicate of the schedule of tariff or rates filed as provided in subsection 90-67(8). 
(Code 1960, § 14-8; P.G. Ord. No. 59, §§ 9, 12; Code 1983, § 23-4; Ord. No. 85-7, § 2, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-32. - Minimum standards. 
In addition to the standards and requirements otherwise applicable through this chapter, all taxicabs, vehicles for hire, and all other public conveyances and owners, operators and drivers thereof shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  All required licenses shall be prominently displayed. 
(2)  Taximeters, approved by the state department of agriculture, bureau of weights and measures, shall be installed and illuminated so as to be easily seen by a passenger sitting in any part of a taxicab. 
(3)  Public conveyances must have an identification device(s) indicating that the vehicle is a public conveyance. 
(4)  All public conveyances shall be maintained in a safe condition and in a proper state of repair, including proper operation of all mechanical and electrical systems, signaling devices and other safety equipment. The city reserves the right to perform or require inspection of any licensed vehicles as may be reasonably necessary. 
(5)  All operators shall comply at all times with the liability insurance requirements set forth in section 90-69. 
(Code 1983, § 23-7; Ord. No. 85-7, § 4, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-33. - Issuance of identification sticker. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person dispatched from a location within the city or any person accepting fares from a location within the city to drive any public conveyance upon the city streets, avenues, or highways without a valid approved identification sticker securely affixed to the rear of the vehicle, to be issued or approved by the licensing official or his authorized representative upon payment of the occupational license tax, if applicable, and after all other requirements of this chapter are met. For the purposes of this section, any similar form of identification as a licensed public conveyance issued by the City of St. Petersburg or the Hillsborough County Public Transportation Commission shall be deemed evidence of licensing when properly displayed. 
(Code 1983, § 23-8; Ord. No. 85-7, § 4, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), adopted June 22, 2010, changed the title of section 90-33 from "Issuance of emblem" to "Issuance of identification sticker."  
Sec. 90-34. - Required lettering on public conveyances. 
Every operator of a public conveyance shall have printed on each side of such vehicle so that such may at all times remain legible and be visible from a distance of not less than 50 feet, the name and address of the operator of such vehicle and the number assigned to the vehicle by the operator, if applicable, in letters not less than three inches high or as part of a logo approved by the licensing official. Such letters shall be in a color contrasting to that of the motor vehicle as required by section 26-2. In addition to the name and address of the operator of such vehicle, the term "taxi," "taxicab," or such other terminology which positively identifies the vehicle as a public conveyance in letters not less than three inches in height, shall also be so displayed on all public conveyances operating in the city. 
(Code 1960, § 14-10; P.G. Ord. No. 59, § 13; Code 1983, § 23-4; Ord. No. 85-7, § 3, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), adopted June 22, 2010, changed the title of section 90-34 from "Required lettering on taxicabs" to "Required lettering on public conveyances."  
Sec. 90-35. - Taxicab meters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any taxicab dispatched from within the city or to pick up passengers for any fee or compensation at a location within the city, unless the taxicab is equipped with a taximeter of such a type and design as will properly and accurately compute and display on its face the charge for the distance traveled and the waiting time. The operation of any taxicab with a taximeter which is defective or which does not properly and accurately compute and display on its face the charge for distance traveled or the charge for waiting time shall constitute a violation of this article. The taximeter shall be inspected at intervals as required by the state bureau of weights and measures and at such other times as may be deemed necessary by the licensing official. All taximeters shall be placed in such a position in the taxicab that the face thereof and the fare numerals may be easily seen and read by a passenger sitting in any part of the taxicab. No taximeter shall be used between sunset and sunrise unless the face shall be illuminated. 
(b)  When a passenger engages and enters a taxicab, the flag, signal or other device affixed to the taximeter shall be so moved to indicate that the taxicab is employed. 
(Code 1983, § 23-6; Ord. No. 85-7, § 4, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Secs. 90-36—90-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 90-66. - Required; fees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any public conveyance upon the streets, avenues, or highways of the city without first obtaining a business permit for the operation of such public conveyance. Any person holding a valid business permit from a county or municipality other than this city and dispatched from a location outside the city limits may operate within the city, but this shall not relieve the owner or operator of the conveyance from payment of a license registration fee to this city pursuant to section 26-1. Any operator who maintains a call or taxi stand within the city shall be required to obtain a full city business permit for each such location and pay the fee as established by resolution of the city commission and included in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 23-24; Ord. No. 85-7, § 7, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy regulatory fees, F.S. § 166.221.  
Sec. 90-67. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a public conveyance in the city shall make application for a permit to the licensing official upon application blanks to be furnished by the city, which application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number and other relevant contact information, including emergency contact information, for the person(s) or company proposing to operate the public conveyance, including a number for inquiries regarding lost passenger items. 
(2)  A list and description of all vehicles to be utilized in association with the proposed public conveyance, including the state license number and serial number of the vehicle. 
(3)  An attached notarized statement from the applicant's mechanic or from a licensed automotive garage or a mechanic accepted by the city, certifying that all vehicles meet the minimum standards contained within this chapter. 
(4)  Any other information reasonably required by the licensing official. 
(5)  Whether such vehicle(s) is to be operated as a taxi, vehicle for hire or other public conveyance. 
(b)  The applicant shall agree that he will comply with all of the laws of the city and that, for a violation of this chapter or of any of the ordinances of the city, the licensing official shall be at liberty to cancel and withdraw such permit and terminate the right of such person to use the streets, avenues or alleys of the city for such transportation business. Any changes to required information submitted for permitting must be provided to the licensing official within seven days of the effective date of change. The permit shall be displayed in the vehicle at all times. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, any similar form of identification as a licensed public conveyance operator issued by the City of St. Petersburg or the Hillsborough County Public Transportation Commission shall be deemed evidence of licensing when properly displayed and may substitute for the permit required herein. 
(Code 1960, § 14-3; P.G. Ord. No. 59, § 2; Code 1983, § 23-21; Ord. No. 85-7, § 5, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-68. - Fees. 
Permit fees for automobiles and buses for hire shall be established by resolution of the city commission and are listed in appendix A to this Code. Fees shall be charged for the following: 
(1)  Each public conveyance operating within the city. 
(2)  Each driver of a public conveyance. 
(Code 1983, § 11-74(11); Ord. No. 89-15, § 1, 8-1-89; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-69. - Bond or insurance required. 
(a)  Before a business permit shall be issued by the city to any person for the use of the streets, avenues or highways of the city for the purpose of the operation of a public conveyance, the operator of such public conveyance shall file with the city, for each motor vehicle operated, a corporate surety bond or certificate of insurance in a solvent company authorized to do business in the state which clearly states or identifies that such insurance is provided with the express intent of insuring the operations of public conveyances as defined by this chapter. Such bond or insurance shall be in the form approved by the city attorney and shall be in an amount of not less than $125,000.00 for the recovery for personal injuries by one person and not less than $250,000.00 for all persons receiving personal injuries because of one act of negligence and, in addition, the bond shall provide for the payment of not less than $50,000.00 for injury to property of any person. Such bond or certificate of insurance shall secure the person against loss sustained because of the death of or injury to persons, and the loss or damage to property resulting from the negligence of such person, his agents, servants or employees. Such bond or certificate of insurance may provide for the cancellation thereof by not less than ten days' notice to the licensing official of such intention. 
(b)  Upon the cancellation or lapse of any such bond or certificate of insurance, the business permit issued to such person shall be immediately revoked unless such person, before the expiration day of the policy of insurance or bond, shall have obtained another bond or policy of insurance containing all the requirements of the original bond or policy of insurance. 
(Code 1960, §§ 14-4(a), 14-5; P.G. Ord. No. 59, §§ 3, 4; Code 1983, § 23-22; Ord. No. 85-7, § 6, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10) 
State Law reference— Insurance requirements, F.S. §§ 324.031, 324.032.  
Sec. 90-70. - Revocation. 
The city commission shall have full power and authority to revoke the business permit for the operation of any public conveyance if it shall be shown that the operator of such public conveyance has been guilty of or permitted the violation of any section of this Code or any ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1960, § 14-7; P.G. Ord. No. 59, § 8; Code 1983, § 23-23; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Secs. 90-71—90-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DRIVERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-101. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a public conveyance to fail to perform any act required by this chapter to be performed or to violate any of the terms, provisions or directions of this chapter. 
(Code 1960, § 14-17(a), (b); P.G. Ord. No. 59, § 22; Code 1983, § 23-36; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-102. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), adopted June 22, 2010, repealed the former section 90-102 in its entirety, which pertained to records of trips, and derived from the Code of 1960, § 14-17(c); P.G. Ord. No. 59, § 22, and the Code of 1983, § 23-37.  
Sec. 90-103. - Accident reports. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a public conveyance to fail to report promptly all accidents to the police department. 
(Code 1960, § 14-17(d); P.G. Ord. No. 59, § 22; Code 1983, § 23-38; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-104. - Reports of change of residence. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a public conveyance to fail to report to the licensing official any change of his residence within five days. 
(Code 1960, § 14-17(e); P.G. Ord. No. 59, § 22; Code 1983, § 23-39; Ord. No. 85-7, § 8, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-105. - Fare receipts. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a public conveyance to fail to give a receipt for a fare when requested by a passenger. 
(Code 1960, § 14-17(g); P.G. Ord. No. 59, § 22; Code 1983, § 23-40; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-106. - Alcoholic beverages; controlled substances. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a public conveyance or vehicle for hire to have in his possession in any public conveyance an alcoholic beverage(s) or at any time unlawfully possess in any public conveyance he is driving any controlled substance made unlawful by the laws of the state. It shall be unlawful for any driver to knowingly permit a person to have an opened container of alcoholic beverages in the public conveyance. 
(Code 1960, § 14-18; P.G. Ord. No. 59, § 23; Code 1983, § 23-41; Ord. No. 85-7, § 9, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Secs. 90-107—90-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 90-136. - Required; driving with suspended permit prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any public conveyance upon the city streets, avenues or highways without a business permit to drive a public conveyance. Any person holding a valid permit or license meeting the approval of the licensing official from a county or municipality other than this city and dispatched from a location other than within this city may operate within this city, but this shall only apply to those persons driving public conveyances which are registered with the city pursuant to section 26-1 or those public conveyances which have obtained a full city business permit as required by this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any driver to operate any public conveyance when his driver's permit or driver's license is suspended. 
(Code 1960, §§ 14-11, 14-17(f); P.G. Ord. No. 59, §§ 15, 22; Code 1983, § 23-51; Ord. No. 85-7, § 10, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-137. - Application. 
(a)  Information. A person desiring the permit required by this division shall file an application with the city containing the following information: 
(1)  Name. 
(2)  Address, previous for the past five years and present. 
(3)  Telephone number. 
(4)  Date of birth. 
(5)  Employer. 
(6)  Driver's license number, and date of issuance and expiration. 
(7)  A copy of a Florida Department of Law Enforcement Criminal History Report for the named applicant issued within 15 days prior to the date of application. 
(b)  Photographs. Each applicant shall file with his application form three photographs of himself in a two-inch by two-inch format. The photographs shall be a good likeness of the applicant. The photographs shall have been taken within 30 days preceding the date of the application. 
(Code 1960, § 14-13(A), (B)(4) (5); P.G. Ord. No. 59, § 16; P.G. Ord. No. 247, § 1; Code 1983, § 23-52; Ord. No. 85-7, § 11, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-138. - Investigation of applicant; conditions for issuance; fee; badge. 
(a)  All applicants submitting an application pursuant to this division may be investigated by the licensing official. 
(b)  The application may be rejected if: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted of any offense involving commission of a felony within the past five years or a misdemeanor within the last three years. 
(2)  The applicant has made any false or misleading statements in his application. 
(3)  The applicant displays or indicates any other cause or reason for which the applicant could be judged by the licensing official to be unfit. 
(c)  For the purpose of the investigation, the licensing official may require the applicant to submit to an examination given either by the city or some person designated by the licensing official. The applicant's physical condition may be examined. The applicant's traffic regulation knowledge may be examined. The applicant's skill and ability to drive or handle a vehicle may be examined. Any other examination which may be deemed necessary to judge the capabilities of the applicant may be administered. 
(d)  The following conditions must be met by the person applying for a public conveyance operator's permit before the permit will be issued: 
(1)  Demonstration of the ability to speak, read and write the English language. 
(2)  All operators must be at least 18 years of age. 
(3)  The applicant has been issued a valid state driver's license with the proper driver's classification required by the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles. 
(e)  Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the requirements contained in this section, the licensing official shall issue to the applicant a business permit to drive a public conveyance. Such permit shall be issued upon the payment by the applicant to the city of a fee in amount established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to this Code. The permit shall be displayed at all times within the vehicle. 
(f)  Upon the issuance of a permit required by this division, the driver shall obtain from the licensing official an identification badge containing a recent photograph of the driver on the face. All identification badges shall be placed in such a position in the taxicab or vehicle for hire that the face thereof may be easily seen and read by a passenger sitting in any part of the taxicab or vehicle for hire. For the purposes of this section, any similar form of identification as a licensed public conveyance driver issued by the City of St. Petersburg or the Hillsborough County Public Transportation Commission shall be deemed evidence of licensing when properly displayed and may substitute for the permit required herein. 
(Code 1960, §§ 14-13(A)(1), (2)(b), (B), (C), 14-14; Code 1983, § 23-53; Ord. No. 85-7, § 12, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 92-17, § 1, 8-4-92; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-139. - Expiration date; renewal. 
A permit issued pursuant to this division shall expire on September 30 following its issuance, regardless of the date of the issuance. Permits are renewable from year to year with the approval of the licensing official, provided that application is made by the permit holder within a period of 60 days prior to the date of the expiration of the permit. 
(Code 1960, § 14-14; P.G. Ord. No. 59, §§ 16, 19, 20; P.G. Ord. No. 247, § 1; Code 1983, § 23-54; Ord. No. 85-7, § 13, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Sec. 90-140. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any permit to drive a public conveyance may be revoked by the city commission, following a quasi-judicial hearing, upon satisfactory proof that the driver has been guilty of any violation of any section of this Code regulating traffic or has been guilty of conduct that in the judgment of the city commission disqualifies such driver as a driver of a public conveyance. 
(b)  Upon conviction of a driver of a public conveyance for the violation of this chapter or any traffic offense, the judge trying the case may, in addition to the other penalties invoked by him, revoke or suspend the permit of such driver or shall issue an order prohibiting such driver to drive within the city. Such revocation or suspension shall be reported by the judge to the city commission. 
(c)  Whenever a permit shall be revoked or a prohibition order entered or where such permit shall be suspended, the city commission shall notify the chief of police, and it shall thereafter be unlawful for the person affected to operate a taxi or vehicle for hire in the city. 
(Code 1960, §§ 14-16, 14-17(f); P.G. Ord. No. 59, §§ 21, 22; Code 1983, § 23-55; Ord. No. 10-09, § 1(Att. A), 6-22-10)  
Chapter 94 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Consumption or possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages in public places prohibited, § 6-5; noise regulations, § 46-131 et seq.; discharge of spear guns regulated, § 54-4; coastal construction and excavation, § 98-61 et seq.; tiki hut construction, § 98-67; seawalls, bulkheads, retaining walls and similar structures, § 98-96 et seq.; flood control, ch. 106; natural resources, ch. 114. 
State Law reference— Beaches and shorelines, F.S. ch. 161; Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; Florida Boat Registration and Safety Law, F.S. ch. 327; restrictions on local regulation of watercraft, F.S. § 327.60. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 94-1. - Swimming, skin diving and wading prohibited in certain waters. 
No person shall swim, skin dive or wade in any of the following places: 
(1)  The waters of Blind Pass within the city limits lying south of an extension of the centerline of 75th Avenue. 
(2)  The waters of the Gulf of Mexico and Boca Ciega Bay lying within the city limits lying offshore from the following described area: from a point 150 feet north of the south boundary of First Avenue on the Gulf side around the southerly tip of the Pass-a-Grille area to a point on the seawall facing Boca Ciega Bay 150 feet north of the southern boundary of First Avenue. 
(Code 1960, § 5-8; Ord. No. 73, §§ 1, 2; Code 1983, § 5-5) 
State Law reference— Skiing under influence of liquor or drugs, F.S. § 327.38.  
Sec. 94-2. - Diving or jumping from bridges. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dive or jump from any public bridge into the waters below. 
(Code 1960, § 5-9; Ord. No. 124; Code 1983, § 5-6) 
State Law reference— Diving from certain bridges prohibited, F.S. § 316.130(17).  
Sec. 94-3. - Fishing prohibited in specified areas. 
(a)  Fishing shall be prohibited in the following areas: 
(1)  The Vina Del Mar Bridge and all adjacent public property. 
(2)  The public property east of the Boca Ciega Isle Bridge, provided this shall not prohibit fishing from the bridge. 
(b)  Violations of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1983, § 12-15; Ord. No. 85-63, §§ 1, 2, 1-21-86) 
State Law reference— Fishing regulated by state, F.S. §§ 370.102, 370.1103; fishing from certain bridges prohibited, F.S. § 316.1305.  
Secs. 94-4—94-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATERCRAFT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation committee, § 22-101 et seq.; special events permit requirements, § 26-31 et seq.; emergency procedures during hurricanes, § 34-1. 
State Law reference— Watercraft activities regulation, F.S. ch. 327. 
 
Sec. 94-31. - Use for human habitation; sanitation. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
To anchor or anchored means the use of a heavy object attached to a vessel by a cable, chain or line which is placed overboard to keep the vessel from drifting, either by its weight or by gripping the bottom. For purposes of this section, a vessel attached or tied to a mooring buoy shall be construed as anchored. 
Watercraft means any ship, vessel, boat, yacht, raft, barge, houseboat or other floating structure. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to vessels anchored in the intracoastal waterway or to vessels anchored due to emergency conditions or situations. 
(c)  Any person, including but not by way of limitation marina operators, yacht basins or clubs or any upland owner of a dock, seawall, wharf or boat slip and their agents, who permits any person to reside upon or use any watercraft for human habitation in excess of 72 hours shall provide to such watercraft, at its mooring, sewer facilities, water hookup and a garbage facility for removal of all garbage, sewage and wastewater generated by the residents on the watercraft. To remove sewage, a sewage holding tank or pumpout facility shall be provided for ultimate disposal of the sewage into the city sewer system. However, no sewer facilities are required to be furnished to any watercraft equipped with a U.S. Coast Guard certified type III marine sanitation device, as specified in the applicable coast guard regulations, 33 CFR 159, as amended. 
(d)  No person shall anchor any watercraft which is or may be used as a live-aboard facility or for habitation within the corporate limits longer than 24 hours unless that watercraft is equipped with a U.S. Coast Guard certified type III marine sanitation device as specified in the applicable coast guard regulations, 33 CFR 159, as amended. It is understood that the purpose of this section is to prohibit the overboard discharge into any waters within the corporate limits of any pollutant, contaminant, sewage, or waste derived from sewage. 
(e)  No person shall anchor a watercraft or allow any watercraft to be anchored within the city limits for a term longer than 24 consecutive hours, without first obtaining a permit from the city manager authorizing the watercraft to be anchored within the city limits in excess of that 24-hour period. The requirement for a permit shall not apply to watercraft moored at the dock or seawall of the residence of the person or any guest of the property owner. There is no charge for the permit. The permit shall be valid solely for 72 hours, and only one permit may be obtained per watercraft in any month. The city manager may set such reasonable rules and regulations as he deems appropriate to ensure the public health, welfare and safety. 
(f)  No watercraft shall anchor overnight within 200 feet of a seawall or the shore. 
(Code 1960, § 5-10; Ord. No. 258, §§ 1, 2; Code 1983, § 5-7; Ord. No. 87-47, § 1, 1-5-88) 
State Law reference— Marine sanitation requirements, F.S. § 327.53; live-aboard vessels, F.S. § 327.60(2).  
Sec. 94-32. - Storage of watercraft. 
Storage of watercraft shall only be allowed within the following restrictions: 
(1)  No person shall store or keep a boat on the public beach between 22nd Avenue and the Pass-a-Grille jetty, also known as Pass-a-Grille Beach, including any public beach south thereof, or the public beach between the Blind Pass jetty and the southern boundary of Upham Beach between sunset and sunrise as defined in section 94-66. 
(2)  No person shall store a watercraft within a dune. Any watercraft stored or kept within a dune for more than 24 hours may be impounded by the city. The city shall post notice of the penalty for violation of this section. 
(3)  No watercraft or equipment shall be stored within 25 feet landward of the visible water line between the hours of sunset and sunrise as defined in section 94-66. 
(Code 1983, § 5-26(a); Ord. No. 95-1, § 6, 1-17-95)  
Sec. 94-33. - Restrictions on use of public property. 
(a)  No person shall secure any boat or vessel of any kind to any public dock or boat launching ramp in such a manner as to interfere with the landing or docking of other boats or vessels, except when such boat or vessel is actually engaged in the loading or discharging of persons or freight. No person shall secure, tie, dock or anchor a boat or vessel of any kind in such a manner as to interfere with the use of any public dock or launching ramp. 
(b)  No person shall secure, tie, dock, or anchor any boat or vessel of any kind to any public property, including any beach, tree, pole, bulk-head or seawall adjacent to any public right of way or easement, within the city, except public docks or boat launching ramps under those conditions provided in subsections (a) or (f) of upon the issuance of a permit by the city manager, authorizing specific use of the public property for docking or unloading. 
(c)  No person shall use public boat launching ramp located in the 3400 block of Maritana Drive and the public boat launching ramp at Egan Park, for the launching or recovery of any vessel, except in a case of emergency, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. every day; provided, however, on federal holidays it shall not be a violation of this subsection to use said boat ramps between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m. Every public boat launching ramp shall be posted with these hours of use. 
(d)  The limitations in subsection (a) of this section on use of public docks and boat launching ramps shall not be applicable where emergency conditions exist with respect to the boat or vessel using the facility. 
(e)  Any boat or vessel of any kind found in violation of this section may be impounded by the city. The city is directed to clearly publish the provisions contained in subsections (a), (b), (d) and (e) of this section on each public dock or public launching ramp. Further, the city shall clearly notify the public that violations of the posted subsections (a), (b) and (d) of this section will result in the impounding of the boat or vessel. 
(f)  7th Avenue Fishing Pier: no person shall secure, tie, dock, moor or anchor any boat or vessel of any kind to the public property known as the 7th Avenue Fishing Pier, located at 7th Avenue and Pass-A-Grille Way. The use of this pier to load or discharge persons or freight is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 83-35, § 1; Ord. No. 83-36, §§ 1—4; Code 1983, § 5-10; Ord. No. 87-4, § 1, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 93-5, § 1, 3-16-93; Ord. No. 99-32, § 1, 5-18-99; Ord. No. 03-04, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 6-22-04)  
Sec. 94-34. - Careless operation of watercraft. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "reasonably prudent manner" means the use of that degree of care and caution that would be used or exercised by a reasonably prudent person in compliance with the law and under the circumstances then and there existing, giving due consideration to all of the hazardous facts and circumstances which are known to or the existence of which might be reasonably suspected by the operator at the time and place, including but not limited to: 
(1)  The conditions of weather, visibility, presence of natural or manmade obstructions. 
(2)  The presence of bathers, swimmers or the presence of other watercraft. 
(3)  The presence of property likely to be damaged or injured directly or indirectly by the operation of such watercraft. 
(4)  So as not to endanger life, limb or property of any person within the city limits. 
(b)  No person shall fail to operate a watercraft of any type or size within the corporate limits in a reasonably prudent manner. 
(Code 1960, §§ 5-4, 5-5; P.G. Ord. No. 81, §§ 1, 2; Code 1983, § 5-8) 
State Law reference— Reckless operation of watercraft, F.S. § 327.33  
Sec. 94-35. - Speed of watercraft; wakes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a watercraft within the city at a speed greater than idle speed/no wake when such watercraft is within 400 feet of the north or south side of the St. Pete Beach Causeway Bridge, within 800 feet to the north or 800 feet to the south of the Vina Del Mar Bridge, within 200 feet south or 600 feet north of the Blind Pass Bridge, or within 200 feet of Mangrove Point in McPherson Bayou. Idle speed/no wake means the minimum speed required to maintain steerageway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a watercraft within the city at a speed greater than slow speed/minimum wake when such watercraft is within 200 feet of any seawall, dock, pier or boat slip, or anywhere within the Blind Pass Channel at any time on Saturday, Sunday or any legal holiday as defined by Florida Statute 110.117 and not regulated by subsection (a) above. A vessel operating on a plane or in the process of coming off plane and settling into the water is not operating at slow speed/minimum wake. 
(c)  The operator of a boat within the city limits shall be responsible for damage which may occur from the wake thrown from his vessel, whether or not the operator of the boat was operating within the limits set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Code 1960, § 5-6; P.G. Ord. No. 81, § 3; Code 1983, § 5-9; Ord. No. 86-47, § 1, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 94-43, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 95-18, § 1, 5-16-95; Ord. No. 98-5, § 1, 7-21-98) 
State Law reference— Operation of personal watercraft, F.S. § 327.39.  
Sec. 94-36. - Zones of restricted operation. 
(a)  There are designated zones of restricted watercraft operation as shown on the map which is attached to Ordinance Number 2011-14 designated as exhibit A, which map is adopted by reference as if set out at length in this section and is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b)  Zone 1, as designated on such map, is a protected area and reserved for swimmers only. No watercraft shall enter or operate within zone 1, provided this restriction shall not apply to any watercraft entering zone 1 because of an emergency. The city commission may grant an exception to this subsection upon written request. In granting an exception, the city commission shall be authorized to impose on the requester whatever conditions it deems are appropriate and reasonable and may adopt those rules and regulations it deems appropriate to protect the safety, health and welfare of the public. 
(c)  Zone 2 is intended primarily for swimming. Motorized and nonmotorized watercraft are prohibited from operating parallel to the beach within this zone. The city shall maintain buoys to mark the outer limits of this zone. 
(1)  Motorized and nonmotorized commercial or recreational watercraft may enter this zone without violating this subsection only as follows: 
a.  Motorized commercial or recreational watercraft may not operate in excess of idle speed. 
b.  Nonmotorized commercial or recreational watercraft may not operate at a speed in excess of three miles per hour. 
c.  All motorized watercraft operating within this zone must be proceeding in a direct route to the beach for the sole purpose of discharging or picking up passengers. After discharging or picking up such passengers, the motorized vehicle must immediately, in a direct route, leave zone 2. 
d.  Nonmotorized commercial or recreational watercraft operating within zone 2 must be proceeding in a direct route to the beach for the purpose of discharging or picking up passengers or for the purpose of beaching the watercraft. If the nonmotorized watercraft has discharged or picked up passengers, it must leave the zone in a direct route. 
e.  Neither motorized or nonmotorized watercraft shall be anchored within this zone nor shall any motorized or nonmotorized watercraft have its anchor within any of the waters of zone 2. 
f.  Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit motorized boats operating under a city commission exception from beaching and setting an anchor for stability within this zone in accord with the rights granted by the city commission. 
(2)  All other watercraft operating as a commercial or recreational activity shall operate within this zone only within areas approved by the city. Every person engaged in the commercial or recreational renting or leasing of watercraft regulated by this section shall warn those using his/her watercraft of the regulation provided for in this section. 
(d)  The operation of any watercraft within the safety zones shown on such map which threatens the safety of the swimmers shall be unlawful. 
(e)  The mooring of watercraft to markers or buoys placed by the city shall be prohibited, except in an emergency. 
(f)  The police department shall be authorized to adopt reasonable regulations restricting the operation of watercraft within the designated safety zones and to promote the safety of those bathing in the Gulf waters, consistent with this section. 
(g)  The city commission may, from time to time, by majority vote, designate areas and times within zone 1 in which surfboarding shall be permitted. If the city commission makes such a designation, the city shall then post sufficient notice to all surfers and swimmers as to the location where surfboarding is permitted. 
(h)  The city commission may, from time to time, by majority vote, designate areas or corridors within zone 2 where public streets terminate at public access areas to the beaches for beach access and beaching by watercraft. If the city commission makes such a designation, the corridor or area shall be the same width as the adjacent public street end, shall be marked by buoys throughout zone 2, and sufficient notice posted to swimmers and the public as to the location. Within the designated corridor or area, watercraft may traverse zone 2, may enter and leave the water, and may be beached. If beached, the watercraft must be placed on the sandy area of the beach at least 40 feet from the water's edge. The city commission may, from time to time, by majority vote, also remove any designation of an area or corridor. 
(Ord. No. 82-25, §§ 2—7; Code 1983, § 5-11; Ord. No. 83-43, § 1, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 84-5, § 1, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 86-16, § 1, 6-3-86; Ord. No. 86-20, § 1, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 86-21, § 1, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 87-5, §§ 1, 2, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 87-18, § 1, 5-19-87; Ord. No. 87-28, § 1, 8-17-87; Ord. No. 11-14, 5-24-11) 
State Law reference— Mooring to buoys or markers, F.S. § 327.42; restricted areas, F.S. § 327.46.  
Secs. 94-37—94-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BEACHES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Dogs on beaches prohibited, § 14-35; parks and recreation committee, § 22-101 et seq.; special events permit requirements, § 26-31 et seq.; emergency procedures during hurricanes, § 34-1; distribution of handbills restricted, § 46-1; development, maintenance and preservation of dunes, § 114-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Beaches and shorelines, F.S. ch. 161. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 94-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Sunrise means the time when the upper limb of the sun as affected by refraction appears above the sensible horizon as a result of the diurnal rotation of the earth. 
Sunset means the time when the upper limb of the sun as affected by refraction disappears below the sensible horizon as a result of the diurnal rotation of the earth. 
(Code 1960, § 5-2; P.G. Ord. No. 67, § 3; Code 1983, § 5-3(c)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-67. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-14. 
(Code 1983, § 5-28; Ord. No. 95-1, § 8, 1-17-95)  
Sec. 94-68. - Chairs, tables, umbrellas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon the public beach any chair, bench, table or umbrella which is in a location or is of a size which would interfere with the use of the public beach by the general public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person placing or causing to be placed any chair, bench, table or umbrella equipment upon the public beach to allow such to remain upon such public beach between sunset and sunrise. 
(Code 1960, § 5-2; P.G. Ord. No. 67, § 3; Code 1983, § 5-3(a), (b))  
Sec. 94-69. - Picnics and food consumption. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person shall conduct or participate in a picnic on any of the city's beaches. Except as provided in section 6-5, no person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverages upon any of the city's beaches. 
(b)  Picnics and the consumption of food and nonalcoholic beverages shall be permitted on the city beaches of Pass-a-Grille and Upham Beach, provided that: 
(1)  Those persons having picnics or consuming food or nonalcoholic beverages within the area shall be responsible for cleaning up all of the food, papers, cartons, bottles and other refuse or debris which shall remain or be left from the consumption of such food or beverage. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to build any fire for any purpose, including the cooking of food, within the sand beaches of the city. 
(3)  Glass containers or bottles associated with the consumption of food or nonalcoholic beverages shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (b)(2) of this section, the city manager shall be entitled to authorize the building of a fire, with such requirements as the city manager deems appropriate. Any person receiving authorization to build a fire shall agree in writing to comply fully with all requirements imposed by the city manager. 
(d)  Anyone convicted of violating this section shall pay a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00. Signs shall be posted notifying the public of the penalty for violating this section. 
(Code 1960, §§ 5-3, 5-3.1; Ord. No. 48, § 2; Ord. No. 83-34, §§ 1, 4; Code 1983, § 5-4; Ord. No. 89-26, § 1, 11-7-89) 
State Law reference— Florida litter law, F.S. § 403.413.  
Sec. 94-70. - Sleeping during nighttime prohibited. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the city commission to preserve and protect the beauty of the city's beaches, parks and other public property for use by residents and tourists. In furtherance of such purpose, the city commission makes the following findings of fact: 
(1)  The city has a significant tourist population that utilizes its beaches, parks and other public property. 
(2)  Being a largely recreational and tourist community, the city's beaches, parks and other public property are a very valuable asset. 
(3)  Such beaches, parks and any other public properties are intended to be used solely for recreational purposes and not for sleeping during nighttime hours. 
(4)  Permitting persons to sleep on the beaches, in the parks and on any other public property during nighttime hours will have a negative effect on the appearance of such areas and upon the city's tourism industry. 
(5)  Persons sleeping on the beaches, in the parks or on any other public property are exposed to the risk of harm from others or the elements. 
(6)  Prohibiting persons from sleeping on the public beaches, in the parks and on other public property during the nighttime hours will promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  The beaches beginning at 30th Avenue and running north to the north boundary of block "M," Don Ce Sar Subdivision, and beginning at the south boundary line of block "N," Don Ce Sar Subdivision, and running north to 37th Avenue, are gulfward of residential property. Sleeping on the beach in these areas is contrary to the health and safety of the public. 
(b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep at the following places between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, referred to in this section as the nighttime hours: 
(1)  On any public beach or in any public park or any other public property within the corporate limits. 
(2)  Between the waters of the Gulf of Mexico on the west and the most landward line of the sand dune or permanent construction, whichever first occurs, in the following area: beginning at 30th Avenue and running north to the north boundary of block "M," Don Ce Sar Subdivision, and beginning at the south boundary line of block "N," Don Ce Sar Subdivision, and running north to 37th Avenue. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall, upon conviction, be penalized as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1983, § 5-12; Ord. No. 90-22, § 1, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 94-71. - Tiki huts. 
Tiki huts are prohibited on any beach unless a permit has been issued by the department of planning and development in compliance with the following: 
(1)  The tiki hut does not violate the terms of F.S. § 161.053. 
(2)  The person applying for the tiki hut permit has the written approval of the upland property owner. 
(3)  The applicant is licensed as a commercial watersport business as provided by the land development regulations is subpart B of this Code. 
(4)  The tiki hut is constructed as provided in section 98-67. 
(Code 1983, § 5-26(b); Ord. No. 95-1, § 6, 1-17-95) 
Cross reference— Tiki hut construction, § 98-67.  
Sec. 94-72. - Temporary structures. 
No temporary structure of any kind shall be erected on any beach unless otherwise authorized by this article or other section of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 5-26(c); Ord. No. 95-1, § 6, 1-17-95) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 98; supplemental district regulations, § 134-1076 et seq.  
Sec. 94-73. - Vehicle permits. 
(a)  Required. No person, municipality, county or other public agency shall drive any vehicle on, over or across any beach unless such motor vehicle has been issued a "vehicle on the beach" permit under this section, except in emergency situations as approved by the police department or fire department. 
(b)  Criteria for issuance. Permits for the operation of vehicles on the beach shall be issued for the following purposes: 
(1)  Public works and public safety; 
(2)  Permitted commercial activities; 
(3)  Special events; and 
(4)  Mechanical beach cleaning. 
(c)  Issuance; additional federal, state or county permits. Permits shall be issued by application to the department of planning and development based on the scope of activity. Where necessary, the applicant shall obtain whatever additional permits that may also be required by either federal, state or county law. Where federal, state or county approval is necessary, no permit issued by the department shall become effective until such approval has been granted. 
(d)  Bond; insurance. Based on the scope of activity, the department may require the posting of a bond or a liability insurance policy protecting against damage to property or persons. 
(e)  Compliance. In reviewing the application for a permit, the department shall be authorized to require the applicant to provide all information necessary to determine whether the vehicle will be operated to comply with the requirements of this article or to set reasonable conditions to ensure compliance. 
(f)  Safe operation. Operating vehicles permitted under this section shall be subject to all of the regulations set forth in this article and other ordinances governing the safe operation of vehicles. 
(Code 1983, § 5-27; Ord. No. 95-1, § 7, 1-17-95) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82.  
Sec. 94-74. - Customary use of beaches-intent. 
The intent of this section and of section 94-75 through 94-79 is to determine and confirm as a legislative fact that since time immemorial, the public has enjoyed access to the beaches of St. Pete Beach fronting the Gulf of Mexico and its related waters, and has made recreational use of the beaches; that such use has been ancient, reasonable, without interruption, and free from dispute; and that because of this customary access and use, the public has the right of access to the beach and a right to use the beach for recreation and other customary related purposes. The intent is to mandate that the city define, protect, and enforce the public's customary rights of beach access and use. It is not the intent of the city to affect the title of the owner of land adjacent to the beach, nor to impair the right of any such owner to contest the existence of the customary right of the public to access and use any particular area of privately-owned beach, nor to reduce or limit any rights of public access or use that may exist or arise other than as customary rights. It is therefore declared and affirmed to be the public policy of the city, that the public, individually and collectively, subject to the provisions of this Code, shall have the right to personal ingress and egress to and from the beach and the right to make recreational and other customary uses of the beach. The office of the city attorney shall be authorized to take all steps legally necessary to protect and defend the public right of access and use declared by this Code. Further, it is the intention that customary use shall be an affirmative defense in any proceeding challenging this division. 
(Ord. No. 18-07, § 1, 6-26-18)  
Sec. 94-75. - Preservation of public access. 
The city will not vacate any approach to the beach or allow the same to be used for private purposes not otherwise preserved to a property owner as a matter of law. 
(Ord. No. 18-07, § 1, 6-26-18)  
Sec. 94-76. - Prohibition of obstructions to personal access to the beaches. 
Except as provided for otherwise in this Code or general law, it shall be prohibited for any person to create, erect, or construct any structure, barrier, or restraint, either vegetative or manmade, that will interfere with or obstruct the right of the public, individually and collectively, to enter or leave the beach by way of any approach or to use lawfully any part of the beach for recreation and other customary purposes. 
(Ord. No. 18-07, § 1, 6-26-18)  
Sec. 94-77. - Construction of erosion control structures. 
The provisions of section 94-76 above shall not prohibit the construction of an erosion control structure or of a re-nourished beach area permitted under applicable federal, state, county or city laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 18-07, § 1, 6-26-18)  
Sec. 94-78. - Prohibition of interference and posting. 
It shall be unlawful and prohibited for any person to confront, threaten, harass, intimidate, or interfere with any person who is lawfully exercising the right of the public for the customary use of the beach. It shall be prohibited for any person to display or cause to be displayed on any beach or approach, any sign, marker, or warning stating that the public beach is private property or that the public does not have the right of access contrary to the lawful access rights of the public. 
(Ord. No. 18-07, § 1, 6-26-18)  
Sec. 94-79. - Enforcement and violations. 
Violations of the provisions of sections 94-76 and 94-78 shall be subject to the enforcement and penalties provided for in section 1-14 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-07, § 1, 6-26-18)  
Secs. 94-80—94-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BEACH MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 94-101. - Requirements. 
Mechanical beach cleaning shall be conducted in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  All mechanical beach cleaning equipment operated on the beach shall require a permit issued by the city in accordance with this article. 
(2)  Cleaning equipment shall meet the requirements of state and local law governing the permitting of beach maintenance activities, including the requirements of F.S. §§ 161.052 and 161.053 and the rules and regulations adopted by the state department of environmental protection, division of beaches and shores. 
(3)  Cleaning activities shall be performed only between sunrise and sunset. 
(4)  Seaweed and other natural sea vegetation may be placed within the five-foot zone, at the toe of the dune, as long as the dune is not disturbed. 
(Code 1983, § 5-25(a); Ord. No. 95-1, § 5, 1-17-95) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46.  
Sec. 94-102. - Prohibitions. 
The following activities shall be prohibited on beaches: 
(1)  Mechanical beach cleaning equipment activities shall be prohibited within five feet of the toe of the dune. 
(2)  Mechanical beach cleaning equipment activities shall not disturb any natural beach vegetation. 
(3)  Penetration of the beach surface with mechanical beach cleaning equipment by more than two inches into the surface of the beach. 
(4)  Any mechanical beach cleaning during the period May 1 through October 31 (turtle nesting season) except seaward of the prior day's high-tide mark or debris line or where authorized by a permit from the state department of environmental protection, division of beaches and shores. 
(Code 1983, § 5-25(b); Ord. No. 95-1, § 5, 1-17-95)  
Sec. 94-103. - Exemptions. 
The city shall be exempt from permitting requirements of this division, but shall otherwise comply with all federal, state and local laws. 
(Code 1983, § 5-25(c); Ord. No. 95-1, § 5, 1-17-95)  
Secs. 94-104—94-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER TAXIS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire, ch. 90. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 94-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City manager means the chief administrative officer appointed by the city commission to carry out the managing of the daily operations of city government or the designee thereof. 
Water taxi means a boat which is operated by a licensed captain under the rules and regulations of the U.S. Coast Guard and used to provide public transportation for carrying a maximum of 12 passengers from one location to another over the waterways. "Permitted water taxi" means that a permit has been issued for a water taxi described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, § 1(2), 4-1-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-132. - Purpose and intent of article. 
It is desirable to allow limited operations of water taxi services within the city; however, the city presently has no appropriate designation for such services and no regulations readily applicable to the operations of such services. It is the purpose of this article to provide a definition of a water taxi and set forth reasonable regulations pertaining thereto. It is the intent of this article to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Permit reasonable competition among businesses which might wish to provide water taxi service within the city while protecting the interests of the residents and guests of the city; 
(2)  Identify the nature of a water taxi service; and 
(3)  Provide appropriate and fair rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of a water taxi service. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, § 1(1), 4-1-97)  
Sec. 94-133. - Operational restrictions. 
(a)  No water taxi may board or discharge passengers along the sandy beach areas on the Gulf of Mexico within the city limits. In no instance shall a water taxi operate within the designated swimming areas along the sandy beach. 
(b)  A permitted water taxi shall not board or discharge passengers on any land mass that is not also accessible by automobile, such as any island that is not served by a bridge. 
(c)  A permitted water taxi may board and discharge passengers along seawalls unless otherwise prohibited by other regulations or ordinances. 
(d)  All permitted water taxi vessels shall be operated in full compliance with other applicable city codes, specifically article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, § 1(3)(f), 4-1-97)  
Sec. 94-134. - Loudspeakers and spotlights. 
No water taxi shall at any time use loudspeakers, bells, whistles, horns or any other device to amplify sound for the purpose of attracting passengers or in violation of the noise ordinance. No water taxi shall at any time, except for safety-related purposes, illuminate by spotlight or any other means any of the sights or places of interest located along its route of operation, including, but not limited to, residential dwellings, businesses or government buildings. Under no conditions shall lights be used to spotlight any wildlife protected under city codes. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, § 1(3)(g), 4-1-97)  
Sec. 94-135. - Enforcement of article. 
This article shall be enforced by the city manager and by all city enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, § 1(3)(h), 4-1-97)  
Secs. 94-136—94-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 94-161. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate water taxis without first obtaining from the city a permit and paying the permit fee required to operate each vessel authorized under the permit. A water taxi operator whose business address is within the city shall obtain any required occupational license prior to commencing operations. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, § 1(3)(a), 4-1-97)  
Sec. 94-162. - Application; contents; liability. 
(a)  Application for a water taxi permit shall be made to the city manager and must include the following information: 
(1)  The name, business address and telephone number of the person operating the water taxi business. If a corporation or partnership, include the names of all directors, officers or partners, where applicable. 
(2)  A description of each vessel proposed to be utilized as a water taxi, including a copy of the United States Coast Guard certificate of inspection, if applicable, and the state vessel registration or documentation. 
(3)  A list of all captains who will operate a water taxi, including their names, addresses, employment histories over the past five years and a copy of each listed captain's United States Coast Guard license for the class of vessel the captain will operate. 
(4)  Where each water taxi will be located when not in use. 
(5)  The method of dispatch and the location of the dispatcher. 
(b)  Any water taxi operator who plans to board or discharge passengers at any seawall location, pier or dock owned by the city shall be responsible for ensuring that the city and its employees and agents will be held harmless from liability for any injury or other activity resulting from the operation of the water taxi. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, § 1(3)(b), 4-1-97)  
Sec. 94-163. - Application review. 
The city manager shall review all applications. The city manager shall approve or reject the application for a permit, based on the applicant's demonstration that it has the proper equipment and personnel to operate a safe and high quality water taxi operation. No application from the same person whose application has been rejected shall be considered by the city manager within six months from the date of such rejection. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, § 1(3)(c), 4-1-97)  
Sec. 94-164. - Issuance; expiration; renewal; fees. 
(a)  Upon determination that the applicant meets all requirements of this article, the city manager shall issue a permit for each vessel operated as a water taxi. The fee for each permit shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is set forth in appendix A to this Code. Such permit authorizes the operation of that vessel as a water taxi for a period of one year. Each permit is renewable for a period of one year upon submission of documentation to the city manager that all vessels and captain licenses are in full force and effect. The renewal fee for each permit shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is set forth in appendix A to this Code. The issuance of permits and collection of fees shall be administered as follows: 
(1)  Expiration. A water taxi permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall expire on September 30 of each year. 
(2)  Renewal. Permits shall be renewable beginning August 1 of each year, being due and payable on or before September 30 of each year, and shall expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the fee is due and payable on or before the first working day following September 30. 
(b)  The water taxi permit decal shall be displayed on the vessel alongside the state commercial registration sticker. In addition to displaying the permit decal and registration, the word "TAXI" shall appear on both sides of the vessel in letters that are a minimum of 12 inches in height. 
(c)  A permit may not be transferred or assigned. 
(d)  A water taxi permit that has been revoked or suspended is not renewable. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, § 1(3)(d), 4-1-97)  
Sec. 94-165. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  A permit may be revoked or suspended for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Failure to comply with all state and federal laws and regulations concerning the vessels of the type operated under the permit. 
(2)  Conviction of careless or reckless operation of a water taxi in violation of state or local laws. 
(3)  Submission of false or incomplete documentation or information required by this section. 
(4)  Operating a permitted water taxi as a commercial water sport operation, as defined by this Code. 
(5)  Failure to comply with all city codes and the safety regulations outlined in an attachment to Ordinance Number 97-8, which is on file in the city offices. 
(6)  Failure to renew a water taxi permit as required in section 94-164. 
(b)  If the city manager has reason to believe that a water taxi permit should be revoked or suspended for one or more of the causes set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the city manager shall send written notice to the permitted operator to show cause why the permit should not be revoked or suspended. A revocation hearing shall be set for the next regularly scheduled city commission meeting at least 15 days after receipt of the notice. All interested parties shall have the right to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, § 1(3)(e), 4-1-97)  
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS  
Chapter 98 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 46-31 et seq.; noise regulations, § 46-131 et seq.; regulations regarding noise from construction or repairing of buildings, § 46-140; restrictions on temporary structures on the beach, § 94-72; flood hazard reduction standards, § 106-151 et seq.; historic preservation, ch. 110; location of buildings and structures, § 134-1101 et seq.; regulations regarding fences and walls, § 134-1136 et seq.; swimming pool regulations, § 134-1226 et seq.; townhouse regulations, § 134-1256 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; building construction standards, F.S. ch. 553; fire prevention and control, F.S. ch. 633. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 98-1. - Hours for construction work restricted. 
(a)  No person shall perform construction work of any type, including excavation, demolition or repair of any building; permit the use of any construction equipment; or authorize others to perform such work other than between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(b)  The city manager may grant exceptions to subsection (a) of this section. Any exemption granted by the city manager shall be in writing setting forth the time, date and other reasonable conditions necessary to granting the exemption, not inconsistent with the purposes of this section. Such exemptions may be granted at the time of the issuance of the building permit or at any time during the progress of the work. Exemptions may be granted for the following work: 
(1)  Paving of commercial parking lots. 
(2)  Home repairs and remodeling. 
(3)  Construction work that the permittee can demonstrate can be completed only during prohibited hours. 
(c)  If the city manager determines that an emergency exists that threatens the public health, safety and welfare, he is authorized to grant an exception to subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2; Ord. No. 97-15, § 1(6-1), 7-1-97)  
Sec. 98-2. - Safeguards during construction. 
(a)  Any person clearing, filling or excavating land within the city shall erect, install or construct a barrier fence or other device to prevent the blowing of sand and soil from the property cleared to other public or private property. Before any building permit shall be issued, the owner or other designated agent of the owner making such application shall provide the city manager or his designee with written assurance that a barrier, fence or other device shall be erected, installed, or constructed to prevent the blowing of sand and soil from the construction site to other public and private property during excavation and construction on such site. 
(b)  Any person erecting a structure shall erect a fence or barrier not less than six feet in height for the protection of the public. With specific authorization of the city manager or his designee, requirement may be waived. 
(c)  Any person excavating, clearing, constructing or making additions or alterations on lands in close proximity to environmentally sensitive lands shall be required to erect a barrier fence for the protection of such lands. The city manager or his designee shall be empowered to define "close proximity" in each individual case. 
(d)  Any person erecting a structure shall provide a minimum of a two-yard container in order to properly maintain the job site. The placement location to be approved by the city manager or his designee. With specific authorization of the city manager or his designee, these requirements may be waived. 
(e)  Any person erecting a structure shall provide a minimum of one portable toilet. The placement location to be approved by the city manager or his designee. With specific authorization of the city manager or his designee, these requirements may be waived. 
(Ord. No. 82-15, § 5; Code 1983, § 6-3; Ord. No. 97-15, § 1(6-2), 7-1-97; Ord. No. 99-54, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 00-32, § 1, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 98-3. - Mailboxes; address signs. 
(a)  All single-family residential and commercial structures within the city may have a mailbox attached to the exterior wall of the structure adjacent to the principal entrance or a mail drop slot in the front door of the residence or commercial structure. 
(b)  All improved property shall display a street number with no smaller than four-inch numbers and no larger than 12-inch numbers. 
(Ord. No. 91-20, § 1, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 95-33, § 1, 8-15-95; Code 1983, § 6-5; Ord. No. 97-15, § 1(6-5), 7-1-97; Ord. No. 99-54, § 1, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 98-4. - Residential maintenance exemption. 
Building permits shall not be required for routine maintenance work on residential structures. For the purposes of this section, pursuant to F.S. § 489.103(9), routine maintenance shall be defined as any work or operation of a casual nature in which the aggregate contract price for labor, materials and all other items is less than $1,000.00; however, this exemption does not apply: 
(1)  If the construction, repair, remodeling or improvement is a part of a larger or major operation, whether undertaken by the same or a different contractor, or in which a division of the operation is made in contracts of amounts less than $1,000.00 for the purpose of evading this section or otherwise. 
(2)  If the type of construction, remodeling or improvement requires the services of a licensed contractor or an inspection under the provisions of the Standard Building Code. 
(3)  To a person who advertises that he or she is a contractor or otherwise represents that he or she is qualified to engage in contracting. 
(Ord. No. 97-15, § 1(6-6), 7-1-97)  
Sec. 98-5. - Municipal buildings. 
All newly constructed municipal buildings will be designed, contracted and built to achieve either the LEED TM Silver certification level or the Florida Green Building Council Commercial Building Designation Standard. When project resources and conditions permit, the city shall strive for a higher level of certification (either Gold or Platinum LEED certification). 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 1, 3-22-11)  
Secs. 98-6—98-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Florida Building Codes Act, F.S. § 553.70 et seq.; Florida Electrical Code, F.S. § 553.15 et seq. 
 
Sec. 98-26. - Building codes adopted. 
The most current edition of the following building and fire codes are hereby adopted as the building and fire codes of the city: 
(1)  The Florida Building Code, including Chapter 1 - Administration, as adopted by the Florida Building Commission; 
(2)  The Florida Plumbing Code, as adopted by the Florida Building Commission; 
(3)  The Florida Mechanical Code, as adopted by the Florida Building Commission; 
(4)  National Electrical Code (ANSI/NFPA 70), as published by the National Fire Protection Association and as adopted by the Florida Building Commission; 
(5)  The Florida Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by the State Fire Marshal, including by reference the Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) and the Fire Prevention Code (NFPA 1) and publications added to NFPA 1 and NFPA 101; and 
(6)  The Florida Fuel Gas Code, as adopted by the Florida Building Commission. 
(Ord. No. 82-15, § 1; Code 1983, § 6-21; Ord. No. 97-15, § 1(6-21), (6-22), 7-1-97; Ord. No. 99-54, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 2004-22, § 1, 11-23-04)  
Sec. 98-27. - Housing codes adopted. 
The Standard Housing Code, 1997 edition, published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., is hereby adopted and shall apply within the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-15, § 2; Code 1983, § 6-22; Ord. No. 85-30, § 4, 6-18-85; Ord. No. 89-3, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 92-2, § 1, 2-4-92; Ord. No. 97-15, § 1(6-22), 7-1-97; Ord. No. 99-54, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 2004-22, § 2, 11-23-04)  
Sec. 98-28. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, including the codes adopted by reference in this article, shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 82-15, § 11, 7-20-82; Code 1983, § 6-30; Ord. No. 97-15, § 1(6-30), 7-1-97)  
Sec. 98-29. - Conflicts. 
(a)  If a conflict arises between the technical codes adopted in this article, other than between the building code and fire safety code, it shall be the policy of this city to require the more restrictive standards as interpreted by the city manager. 
(b)  If a conflict arises between the building code and the fire safety code, it shall be resolved in accordance with F.S. § 553.73(8)(a). 
(Ord. No. 82-15, § 3; Code 1983, § 6-23; Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, 12-1-87; Ord. No. 97-15, § 1(6-23), 7-1-97; Ord. No. 99-54, § 1, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 98-30. - Modifications to the administrative and enforcement provisions of the building code. 
The administrative and enforcement provisions of the building codes as adopted in Section 98-26 are modified as follows: 
Section 101.3.3 is hereby added to read as follows: 
101.3.3 Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan by the jurisdiction under the requirements of this code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. 
Section 103.1 is hereby added to read as follows: 
103.1 General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures to apply its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code, and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. 
Section 103.2 is hereby added to read as follows: 
103.2 Right of entry. 
103.2.1 Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes any building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this code. If such building or premises are occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
103.2.2 When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code. 
Section 103.3 is hereby added to read as follows: 
103.3 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. No stop work order shall be released until the proper city official has been paid a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to the Code of Ordinances. 
Section 103.4 is hereby added to read as follows: 
103.4 Revocation of permits. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any provisions of this code. 
103.4.1 Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this code, where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to any material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
103.4.2 Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon a determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this code. 
Section 103.5 is added to read as follows: 
103.5 Unfit or Unsafe Structures. All structures that are unsafe or unfit are nuisances and are hereby declared unlawful. They shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. This prohibition may be enforced by any other legal, equitable, or administrative means available to the City of St. Pete Beach, including code enforcement proceedings under Chapter 162, Florida Statutes. 
103.5.1 Definitions. The following definitions apply for purposes of this Section: 
"Imminent Danger" means any structurally unsound conditions of a structure or portion thereof that is likely to cause physical injury to a person entering the structure: Or due to structurally unsound conditions, any portion of the structure as likely to fall be carried by the wind, or otherwise detach or move, and in doing so cause physical injury or damage to a person on the property or to a person or property nearby. Or the condition of the property is such that it harbors or is inhabited by pests; vermin or organisms injurious to human health the presence of which constitutes an immediate hazard to people in the vicinity. 
"Interested Party" is any individual or organization that has submitted to the building official a written request to be notified with respect to the procedures set forth in this section, identifying a specific property by tax parcel identification number or street address, within one year prior to the delivery of a notice of unfit or unsafe structure as provided in Section 103.5.3, and any party determined to have an interest in such property by reference to the public records; 
"Rehabilitation" means the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use; 
"Repair" means the replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in the existing work; 
"Structure" means that which is built or constructed. The term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof"; 
"Unfit" means those structures to be used as habitable space that do not meet the minimum requirements for existing buildings as outlined in the Florida Building Code. 
"Unsafe" means structurally unsafe due to imposed loads from the combined affects of gravity wind and/or water exceeding the capacity of any material, structural member or portion thereof, unstable due to damage from fire, flood, wind or other causes, inadequately provided with exit facilities, constituting a fire hazard, constituting a hazard to health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, exposure to weather, moisture intrusion, structural decay, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment, or otherwise dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants thereof or any members of the public; 
103.5.2 Authority to Order Vacation, Repair, or Demolition. 
103.5.2.1 The building official is hereby authorized to order the vacation, demolition, and removal of any unfit or unsafe structure, or to order the repair and/or replacement of any part or parts of any structure in the city, when such part or parts, by reason of fire, age, decay, moisture intrusion, deterioration, structural defects, improper design, unstable foundation, or termite infestation are dangerous to the occupants thereof, a menace to public health, a fire hazard or so unsafe as to endanger life or property or to render the use of public streets dangerous. 
103.5.2.2 In the event the owner of record or other interested parties fail to comply with any condemnation order or compliance agreement within the time therein fixed, the building official is authorized to demolish, remove, repair, and/or rehabilitate the unfit or unsafe structure utilizing independent contractors licensed in the State of Florida. The building official is also authorized to utilize the services of independent architects, engineers and contractors licensed in the State of Florida to determine the condition of the structure in question, and such costs shall be assessed in the same manner as provided in Section 103.5.9. 
103.5.3 Notice of Unfit or Unsafe Structure(s) and Manner of Service. When the building official verifies the existence of a structure that is unfit or unsafe, the building official shall provide written notice, by certified mail, that the structure is in violation of this section to the owner of record of the property upon which the structure is located, as determined by reference to the public records and property tax rolls pertaining to said property, and other interested parties. The notice shall describe the unfit or unsafe conditions, and shall advise that said conditions must be corrected within a reasonable time, as specified in the notice, or the structure shall be subject to abatement as provided in this section. The notice shall also provide that a building or demolition permit must be secured prior to the commencement of any corrective work, including repair, replacement, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. The reasonable time frame specified in the notice shall supercede the time frames established in Section 104.5.1. 
103.5.4 Placarding Unfit or Unsafe Structures against Human Habitation. In addition to sending the notice required by Section 103.5.3, the building official shall post a notice at the entrance to the structure stating: "This Structure is Unsafe and/or Unfit for Human Habitation". The placard shall remain posted until the required repairs or rehabilitation are made or the structure is demolished. Once the structure is posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purposes of making the required repairs or demolishing it. If the structure is occupied at the time of posting, it shall be vacated within 14 calendar days. Otherwise, no person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy such a placarded structure. The owner shall immediately begin action to vacate the structure and bring it into compliance within the time prescribed. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or deface the placard that has been posted on an unsafe or unfit building. The placard shall remain until such time as the building official orders the placard to be removed in accordance herewith. 
103.5.5 Extension of Time to Comply with Notice of Unfit or Unsafe Structure(s). If the owner of record or other interested party is unable to complete the work by the date ordered or to fully comply with the violation notice, a written request for an extension of time to comply may be filed with the building official, and if justifiable cause is demonstrated due to special hardship, unusual difficulty or unique circumstances, including the preservation of significant portions and features of a structure of historic or architectural value, the building official may grant reasonable extensions of time to comply with a notice pertaining to unfit or unsafe structure(s). 
103.5.6 Condemnation Order and Notice of Intent to Demolish. If the unfit or unsafe conditions are not corrected within the specified time indicated on the notice of unfit or unsafe structure(s), the building official shall condemn the unfit or unsafe structure and send a condemnation order to the owner of record and other interested parties, by certified mail. In addition to sending said condemnation order, a copy of the order shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the unfit or unsafe structure and a notice of intent to demolish shall be recorded in the public records. Ten days prior to authorizing the demolition of any unfit or unsafe structure by city contract, a notice of intent to demolish shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. Such notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
Notice of Intent to Demolish 
Pursuant to Chapter 98 of the St. Pete Beach City Code, the owner or other interested parties having failed to either repair or demolish the structure at (address) as ordered by the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida are hereby notified that the City of St. Pete Beach will proceed to have the structure demolished on (date), and a lien placed against the property to recover all costs and expenses incurred. 
To appeal this notice, the owner of record or other interested parties must file an appeal with (contact official, address and telephone number) within ten (10) days of the date of this Notice of Intent to Demolish. 
103.5.7 Authority to Order Rodent Control. When the city code enforcement officer verifies the existence of rodent infestation in a structure that is to be demolished or removed, the building official may require that a licensed pest control operator exterminate the rodents using ectoparasite control measures to preclude the migration of rodents. 
103.5.8 Condition of Lot after Demolition. The owner of a lot from which a structure is demolished shall cause the same to be sodded, seeded with grass, or otherwise covered with vegetative landscaping, within 30 days of the completion of demolition. 
103.5.9 Assessment of Cost of Demolition and Lien on Property. The building official shall assess the entire cost of demolition and removal, including asbestos abatement, the sodding or seeding of the lot, and rodent extermination against the real property in the form of a lien. Said lien shall be superior to all other claims or interests in the property, except property taxes, and shall include all administrative costs incurred by the city in taking such demolition action. When the owner of record or other interested parties have abated the unfit or unsafe structure as a result of having received a violation notice, all costs incurred by the city through the time of said abatement shall be assessed against the property in the form of a lien. The aforesaid lien shall be filed in the Public Records of Pinellas County, Florida, showing the nature of such lien, the amount thereof and an accurate legal description of the property, including the street address and the date of filing, and shall recite the names of all owners of record and other interested parties notified. Such lien shall bear interest from the date thereon at the rate of ten percent per annum and shall be enforceable as provided by law, including foreclosure. The failure to effect personal notice upon the owner of record or other interested parties shall not prevent the city from taking any action with respect to any structure and placing a lien on the property in accordance herewith, so long as there is substantial compliance with the provisions of the code. 
103.5.10 Authority to Enter into a Compliance Agreement. The city manager is hereby authorized to enter into a compliance agreement with the owner or other interested parties, in a form approved by the city attorney, for the abatement of the unfit or unsafe structure. Such agreement shall be controlling and shall govern the subsequent course of action to abate the unsafe or unfit conditions through repair or rehabilitation work. All repair or rehabilitation work shall conform to the minimum requirements of Chapter 34 of the Florida Building Code. The aforesaid compliance agreement shall establish completion dates for the submission of permit documents and for the completion of the repair or rehabilitation work. The compliance agreement shall provide for the demolition and removal of the unfit or unsafe structure by the city if the completion dates are not met. The cost of demolition and removal incurred by the city shall be assessed on the property in the form of a lien, as provided in Section 103.5.9. 
103.5.11 Appeal Procedure. 
103.5.11.1 Appeals may be taken from any condemnation order or notice of intent to demolish issued pursuant to this code by any owner of record or other interested party, except in emergency matters as provided in Section 103.5.12. Such appeal shall be initiated upon payment of a filing fee of $100.00 and a written request for such hearing within ten days of service of the condemnation order or the notice of intent to demolish. The aforesaid appeal shall be heard by the Code Enforcement Board/Special Master (the Board). 
103.5.11.2 A notice of said hearing shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least ten days prior to the hearing. Upon hearing the evidence presented at the hearing, the board may authorize the building official to proceed with the demolition and removal of the structure, or the board may authorize the city manager to enter into a compliance agreement with the owner of record or other interested party, as provided in Section 103.5.10. The building official shall advise the owner of record and other interested parties in writing of the board's action by regular mail. 
103.5.12 Authority to Act in Emergencies. When any structure may cause imminent peril to the public health, safety or welfare, or immediate danger to the life or safety of any person, or danger to the public by wind, storm, fire or other natural disasters, or when the structure is in imminent danger of collapse from structural decay, the building official shall promptly cause such structure to be made safe or cause its removal. For this purpose, the building official and the fire marshal may at once enter such a structure or the land on which it stands or abutting land or structures, to perform an inspection with such assistance and at such cost as may be deemed necessary. Upon inspection, the building official and the fire marshal shall determine whether the structure requires immediate emergency demolition to maintain the public's health, safety and welfare. A written report shall document the results of said inspections. The building official may order the vacation of adjacent structures and may require the protection of the public by appropriate fencing or such other means as may be necessary, and for this purpose may close a public or private way. Written notification of the demolition of the structure shall be sent to the owner of record and other interested parties, within five days thereof, showing the reason for the demolition. 
Section 103.6 is added to read as follows: 
103.6 Authority to Secure Open and Vacant Structures. The building official is hereby authorized to secure all open and vacant structures. At least five days prior to securing any such structure, the building official shall notify the owner of record by certified mail of the need for the structure to be secured. Upon service of said notice, the owner of record may secure the structure, or may appeal the determination that a structure is open and vacant by filing with the city a notice of appeal. All openings, including open windows and doors, shall be secured with exterior plywood and suitably coated with an appropriate neutral paint color blending with or harmonizing with the exterior colors of the building, so as to be as inconspicuous as possible. Where an open and vacant structure is secured by the city after written notice to the owner of record, the building official shall assess the entire cost of securing the same, including all administrative costs, against the property in the form of a lien. All open and vacant structures that have been secured shall be subject to inspection by the city, and the owner of record shall be assessed a fee for each inspection. For the purpose of ensuring that the structure is locked and secured, inspections shall be conducted at 30-day intervals and a fee of $50.00 for each inspection shall be assessed pursuant to the aforesaid lien. The aforesaid lien shall be filed in the Public Records of Pinellas County, Florida, showing the nature of such lien, the amount thereof and an accurate legal description of the property, including the street address and the date of filing, and shall recite the names of all owners of record and other interested parties notified. Such lien shall bear interest from the date thereon at the rate of ten percent per annum and shall be enforceable as provided by law, including foreclosure. The failure to effect personal notice upon the owner of record or other interested parties shall not prevent the city from taking any action with respect to any structure and placing a lien on the property in accordance herewith, so long as there is substantial compliance with the provisions hereof. 
Section 103.8 is added to read as follows: 
103.8 Decisions of the Building Official. Whenever the building official rejects or refuses to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the erection or alteration of a building or structure, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this code do not apply, or that a particular form of construction can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this code or any of the regulations hereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure or his duly authorized agent, may appeal from the decision of the building official to the Countywide Boards of Adjustments and Appeals as assigned to the Pinellas County Construction Licensing Board (PCCLB). 
Section 104.1.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
104.1.4 Casual, Minor or Inconsequential Work. Casual, minor or inconsequential work, as defined herein, may be made without approval by, or permit from, the building official, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the technical provisions of the Florida Building Code. For the purposes hereof, any work of a casual, minor or inconsequential nature shall mean ordinary minor repairs which do not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes and do not affect any structural components, do not affect ingress or egress from a structure, do not affect the electrical system and do not affect accommodations for the physically disabled. However, any work, including repairs, remodeling, or alterations, that is not casual, minor, or inconsequential in nature, in which the aggregate price for labor, materials and other items exceeds $1000.00 and requires an inspection to verify compliance with the Florida Building technical codes, shall require a permit and inspection. This $1000.00 exemption shall not apply to work that is being performed in increments costing less than $1000.00. 
Section 104.2.1.2 is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 104.2.1.2 Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. Prior to the reinstatement of an expired permit, the building official may require an evaluation prepared by a design professional of the work performed on a new or existing building to demonstrate compliance with all applicable codes and regulations. 
Section 104.4.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
104.4.2 Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with the refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. With respect to evaluation of design professionals' documents, if it is necessary to reject design documents required by the code three or more times for failure to correct a code violation specifically and continuously noted in each rejection, including, but not limited to, egress, fire protection, structural stability, energy, accessibility, lighting, ventilation, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, and gas systems, or other requirements identified by rule of the Florida Building Commission, a fee of four times the amount of the proportion of the permit fee attributed to plans review shall be imposed each time after the third such review the plans are rejected for that code violation. 
Section 104.4.5 is hereby added to read as follows: 
104.4.5 Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed, and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may issue a special permit for the foundation work, only. The holder of such a special permit shall proceed at his or her own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet the provisions of the technical codes. 
Section 104.5.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
104.5.1 Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days after the time the work is commenced, or if the work authorized by such permit is not completed within 14 months for one and two family dwelling and 18 months for all other projects after the approval of the building plans. Failure to obtain an approved inspection within 90 days of the previous approved inspection shall constitute suspension or abandonment. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed by the building official for the permit, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated prior to the expiration date. Justifiable cause may include, without limitation, delays due to labor strikes, acts of God, weather, shortages in materials or labor, permitting by other governmental agencies or legal actions. No active permit shall be extended until there has been paid an additional fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to the Code of Ordinances. 
Section 104.5.1.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
104.5.1.1 Permit reinstatement. If work has commenced and the permit is revoked, becomes null and void, or expires because of lack of progress or abandonment, a new permit, or the reinstatement of the expired permit covering the proposed construction shall be obtained before proceeding with the work. The expired permit resulting from the failure to obtain an approved inspection within 90 days may be reinstated by the building official, provided the work in place and required to complete the structure meets all applicable regulations in effect at the date of reinstatement, and provided the reinstatement is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. Justifiable cause shall be as provided in section 104.5.1. No permit shall be reinstated until there has been paid an additional fee in an amount equal to 50 percent of the amount of the original building permit fee pertaining to the work remaining. 
Section 104.5.1.5 is hereby added to read as follows: 
104.5.1.5 Permits issued for the demolition of a structure shall expire 60 days from the date of issuance, unless superseded by the notice requirements of Section 103.5.3. For a justifiable cause, one extension of time for a period not exceeding 30 days may be allowed unless superseded of the requirements of Section 103.5.5. Such request shall be in writing to the building official. 
Section 104.5.1.6 is hereby added to read as follows: 
104.5.1.6 Transfer of permit. A permit shall not be transferred from one party to another without filing an application accompanied by an affidavit in which the permit holder and the owner give approval of the transfer and in which the applicant accepts full responsibility for any and all work previously completed on the building or structure to be constructed. No permit shall be transferred until there has been paid to the proper city official a transfer fee in the amount equal to ten percent of the amount of the original permit fee or an amount which shall be established by resolution of the city commission and listed in appendix A to the Code of Ordinances, whichever is greater. 
Section 104.6.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
104.6.2 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing or life safety system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of triple the required permit fee. This provision shall not apply to emergency work, when delay would clearly have placed life or property in imminent danger. In all such emergency cases the required permit(s) shall be obtained within five business days and any unreasonable delay in obtaining those permit(s) shall result in the charge of a triple fee. In the event of an emergency declaration from the state, the time required to obtain the required permit(s) for emergency work may be extended. The payment of a triple fee shall not preclude or be deemed a substitute for prosecution for commencing work without first obtaining a permit. The building official may grant extensions of time when justifiable cause has been demonstrated in writing. 
Section 104.6.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
104.6.4 Schedule of Permit Fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application. The schedule of permit fees shall be established by ordinance of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to the Code of Ordinances. 
Section 104.6.5 is hereby added to read as follows: 
104.6.5 Building permit valuations. If the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, a permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. The permit valuation may be calculated using the latest building valuation data published by the International Code Council or other applicable model code organization. 
Section 104.6.6 is hereby added to read as follows: 
104.6.6 Refund of Permit Fees. Permit fees may be refunded only when a building permit is cancelled prior to the completion of the work for which the permit was issued. The request to cancel a permit shall be submitted to the building official in writing by the permit holder and shall include a copy of the receipt for the paid permit fees. Upon receipt of this request, the city shall refund 50 percent of the unused portion of the permit fee to the permit holder, if greater than $100.00. Permit fee refunds under $100.00 shall not be required. 
Section 105.6 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
105.6 Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical codes. The building official shall determine the timing and sequencing of when inspections occur and what elements are inspected at each inspection. If it is necessary, in order to enforce compliance with the Florida Building Code, to conduct any inspection after an initial inspection and one subsequent reinspection of any project or activity for the same code violation specifically and continuously noted in each rejection, including, but not limited to, egress, fire protection, structural stability, energy, accessibility, lighting, ventilation, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, and gas systems, or other requirements identified by rule of the Florida Building Commission, the a fee of four times the amount of the fee imposed for the initial inspection or first reinspection, whichever is greater, shall be imposed for each such subsequent reinspection. 
Section 105.6 (1.1) is hereby added to read as follows: 
(1.1)  Foundation (Tie-In) Survey: A foundation survey prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor shall be required for all new construction and substantial improvements prior to the first framing inspection. This survey shall certify the placement of the building on the site, illustrate all surrounding setback dimensions and shall indicate the relationship of the lowest living floor, and the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member supporting the lowest living floor, to the required base flood level. This survey shall be submitted to the building department and shall be available at the job site for review by the building inspector. 
Section 105.6 (2.1) is hereby added to read as follows: 
(2.1)  Insulation Inspection: To be made after the framing inspection is approved and the insulation is in place. 
Section 105.6 (4) is hereby amended to read as follows: 
(4)  Roofing inspection: To be made as two inspections for all roof coverings, and shall at a minimum include the following building components: 
• dry-in 
• insulation 
• roof coverings 
• flashing 
Section 105.6 (7) is hereby added to read as follows: 
Site Debris 
1.  The contractor and or owner of any active or inactive construction project shall be responsible for the clean-up and removal of all construction debris or any other miscellaneous, discarded articles prior to receiving final, inspection approval. Construction job sites must be kept clean, such that accumulation of construction debris must not remain on the property for a period of time exceeding 14 days. 
2.  All debris shall be kept in such a manner as to prevent at from being spread by any means. 
Section 107.1 is hereby added to read as follows: 
107.1 For products not covered under the statewide product evaluation and approval system, the building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his or her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
Section 109.1 is hereby added to read as follows: 
109.1 Any person, firm, corporation or agent who violates any provision of this code, or who fails to comply with any of the requirements of this code, or who erects, constructs, alters, installs, demolishes or moves any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system in violation of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or continued. Upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits as provided by law and the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 82-15, § 6; Code 1983, § 6-24; Ord. No. 85-30, §§ 1, 5, 6, 6-18-85; Ord. No. 85-45, § 3, 9-4-85; Ord. No. 85-50, § 1, 9-17-85; Ord. No. 85-52, §§ 1, 2, 10-1-85; Ord. No. 97-15, § 1(6-24), 7-1-97; Ord. No. 99-54, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 2-19-02; Ord. No. 2004-22, § 3, 11-23-04)  
Sec. 98-31. - Amendments or modifications to plumbing code. 
The plumbing code as adopted in section 96-26 is modified and amended as follows: 
Section 101.5.4 is amended to read as follows: 
All plumbing, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this code shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of plumbing. 
The property owner shall be responsible for the proper maintenance of his/her/its sewer lines on his/her/its property, and anything outside the property line and within the city right-of-way or utility easement is to be maintained by the city. Provided, however, that for new construction of any sewer line, the property owner shall be required to tie in to the city sewer facilities wherever they are located, including the portion on the city right-of-way or easement, and the property owner's sewer line shall be installed according to city standards and then dedicated to the city. 
The city manager shall adopt such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate, from time to time, in order to enforce the provisions of this section. 
Impact Fees is added to read as follows: 
An impact fee, which shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to the Code of Ordinances, for each gallon of daily sewage discharge that a development will likely produce will be imposed. Impact fees for redevelopment will be based on the increase of anticipated discharge. The department of planning and development will retain the right to estimate the anticipated sewage flows and impacts for uses not covered in the fee schedule or where a possible conflict exists in the fee schedule. The fee schedule for sanitary sewer impact fees shall be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to the Code of Ordinances. 
Insurance is added to read as follows: 
In order to secure an occupational license to engage in the business of plumbing in the City of St. Pete Beach, a master plumber, employing plumber or plumbing contractor shall first secure and at all times maintain in an insurance company doing business in the State of Florida public liability insurance with minimum limits as set forth by the Pinellas County Construction Licensing Board. 
Section 801.2 is amended to read as follows: 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit by any means into the building drainage system or into a public or private sewer: 
(a)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 140 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(b)  Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil, or grease. 
(c)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(d)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(e)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(f)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.2 or higher than 8.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(g)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(h)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(i)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(j)  Any cooling water, air conditioner condensate, steam condensate, unpolluted industrial process water, and all other unpolluted drainage. Such unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to sewers specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city. 
Section 1004.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Water lifts, expansion tanks, cooling jackets, sprinkler systems, drip or overflow pans, or similar devices which waste clear water only, shall discharge into a pervious detention area capable of controlling discharge at a rate which is less than the rate of inflow. 
Section 1101.3 is amended as follows: 
Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, and subsurface drainage shall not be drained into sanitary sewers. Detention of stormwater shall be as provided in the Drainage Ordinance in chapter 106 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 82-12, § 1; Ord. No. 82-15, § 7; Code 1983, § 6-25; Ord. No. 85-30, § 2, 6-18-85; Ord. No. 87-22, § 1, 8-4-87; Ord. No. 97-15, § 1(6-25), 7-1-97; Ord. No. 99-54, § 1, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 98-32. - Housing code amendments. 
The housing code as adopted in section 98-26 is modified or amended as follows: 
Section 106, Housing Board of Adjustments and Appeals, is amended to read as follows: 
The housing board of adjustments and appeals shall be the special hearing master in conformity with the provisions of chapter 22, article IX of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 12A-2; Ord. No. 166, § 2; Ord. No. 412, § 33; Code 1983, § 6-29; Ord. No. 85-45, § 3, 9-4-85; Ord. No. 97-15, § 1(6-29), 7-1-97; Ord. No. 99-54, § 1, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 98-33. - Florida Building Code, residential; amendments. 
[The residential code, as adopted in section 98-26 is modified or amended as follows:] 
Section R322.2.1 Elevation requirements . 
1.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas not designated as Coastal V Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 feet or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
Exception: 
The following zoning districts are exempt from the 1 feet and must follow base flood elevation; 
CC-1 Commercial District, CC-2 Commercial District, TC-1 Town Center Core District, TC-2 Town Center Corey Circle and Coquina West Districts, Traditional Hotel District THD, CC1 Commercial Corridor Blind Pass Road District, CC2 Commercial Corridor Gulf Blvd. District, (LR) Large Resort, AC Activity Center District, PAG Pass-A-Grille Overlay District and B/HC Boutique Hotel/Condo District. 
2.  When an existing building or structure permitted under this section complies with the FIRM at the time of issuance of a permit for new construction/addition, neither the existing building nor the new construction/addition, is required to comply with the additional building height footage required to be added to the base flood elevation by this section. 
Remainder unchanged 
Section R322.3.2 as follows : 
R322.3.2 Elevation requirements. 
1.  All buildings and structures erected within the coastal high hazard areas shall be elevated so that the lowest portion of all structural members supporting the lowest floor with the exception of mat or raft foundations, piling, pile, cap, columns, grade beams and bracing, is elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 feet or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher 
Exception: 
The following zoning districts are exempt from the 1 feet and must follow base flood elevation; 
CC-1 Commercial District, CC-2 Commercial District, TC-1 Town Center Core District, TC-2 Town Center Corey Circle and Coquina West Districts, Traditional Hotel District THD, CC1 Commercial Corridor Blind Pass Road District, CC2 Commercial Corridor Gulf Blvd. District, (LR) Large Resort, AC Activity Center District, PAG Pass-A-Grille Overlay District and B/HC Boutique Hotel/Condo District. 
2.  When an existing building or structure permitted under this section complies with the FIRM at the time of issuance of a permit for new construction/addition, neither the existing building height footage required to be added to the base flood elevation by this section. 
Remainder unchanged 
Section R322.3.4 Walls below design flood elevation. Walls are permitted below the elevated floor, provided that such walls are not part of the structural support of the building or structure and: 
1.  Electrical, mechanical, and plumbing system components are not to be mounted on or penetrate through walls that are designed to break away under flood loads; and 
2.  Are constructed with insect screening or open lattice; or 
3.  Are designed to break away or collapse without causing collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. Such walls, framing and connections shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 (470 Pa) and no more than 20 pounds per square foot (958 Pa); or 
4.  Where wind loading values of this code exceed 20 pounds per square foot (958 Pa), the construction documents shall include documentation prepared and sealed by a registered design professional that: 
4.1.  The walls below the design flood elevation have been designed to collapse from a water load less than that which would occur during the design flood. 
4.2.  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system have been designed to withstand the effects of wind and flood loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be those associated with the design flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by this code. 
Section R322.3.5 Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation. Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms except for stairwells, ramps, and elevators. The limitation on partitions does not apply to crawlspace foundations. Storage shall be limited to items which otherwise would be stored outside a building or items normally used outside (e.g., grill, lawn mower, folding chairs, etc.). Access to enclosed areas shall be the minimum necessary to allow for permitted uses and limited to garage door and standard single exterior doors and one double entry door; sliding doors are permitted. All utilities such as electrical, heating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other services facilities (including ductwork) must be elevated or floodproofed to the required elevation. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 2, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 1, 2-26-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-26, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 2015, did not specifically amend the code; hence, its inclusion herein was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 98-34. - Florida Building Code, building; administrative amendments. 
[The building code, as adopted in section 98-26 is modified or amended as follows:] 
Modify Sec. 107.3.5 as follows: 
107.3.5 Minimum plan review criteria for buildings. 
Commercial Buildings: Building 
8.  Structural requirements shall include: 
Flood requirements in accordance with Section 1612, including lowest floor elevations, enclosures, declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement), flood damage-resistant materials. 
Residential (one- and two-family) 
6.  Structural requirements shall include: 
Flood hazard areas, flood zones, design flood elevations, lowest floor elevations, enclosures, declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement), equipment, and flood damage-resistant materials. 
(Ord. No. 18-08, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Secs. 98-35—98-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 98-61. - Findings of fact. 
The city commission finds and determines that it is necessary to establish the minimum standards contained herein for the maintenance, upkeep and appearance of improved or unimproved real property; to minimize impacts of construction; and to provide a just, equitable and practicable method to preclude: 
(1)  Residential and non residential buildings, structures and premises from causing and/or endangering the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants; 
(2)  Diminished property values; 
(3)  Detraction from the appropriate aesthetics of the city; and 
(4)  Creation of nuisance and other undesirable and unhealthy conditions. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-62. - General provisions. 
(a)  Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this article or a prior code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The requirements of this article are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection or safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. 
(b)  Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be performed in accordance with all other applicable regulations of the city, county, state or federal government and other agencies having jurisdiction. 
(c)  Existing remedies. The provisions in this article shall not be construed to abolish or impair other remedies of any local, state or federal or other jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure. 
(d)  Requirements not covered by this article. The building official shall determine requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation and general conditions acceptable for an existing fixture, structure or equipment not specifically covered by this article. 
(e)  Deviation from article. Where practical difficulties make strict compliance with the provisions of this article impractical due to cost or otherwise, the building official has the authority to grant modifications for individual cases. The modification shall be the minimum deviation necessary and shall be such as to achieve to the extent possible compliance with the intent and purpose of this article and shall not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The basis for granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files. 
(f)  Compliance. It shall be the duty of each and every owner and operator of improved or unimproved real property within the city to comply with the requirements set forth in this article. No permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless there is compliance with all applicable sections of this article. No real property, premises or building, or combination, shall be used in a manner inconsistent with or in conflict with the requirements of this article. 
(g)  Conflict with other codes. The provisions of this article shall apply to all real property, buildings, structures or premises within the city limits. Where the provisions of this article impose a standard different than that set forth in any other applicable ordinance of the city, code adopted by the city, or by other unit of local government or under the laws of the state, the most restrictive standard shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-63. - Definitions. 
Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this article and are defined in the Florida Building Code and technical codes or in the City Land Development Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. 
Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this article: 
Abandoned or disabled motor vehicle is an inoperative vehicle (see inoperative vehicle). 
Abandoned property means any wrecked, inoperative, derelict or partially dismantled property having little, if any, value other than nominal salvage value, which has been left unattended and unprotected from the elements, which shall include, but not be limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, boats, machinery, appliances such as refrigerators and washing machines, plumbing fixtures, furniture, vessels, and any other similar articles. 
Approved means approved by the building official or the building official's designated representative. 
Boat means any vessel, barge, airboat, canoe, raft or watercraft of any description used, or capable of being used, as a means of transportation on water. 
Building means any structure that is enclosing a space used for sheltering any occupancy. The term "building" shall include commercial buildings, single or multifamily dwellings and vacant structures, whether occupied or not. 
Building code and technical codes means the Florida Building Code and the technical codes adopted pursuant to Article III of this chapter. 
Commercial business means any business or enterprise that offers for sale goods or services, or which in any manner conducts commerce. 
Condemn means to judge unfit for occupancy or use. 
Contractor means and includes owner, operator, owner-builder or licensed contractor. 
City waters shall mean all waters of the state, public navigable waters, creeks, bayous, canals and channels, whether natural or manmade, located within the City of St. Pete Beach, and including all such waters within the jurisdiction of the city in which the tide ebbs and flows. 
Demolition means the deconstructing, destroying, raising, tearing down, or wrecking of any building, including its foundation. As used herein, the word "demolition" shall not apply to partial demolition associated with major or minor remodeling. 
Derelict vessel means any vessel, as defined in F.S. § 327.02, which is left, stored, or abandoned: (a) in a wrecked, junked, or substantially dismantled condition upon any city waters or on property that is not zoned for repair or storage of such vehicles. (b) Docked or grounded at or beached upon the property of another without the consent of the owner of the property. Deterioration means the condition of a building or part thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, rusting, peeling paint or other evidence of physical decay, including the landscaping and the parking areas. 
Enclosed container means, for purposes of this article, any physical structure which prevents materials from falling out, spilling, or coming out by other accidental means during storage or transport, and shall include, but not be limited to, garbage cans, boxes, truck bodies capable of being enclosed and any means sufficient to prevent the accidental scattering or leaking of said materials. 
Exterior property means the open space on the premises outside of the building. 
Fire hazard (see "nuisance") means any thing or act which increases or may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than reasonable, or which may unreasonably obstruct, delay or hinder or may unreasonably become the cause of an obstruction, a delay, a hazard or an unreasonable hindrance to the prevention, suppression or extinguishment of fire. 
Food waste means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food. 
Imminent danger means a condition that could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
Improved property means real property which contains buildings or other structural improvements. 
Inert waste materials means brick, block, concrete, rock, stone, earth, and sand, free from contamination or other types of waste and capable of serving as fill material without harm to, or pollution of, ground or surface waters. 
Infestation shall mean the presence within or around a commercial property of insects, rodents, or pests which are detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare of occupants or visitors; and, in the case of a structure, that if left unattended, may result in structural deterioration. 
Inoperative motor vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle which is missing functioning parts including, but not limited to, the chassis, engine, wheels, or tires; or any vehicle which is incapable of movement under its own power and will remain so unless repair or reconstruction occurs. The term, for purposes of this Article, includes Derelict Vessels (see Derelict Vessel). 
Litter means any discarded, used, unconsumed substances or wastes, including but not limited to those specified in F.S. § 403.413. Litter shall include, but shall not be limited to, garbage, solid waste, trash, refuse, debris, paper products (including newspapers and magazines), glass, metal, plastic or other containers, cloth, wood and wood products, sweepings, liquids (other than uncontaminated water), sludge, grass clippings, tree limbs, trunks and roots, undergrowth and materials produced by clearing and grubbing and other horticulture wastes, motor vehicle parts and tires, furniture, oil or grease, hazardous wastes (including gasoline, paint thinners and other similar types), the carcass of a dead animal, any obnoxious or offensive matter of any kind, and any object or condition of any unsightly nature, which may have been discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of improperly. 
Lot means a parcel of real property. 
Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle as the same is defined in F.S. § 320.01, Florida Statutes. 
Nuisance means any one or combination of the following: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence, or as provided by the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city; 
(2)  Any condition, including an attractive nuisance, which may prove detrimental to human health or safety, whether in a building or on the premises; 
(3)  Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health of persons in, on or near the premises where the condition exists; 
(4)  Unsanitary conditions or conditions that are dangerous to public health, well-being or the general welfare; 
(5)  Fire hazards; and 
(6)  Unsightly conditions. 
Occupant means any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of real property or a part thereof. 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who, individually or jointly or severally with others, holds the legal or beneficial title to any real property, building, facilities, equipment or premises subject to the provisions of this chapter. The term shall include the owner's duly authorized agent, a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary, property holder as any other person, firm, corporation or legal entity having a vested or contingent interest or, in the case of a leased premises, the legal holder of the lease of his legal representative. It is intended that this term shall be construed as applicable to the person, firm, corporation or legal entity responsible for the construction, maintenance and operation of the building, facilities or premises involved. 
Parking lot means any parcel of real property with an outdoor area or space, paved or unpaved, approved for motor vehicle parking or storage. 
Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises," "building," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or "story" are stated in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
Permit means approvals issued by building official, to include but not be limited to the construction site management plan approved by the building official. 
Premises means real property and, as the context may dictate, structures located thereon. 
Project site means the area within the property line where lot clearing and grading, stockpiling of soil, demolition, excavation, construction, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling, and minor remodeling may occur. 
Real property includes any land or real estate within the city limits, whether private or public. 
Residential means all single-family and multifamily buildings and structures. 
Right-of-way means land to which the state, county or city holds fee simple title or an easement for transportation or utility use. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials and litter, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, rubber, tree branches, yard trimmings tin cans, metals, mineral matter, and glass and other similar materials. 
Streets or highways means the entire width and length of any right-of-way between the boundary lines of that publicly maintained or publicly owned real property when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel. 
Stop work order means a notice signed by the building official or designee to cease work or other activity on any site for which a permit has been issued or is subject to issuance. Storage of litter means interim containment of litter in a manner approved by the city council, after generation of such litter and prior to proper and final disposal. 
Street means the paved or improved portion of the right-of-way which is intended for public use by vehicles, pedestrians, bicycles and others and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Tenant means a person, corporation, partnership or group who has the occupation or temporary possession of a dwelling unit or commercial premises, but does not hold title to same. 
Vacant building means any building being without lawful tenant, or lawful occupant or without a certificate of occupancy. 
Vacant commercial storefront means any building or structure which has been utilized for a commercial purpose and which contains windows on the ground floor which front upon a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way. 
Vacant or unimproved lot means any parcel of land not containing a building or structure 
Vehicle includes all motor vehicles and also means a machine propelled by power, other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and to transport persons, property, equipment or pull machinery, and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, motorbikes and tractors. 
Waters of the state means those waters as defined in F.S. § 327.02. 
Weeds means all weeds, annual plants and uncultivated vegetation; however, this term shall not include trees, cultivated flowers, cultivated shrubs and gardens. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-64. - General maintenance. 
(a)  Nuisances and hazards. Real property shall be maintained free of nuisances and any hazards to the safety of the occupants, customers or persons utilizing the premises or to pedestrians passing by. 
(b)  Walls exposed as a result of demolition. Where a wall of a building is exposed as a result of demolition, the owner of the building shall have the wall with its doors, windows, vents or other similar openings closed with material of the type composing the wall. No protrusions or loose material shall be in the wall. The exposed wall shall be painted, stuccoed or bricked, and weatherproofed, if necessary, based on construction material, to prevent deterioration of the wall. 
(c)  Storage of flammable or combustible materials. There shall be no storage or accumulation of flammable or combustible liquids or other materials on the premises unless approved for storage by applicable regulations or the codes and only in such quantities prescribed by the regulations. 
(d)  Abandoned curb cuts. Where curb cuts are abandoned due to new construction or change of access by the owner, the curb cut shall be closed and replaced by the owner with a standard sidewalk, curb and gutter design, to match original. 
(e)  Sidewalks or curbs damaged by delivery vehicles. Damage to public sidewalks or curb and gutter located in the public right-of-way shall be repaired or replaced by the owner at no expense to the city when such damage is caused by vehicles making deliveries to the commercial premises. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-65. - Unsightly conditions. 
The following conditions are hereby deemed to be unsightly conditions and are prohibited. The following conditions are prohibited on any real property in the City: 
(1)  Structures that are: 
a.  Partially destroyed; or 
b.  Left in a state of disrepair; or 
c.  Left in a state of partial construction beyond the valid timeframe of the permit. 
(2)  Abandoned or broken equipment; broken or discarded furniture and household appliances in visible yard areas. 
(3)  Building exteriors in a condition of deterioration or disrepair such that the condition causes measurable diminution of surrounding property values. 
(4)  Property exteriors with trash, litter, debris, packing boxes, lumber, construction material, solid waste, horticulture debris, salvage materials, appliances, machinery, equipment and any furniture, excluding furniture specifically designed for outdoor use. Failure to maintain the premises in a clean, safe and sanitary condition is a violation. The owner and operator shall keep that part of the exterior property subject to its control or occupancy in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(5)  Clotheslines visible from the street. 
(6)  Garbage and trash containers stored in a manner visible from the street. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-66. - Residential and commercial property maintenance. 
(a)  All premises shall be maintained in compliance with the standards in this section. 
(b)  Standards for improved property. 
(1)  Foundation. The building foundation system shall be adequately maintained and capable of supporting the load for which it was designed. 
a.  Wood supports shall be sound and free from insect infestation and rot. 
b.  Metal supports and connections shall be free from rust and the equivalent of new supports. 
c.  Skirting shall be maintained free from broken or missing sections, pieces or cross members. Skirting shall be securely attached and sized from the ground to the lower outside perimeter of the structure. 
(2)  Exterior walls. Exterior walls of buildings shall be: 
a.  Maintained free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and 
b.  Maintained, weatherproofed and surfaces properly coated as needed to prevent deterioration. Decorative features such as cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage. Any graffiti shall be removed or repainted to match existing surfaces. 
(3)  Windows. 
a.  Every window shall be maintained in sound working condition and good repair to be substantially weather-tight and rodent-proof. 
b.  Openings originally designed as windows shall be maintained as windows, unless approved by the building official for enclosure. The enclosure of a window shall be by either bricking the opening, blocking the opening with concrete blocks and stuccoing the exterior, or boarding the opening. When boarding is used, it shall be of trim fit, sealed to prevent water intrusion, and painted or stained to conform to the other exterior portions of the building. The boarding shall remain in place and be properly maintained. 
(4)  Shutters. All shutters shall be maintained in good repair and securely attached to a structure. Peeling paint or preservatives is prohibited. 
(5)  Exterior doors. Every exterior door and hatchway or garage door shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(6)  Exterior doorframes and storefronts. Exterior doorframes and storefronts shall be maintained in good condition. All moldings shall be securely attached to the structure and maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration. 
(7)  Exterior surface treatment. All exterior surfaces, including by way of example and not limitation, doors and window frames, cornices, porches, decks, trim, balconies, fences and docks, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective treatment. Peeling paint is prohibited and surfaces shall be repainted. All metal surfaces shall be coated to inhibit rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated. 
(8)  Structural supports. Every structural element of a dwelling shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and shall not show evidence of deterioration that would make it incapable of carrying normal loads. 
(9)  Porches and balconies. All exterior porches, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall include banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling and installed to withstand the loads prescribed by the Florida Building Code. All exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from defects. Paint and other finishes shall be in good condition. 
(10)  Stairs. All stairs shall be maintained safe and free from tripping hazards. Treads shall be sound, without broken or chipped edges. Wooden stairs shall be free from decay or substantial wear that could cause a tripping hazard or have an unsightly appearance. Handrails and guardrails shall be maintained to withstand loads prescribed by the Florida Building Code. 
(11)  Roofs. Roofs shall be maintained in a structurally sound and safe manner. Roofs shall be repaired using like materials to existing materials. 
(12)  Gutters and downspouts. Gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and shall be neatly located and securely installed. 
(13)  Chimneys, flues, and vent attachments. Chimneys, flues, and vent attachments shall be maintained in a structurally sound manner, free from defects to capably perform the functions for which they were designed. 
(14)  Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes, and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and properly anchored to remain in sound condition. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements, decay or rust. 
(15)  Insect screens. All windows and other outside openings required for ventilation of food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh (16 mesh per 25 mm). Every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
(16)  Commercial parking areas/walkways. Holes, excavations, breaks, projections or obstructions on walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas and other parts of commercial premises which are accessible to and used by persons on the premises are prohibited. Deficiencies shall be repaired, replaced or removed as appropriate. The building official shall set a time for performance for the owner to comply with this subsection. This subsection applies to occupied and unoccupied property. All surfaces, including those of parking lots, shall be maintained free of glass, loose shingles, loose wood, crumbling stone or brick, asphalt, concrete, stucco, loose or broken plastic or other similar hazardous conditions. 
(17)  Accessory structures. Garages, storage buildings and all other accessory structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound structural condition. 
(18)  Swimming pools. All swimming pools, spas and architectural pools, ponds or bodies of water shall be properly maintained so as not to create a safety hazard or harbor insect infestation. Water shall not be allowed to stagnate or to become polluted. All pools shall be free from unsightly appearance. 
(19)  Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior premises shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, the owner shall promptly exterminate rodents through a process which will not be injurious to human health. 
(20)  Grass, weeds and uncultivated vegetation. All grasses or weeds, and uncultivated vegetation, shall not exceed ten inches in height on improved property, including the area between the edge of the pavement in the street and the lot line. 
(21)  Shrubbery, plants, and ground cover. All real property shall be maintained in a condition to prevent erosion of soil by: 
a.  Landscaping with grass, trees, shrubs or other planted ground cover; or 
b.  Such other suitable means as shall be approved by the building official. 
(22)  Trees. Trees shall be maintained or removed as follows: 
a.  Hazardous trees. Dead, dying, damaged or diseased trees are prohibited. A finding by a registered forester or certified arborist employed by the city that a tree is in danger of falling upon an adjacent lot or street due to death, disease or damage, including damage caused by weather conditions, is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
b.  Prohibited conditions. The following conditions are prohibited: 
1.  Trees, plants, shrubs, vegetation, or parts thereof, which overhang any sidewalk, street, alley or fire hydrant, and obstruct or impair the free and full use of the sidewalk, street, alley or fire hydrant by the public. 
2.  Grass, weeds, shrubs, bushes, trees or vegetation which constitute a fire hazard or a menace to public health, safety or welfare. 
3.  Removal of obstruction. The owner of any real property shall trim trees, plants, shrubs or vegetation, or any parts thereof as follows: which overhang any sidewalk, alley or street as determined by the building official, and which interfere with the use of any sidewalk, alley, street, poles, wires, pipes, fixtures or any other part of any public utility situated in the right-of-way. 
(23)  Exterior lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be in compliance with the following: 
a.  Nonvehicular light sources that shine into the eyes of drivers of vehicles or pedestrians which could impair safe traverse are prohibited. 
b.  All light sources greater than 100 watts shall be shielded and directed such that no direct source of illumination shall be visible beyond the lot line of the structure or use involved. 
(24)  Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be maintained in a safe and structurally sound condition, in good repair with the surface coated or painted. Fences shall be free from loose or rotting materials. Metal fencing shall be free from rust or deterioration. 
(25)  Floors, interior walls and ceilings. All floors, interior walls and ceilings of every structure shall be maintained in a structurally sound manner and in a condition consistent with its use. 
(26)  Miscellaneous elements. All existing miscellaneous elements on building walls, roofs and surrounding premises, to include by way of example empty electrical or other conduits, or unused sign brackets, shall be removed. 
(27)  Landscape maintenance. Where landscape plans have been specifically incorporated and approved in a development plan, the landscape areas shall be maintained in a manner equal to the original landscaping approval. 
(c)  Litter. 
(1)  Storage of litter. 
a.  All commercial businesses shall store litter in containers to eliminate wind-driven debris. The number and size of receptacles for each commercial business shall be that number required to maintain a clean, neat, and sanitary premises. Spillage and overflow of litter around containers is a violation. 
b.  Commercial businesses shall provide and maintain litter containers adequate to contain litter generated from such business at its loading and unloading zones. 
c.  Commercial businesses open to the public shall provide and maintain containers adequate to contain litter generated from such business. 
d.  Every person in possession or in control of any place, public or private, where litter is accumulated or generated shall provide and maintain adequate and suitable containers capable of holding such litter until proper final disposal is accomplished. 
(2)  Depositing litter. It shall be unlawful to throw, discard, place, drop, or deposit litter in any manner or amount in or upon any real property, highway, street, right-of-way or body of water within the limits of the city, except in such containers specifically provided and designated for the disposal of litter, is a violation. Litter strewn by a pedestrian except at approved and permitted disposal sites is a violation. Litter ejected or discarded from a motor vehicle except at approved and permitted disposal sites is a violation. 
(3)  Accumulation of litter. Any accumulation of litter in or upon any property, vacant or improved, is deemed a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove the accumulation by the property owner, tenant, occupant, agent, manager or other person who owns, maintains, or controls any premises or portion thereof, whether improved or unimproved, is a violation. 
(d)  Accessory structures. Garages, storage buildings and all other accessory structures shall be maintained in good repair and sound structural condition. Structures, attached or unattached to the principal structure, which are found by the building official to be structurally deficient, shall be repaired or demolished within the timeframe set by the building official. Maintenance of accessory structures shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The exterior of the building and premises to include but not limited to parking areas and landscaped areas shall be maintained in a sound, clean and neat condition. 
(2)  Signs shall be maintained in good condition. Where the sign structure remains, the sign faces are to be replaced with blank panels (permit required). The design and color is subject to approval by the building official. 
(3)  All advertising structures, awnings and accompanying supporting members shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or safety hazard. Advertising structures or awnings not properly maintained in accordance with this subsection shall be removed. Awnings or marquees made of cloth, plastic or a similar material shall not show evidence of tearing, ripping or holes. Upon removal of an advertising structure or awning, all supporting members shall be removed. Where supporting members have been left from sign removal prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, such supporting members shall be removed within three months of the effective date of such ordinance. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize any encroachments on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Where parking areas are to be barricaded to prohibit vehicular travel, it shall be accomplished by installation of parking bumpers pinned to the pavement. 
(e)  Outdoor storage. Outside storage of materials and equipment shall be restricted to the rear yard area and screened by an opaque fence or hedge so that such materials are not visible from any public right-of-way or adjoining lot. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-67. - Junk vehicle, junk vessels and abandoned property. 
(a)  Enforcement. The following requirements may be enforced by any law enforcement officer or any code enforcement officer of the city. 
(b)  Incorporation of state statutes. The provisions of F.S. ch. 705, are adopted, incorporated in and made a part of this article, to be enforced in addition to and in concert with this article for the purpose of achieving proper control and uniformity in the regulation of those specific issues and actions involving lost or abandoned personal property upon public real property within the city. This article, in addition, regulates and prohibits the type of action and conduct described within areas and locations not covered by or made applicable under the regulatory scheme of F.S. ch. 705. This article is not to be interpreted as being in conflict with the provisions of F.S. ch. 705; however, to the extent that any such conflict shall arise, the provisions of the statute shall prevail. 
(c)  Parking, storage, abandoning, keeping or leaving of certain vehicles or boats restricted and prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store, abandon, keep or leave exposed or outside any enclosure any vehicle or boat which is in a wrecked, junked, inoperative, partially dismantled or abandoned condition on any real property, private or public, within the city limits for such time and under such circumstances as to reasonably cause such vehicle or boat to be a danger to the public health, safety and welfare, or to be an eyesore, to be unsightly or to be aesthetically unpleasing due to such conditions and appearance. It shall not be a violation of this article if the person's action is in connection with a bona fide business purpose or enterprise that is lawfully situated and licensed within the city, or if the vehicle or boat is being actively restored and worked upon by the owner and kept within an enclosure on his real property. 
(d)  Public nuisance declared. All vehicles or boats violating or found to be in violation of the provisions of this article are declared to be a public nuisance, illegal and subject to removal as provided for by statute or by this article as may be applicable. 
(e)  Absence of a current license plate or current registration as prima facie evidence of abandonment. For the purpose of the enforcement of this article, the absence of a current license plate or current registration on a vehicle or boat shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle or boat is abandoned, junked or discarded. The presence of a current license plate or registration solely shall not, in and of itself, exempt any vehicle or boat from the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Leaving of wrecked, junked, inoperative, partially dismantled or abandoned vehicles or boats on streets or highways prohibited. No person shall leave for more than 24 consecutive hours, whether currently licensed, registered or not licensed or registered, any wrecked, junked, inoperative, partially dismantled or abandoned vehicle or boat on any street or highway within the city limits. 
(g)  Responsibility for removal and procedures. Any person who causes, permits or allows any wrecked, junked, inoperative, partially dismantled or abandoned vehicle or boat in violation of the provisions of this article to be kept on such person's private real property, on any public real property or on any street or highway within the city shall be in violation of this article and responsible for its removal. After giving appropriate notice and following the procedures set forth in F.S. ch. 705, relating to public property, if the vehicle or boat is not removed from public property, it is subject to removal by the city under the provisions of the statute and this article. If the violation is upon private real property, the violator shall be appropriately noticed or cited. The violator shall be responsible for all costs reasonably associated with the enforcement of this article necessitated by his failure to remove the property. 
(h)  Removal of lost vessels and abandoned vessels from city waters. 
(1)  Removal. City code enforcement officers are hereby authorized to remove any lost vessel and any abandoned vessel found in or upon city waters. A conviction for violation or a finding of violation of this article is not a precondition to the removal of a lost vessel or abandoned vessel. The city's code enforcement officers are hereby authorized to commence and complete the removal of any lost vessel or abandoned vessel, in the manner and sequence authorized by the Act, regardless of whether a citation is issued to the owner of such vessel, and regardless of any prosecution for violation or any proceeding before the code enforcement board. 
(2)  Storage and disposal. All lost vessels and abandoned vessels removed from city waters pursuant to this section shall be confiscated, stored, conveyed, donated and/or disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Act. 
(3)  Costs and liens. All costs of removal, storage and disposal (whether by destruction, sale or otherwise) of a lost vessel or abandoned vessel shall be charged to the owner of such vessel to the full extent permitted by the Act. Pursuant to Section 705.103(4) of the Act, any person who neglects or refuses to pay such amount shall not be entitled to be issued a certificate of registration for such boat, or any other boat, until such costs have been paid. The city attorney is hereby authorized to file such instruments as are necessary to establish and enforce any lien upon any such boat for such costs. 
(i)  Procurement of services. Subject to any limitations in the city's procurement policies, the city manager is hereby authorized to procure services for the removal, storage, salvage and/or disposal of lost vessels and abandoned vessels removed from city waters. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-68. - Junk and disabled vehicles on private property. 
(a)  Liability. The city and its agents and officers shall not be liable: 
(1)  To any owner of any vehicle removed pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(2)  To any owner of residential real property in an action based upon trespass for the removal of a vehicle under this article. 
(b)  Nuisance declared. The outdoor storage of abandoned or disabled motor vehicles is a public nuisance, and removal of such vehicles is the abatement of a public nuisance. 
(c)  Owner to remove unlicensed vehicle. Any abandoned or disabled motor vehicle shall be removed by the owner of any residentially zoned real property upon which the vehicle sits or by the owner of the vehicle within 30 days after the expiration date shown on the license tag or within 30 days after the license tag shall have been removed from the vehicle. 
(d)  Notice to remove. At any time after a motor vehicle license tag shall have expired, the city shall send written notice by certified mail to the record title owner of the residentially zoned real property and to the person to whom the vehicle is registered as shown by motor vehicle registration records of this state or any other state or district, stating that the vehicle will be removed at the expense of the vehicle owner or the residential real property owner not less than 30 days after mailing of such notice. 
(e)  Failure to comply; removal of vehicle. If a vehicle shall not be removed and current license plates shall not be displayed and the vehicle shall not be enclosed in a permanent structure before the expiration of 31 days from the date of the mailed notice, the city may cause the vehicle to be removed by a public or private towing concern. 
(f)  Storage; owner's duty. A vehicle removed under this article shall be stored by the public or private agency removing same and the owner of the vehicle shall be liable to such agency for all towing and storage charges. 
(g)  Notice of charges. If any abandoned or disabled motor vehicle is removed pursuant to this article and there exist unsatisfied charges to the city to compensate it for expenses incurred, the city shall notify the record title holder of the real estate by certified mail that there are charges due and the amount of such charges and that that amount must be paid to the city within 30 days of the mailing of such notice. 
(h)  Lien. If the charges specified are not paid within the time allowed, the city may place a lien against the real property involved and may enforce the lien as prescribed by Florida Statutes and shall be entitled to compensation for all costs of enforcing such lien plus reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-69. - Responsibilities of owner and operator. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the operator and the owner to ensure compliance with the following: 
(1)  All parts of the premises under the control of the owner or operator shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition consistent with the business use. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall not perform any acts: 
a.  Which render other parts of the premises unsafe or unsanitary; or 
b.  Which obstruct any adjacent owner or operator from performing any duty required, or maintaining the premises in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(3)  Every owner or operator shall eliminate infestation of rodents or insects in and on the premises subject to the owner's or operator's control. 
(4)  Every owner or operator shall maintain all plumbing fixtures in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(5)  No litter shall be stored or accumulated on the premises unless placed in a container in compliance with solid waste regulations. 
(6)  Upon learning of a defect or inoperable status of any facility, utility or equipment required under this article which is the owner's responsibility, the operator shall provide written notice to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-70. - Construction site management. 
(a)  Construction site management plan required. No building permit for any exterior commercial or multi-family construction or improvements shall be issued unless a construction site management plan has been submitted and approved by the building official. Persons who intend to make any of the following improvements shall designate a licensed contractor for the purposes of the construction site management requirements: lot clearing, grading, stockpiling of soil, demolition, building construction or reconstruction, building alteration or addition. These requirements set minimum standards for the operation of the project site to eliminate or minimize impacts to the site and to the neighborhood to include containment of sediment, surface water discharge, erosion of soil, vehicle parking and loading areas, traffic control, fencing, placement of materials, safety, neatness and cleanliness. 
(b)  Submission requirements. The contractor shall submit a construction site management plan with a building permit application which includes the following, unless waived by the building official after review and determination that the requirement is not reasonably applicable: 
(1)  Location of proposed demolition, if any. 
(2)  Grading and drainage surface water management plan for street and project site, including: 
a.  Drainage plan during construction in compliance with subsection (d) of this section. 
b.  Final grading and drainage plan upon completion of construction for the street and project site in compliance with subsections (d)(4) and (5) of this section. 
(3)  Parking plan, including: 
a.  Location of on-site and abutting street parking areas. 
b.  Off-site parking plan in compliance with subsection (e)(4) of this section and the following: 
1.  A single access with dimensions; 
2.  Buffering for adjacent waterways and streets, as approved by the building official; 
3.  A temporary fence location, height and type of fence with screening; 
4.  Narrative describing restoration of the lot and hours of operation. 
c.  Copy of city right-of-way permit for parking in right-of-way. 
(4)  Fencing plan, showing location, height and type of fence with screening or evidence that proposed construction does not warrant a construction fence in compliance with subsection (g)(6) of this section as determined by the building official. 
(5)  Location of construction trailers, loading/unloading area and material storage area. 
(6)  Location of chemical toilets. 
(7)  Location of dumpster. 
(8)  Traffic control plan, showing access with dimensions, area to be stabilized, narrative on phasing of construction with provision of adequate parking and delivery of materials. 
(9)  Other activities, where special conditions are identified by the building official. 
(10)  Proof of notice to owners of property within 300 feet of the outer limits of the subject property, as listed in the property appraiser's records, at least 21 days prior to commencement of construction. The proof consists of a list of property owners and addresses and a receipt or other proof of mailing. Notice is to include: 
a.  A phone number for the contractor where a representative is available whenever construction activities are taking place on site and prior to a storm event. 
b.  The phone number for the city's community development department and police department. 
c.  An approximate timetable for construction activities to include any demolition, excavation, or pile driving activities. 
d.  An offer to have a licensed engineer or city-approved inspector conduct a pre-construction or pre-demolition site inspection of the adjacent properties prior to commencing any demolition, pile driving or similar activities and on-site seismic monitoring during demolition and construction. At a minimum the inspection is to include a visual record of the neighboring properties, a copy of which shall be given to the neighboring property owner and made available to the city on request. 
(c)  Approval of plan; waivers. The building official shall review, approve or deny the construction site management plan. The building official is hereby authorized to grant waivers from submission requirements and corresponding standards: 
(1)  If the requirement is unrelated to proposed development; or 
(2)  If the impact of the proposed development is negligible in that submission requirement area. 
(d)  Grading plan; grading and surface water management standards. 
(1)  Grading. The site shall be graded and maintained during construction: 
a.  To prevent erosion of soil; and 
b.  To control surface water discharge so that no water in excess of pre-construction discharge flows onto abutting property; and 
c.  To prevent accumulation of stagnant water for the duration of construction. 
(2)  Sediment fence. The contractor shall install a sediment fence to protect adjacent properties, including lakes, canals and all other waterways, from discharges of soil, sediment, or construction-related material from the site unless a waiver is obtained from the building official. 
(3)  Maintenance. The contractor shall inspect and maintain all erosion and sediment control practices until construction is complete and the construction site is stabilized. A fence installed to maintain sediment control shall remain in an upright condition until final electrical inspection. 
(4)  Final grading. Final grading of the site shall be in compliance with the construction site management plan. The design shall ensure that no surface water in excess of the pre-construction amount shall flow onto abutting or adjacent properties. The design shall also ensure that the discharge of surface waters shall be off-site into an approved stormwater system. 
(5)  Surface water. Surface waters, including dewatering, shall be directed into an on-site settling basin or otherwise filtered before discharge off-site. Off-site discharge shall be directed to an approved surface water management system during construction and upon final grading of the project site. The contractor shall be responsible for removal of any silt, debris, and dirt that accumulates within the city's stormwater management system, including swales, stormwater retention lakes, ponds, canals and waterways. Discharges of sediment into waters in the State of Florida is a violation of water quality and may result in enforcement action by the Southwest Florida Water Management District, the state department of environmental protection or the city. Discharge of water from swimming pools under construction or completed into ponds, lakes, canals and waterways is prohibited. 
(e)  Parking during development of project. 
(1)  Parking on-site. The owner or contractor shall provide for parking on the project site to the greatest degree possible. Alternative parking sites may include the abutting right-of-way, adjacent vacant lot or offsite parking lots in the immediate area as approved in the construction site management plan. 
(2)  Access. Use of the public right-of-way for access to and from the project site as shown on the construction site management plan shall be strictly managed by the contractor. The contractor shall maintain the public street adjacent to the project site free of dirt, sand or any other debris resulting from construction activities. The public right-of-way adjacent to the project site shall be broom swept on a regular basis keeping it free of dirt, sand and other debris. Failure to remove said material on the day of occurrence is a violation. 
(3)  Temporary graveled or stabilized area for construction access and parking. The contractor shall provide a graveled or stabilized area as shown in the construction site management plan. The stabilized area shall be located at points where vehicles enter and exit the construction site and the parking location. When a right-of-way area is used for parking, the contractor shall provide a graveled or stabilized area on the right-of-way. Upon completion of the project, the contractor shall restore the right-of-way to its original condition or better. The purpose of the graveled or stabilized area at the entrance to the project site is to eliminate and reduce tracking or flow of sand, mud, concrete wash or other related material onto the right-of-way. 
(4)  Parking in the right-of-way. If the construction site management plan illustrates proposed parking in the right-of-way, the application shall be accompanied by a city right-of-way permit. A construction site supervisor must be present whenever parking or deliveries occur in the right-of-way to ensure that vehicles do not limit access on the right-of-way and no damage occurs to the right-of-way or adjacent properties. The owner and contractor shall assume responsibility for any damage and take steps to correct the damage immediately. 
(5)  Offsite parking. The building official may temporarily permit off-site parking on vacant lots other than the project site with the written permission of the owner of the lot where the vehicles are to be parked and in compliance with the following standards: 
a.  Compliance with the construction site management plan. 
b.  The lot shall be used for parking only. 
c.  There shall be no storage of materials, trailers or construction equipment. 
d.  There shall be no loading and unloading of materials or machinery. 
e.  The lot shall remain free of debris or trash. 
f.  A temporary six-foot chain link fence with a single color fabric or other screening materials as approved by the building official shall be located at the front, side, and rear lot line of the temporary parking area except where a lot line is located on the water. Where a lot line is along the water, the fence shall be placed no closer to the water than the yard setback line and shall not exceed three feet in height. The fence gate shall remain locked during non-working hours. The fencing shall remain on-site until the off-site parking is no longer needed to complete the project site and shall be removed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project site. 
(f)  Material storage. Material associated with the project site, including equipment, shall be neatly stored on the site (within the fenced area when applicable). The storage of material shall not obstruct access to the structure under construction or create a public safety hazard. All loading or unloading of materials and/or equipment is limited to the construction site and right-of-way. 
(g)  Construction fencing. A project site that meets the following standards is required to install a construction fence, which means a temporary six-foot chain link fence with a single color fabric. The fence and screening must remain in place, upright and in good repair throughout the construction process. 
(1)  Clearing, grading, stockpiling or soil or demolition. A construction fence is required where clearing, grading, stockpiling of soil or demolition is proposed as follows: 
a.  Lots located in multi-family or commercial zoning districts shall install a fence on the front, side, and rear lot lines prior to commencement of clearing, grading or demolition. Fencing may be removed upon final electrical inspection. 
b.  Lots located in single-family zoning districts shall contain a fence on the side and rear lot lines. Fencing may be removed upon final grading and landscaping or upon replacement with a permanent fence or wall. If no construction has occurred within 45 days of completion of a demolition or lot clearing, the fence shall be removed within 30 days after the final inspection. 
(2)  Major remodeling. Major remodeling shall mean an increase in the building volume of 10,000 cubic feet or more, an increase in the building footprint of 1,000 square feet or more or new construction with a building footprint of 1,000 square feet or more. A construction fence is required for major remodeling as follows: 
a.  Lots located in multi-family or commercial zoning districts shall contain a fence on the front, side and rear lot lines. Fencing may be removed upon final grading and landscaping or upon replacement with a permanent fence or wall; 
b.  All other lots shall contain a fence on the side and rear lot lines. Fencing may be removed upon final grading and landscaping or upon replacement with a permanent fence or wall. 
(3)  Major alteration. Major alteration shall mean a change of 50 percent or more of the gross square footage of an existing structure for reconstruction, rehabilitation, removal of walls, or other improvement excluding replacement of the roof. A construction fence is required for major alteration as follows: 
a.  Lots located in multi-family or commercial zoning districts shall contain a fence on the front, side, and rear lot lines. Fencing may be removed upon final electrical inspection. 
b.  All other lots shall contain a fence on the side and rear lot lines. Fencing may be removed upon final grading and landscaping or upon replacement with a permanent fence or wall. 
(4)  Exception from six-foot height requirement. 
a.  Where a construction fence is required and the property line is located on the water in any residential zoning district, that portion of the construction fence along the water may be reduced to three feet in height within the required yard along the waterfront. 
b.  On lots located in multi-family or commercial zoning districts on non-Gulf waterfronts, the side and rear lot line fences shall be lowered to three feet for that portion which is the greater of: 
1.  30 feet from the mean high water line; or 
2.  30 feet from the platted waterfront building line 
(5)  Exception to installation of construction fence. Where a construction fence would be required for a residential lot pursuant to subsection (1)b., (2)b. or (3)b. above and the owner or contractor obtains a construction fence waiver from the owner of the property that abuts the project site, the building official may waive the requirement for all or a portion of the construction fence but retains the right to require a construction fence at any time. The three-foot sediment fence will still be required. 
(6)  Installation. Installation of a construction fence shall occur prior to any construction activity or material deliveries. The fence shall not be placed so as to create a public safety hazard. Where the project site is enclosed by a fence, the fence gate shall be locked during non-working hours. 
(h)  Signs. A 12-inch by 18-inch sign shall be posted by the contractor on the project site in the location approved on the construction site management plan which is readable from the street. The sign shall contain the street address of the property, phone number for the City of St. Pete Beach and the name and phone number of the general contractor. This sign shall be maintained in a readable condition until completion of construction. 
(i)  Site cleanliness. The owner or contractor shall have the entire construction site clean and free of debris at all times. Clean for purposes of this section means, without limitation, removal and placement into a dumpster of scrap lumber, concrete remnants and roof tile from the project site. The project site shall be free of all loose debris such as cans, metal, plastic and paper. 
(j)  Temporary trailers. When a temporary trailer is proposed and a construction fence is required, it shall be located on the project site within the fence at the location shown on the construction site management plan. 
(k)  Chemical toilets. Chemical toilets shall be located inside the project fence and accessible for servicing. Where a fence is not required, the contractor shall locate the chemical toilet facing towards the rear of the project site and no further than 15 feet from the structure under construction except where another location has been authorized by the building official due to the size of the lot and ease of access to the chemical toilet. 
(l)  Landscaping. Damage to any landscaping on an abutting or adjacent property as a result of the construction shall be replaced and restored at the contractor's expense to its original condition. Failure to replace and repair is a violation. 
(m)  Dumpsters. Construction site dumpsters shall be located inside the fence. Where a fence is not required, it shall be located on the project site. The dumpster shall be emptied in a timely fashion so there is no overflow of debris or litter. Prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued, the dumpster shall be removed from the site. 
(n)  Permitted days and hours for construction work. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building or delivery of materials other than at the following times is prohibited. Such work must be accomplished on Monday through Saturday. No work may be conducted on New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(1)  In residential areas: 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(2)  In nonresidential areas: 6:30 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
a.  Special construction activities. Pile driving and steel erection activity shall be limited to Monday through Friday, excluding federal holidays, during the hours between 8:00 a.m. in the morning until 4:00 p.m. in the evening. Demolition activity shall be limited to Monday through Friday, excluding federal holidays, during scheduled work hours between 8:00 a.m. in the morning and 6:00 p.m. in the evening. Auger cast and hydraulic boring are excluded from this limitation. 
b.  Permit for work during prohibited hours. Any person may apply to the building official for a permit to operate during the hours or days prohibited under this section. If the building official or his designee shall determine that substantial loss or substantial inconvenience would result to any party in interest, and that the public health and safety will not be impaired by such operation, a permit may be issued which would allow work to occur during hours or days otherwise prohibited by this subsection. Notice of permit approval shall be provided by the city to adjacent property owners. The permit shall not exceed three days in duration, but may be renewed from time to time for a like period so long as the circumstances described in this subsection exist. 
c.  Emergency and special types of construction. Where ordinary and necessary trade or engineering practices or an emergency require the continuous operation of pumps, well points, dredges, draglines and other machinery of a like nature during the otherwise prohibited hours, a permit shall be required and such operation shall not constitute a violation of this subsection. It is not the intent of this subsection to require poor or wasteful engineering or building practices in order to comply herewith. 
(o)  Construction-related traffic control. A contractor, owner, vehicle operator or any person associated with the project site who impedes or obstructs the public right-of-way; or who parks, loads, unloads, or carries on any related activity on the public right-of-way shall also be in violation of this section unless such actions are approved in advance by the building official. 
(p)  Requirements during weather emergency. It is the responsibility of the owner and contractor to have removed construction materials from the project site or secured construction materials at the project site at least 48 hours prior to the predicted landfall of a tropical storm or hurricane until the time set forth in subsection (7) below. 
(1)  Applicability. At least 48 hours prior to the predicted landfall of a tropical storm or hurricane for any portion of Pinellas County Florida, as determined by the National Weather Service, National Hurricane Center or appropriate weather agency or as provided in the city's emergency plan; or upon order of the building official in anticipation of a storm emergency; all construction materials, including roof tiles, on all project sites within the city shall be secured and stored onsite in a safe manner or removed so that no material can become a safety hazard with hurricane or tropical storm force winds. 
(2)  Notice. Media broadcasts or notices issued by the National Weather Service or National Hurricane Center of an approaching tropical storm or a hurricane is hereby deemed notice to the owner or contractor. The owner and contractor are responsible for the project site by securing on-site or removing from the site any construction materials or debris to protect against the effect of hurricane or tropical storm force winds. By holding a building permit during hurricane season, the contractor shall monitor the National Weather Service and the National Hurricane Center for weather emergencies. 
(3)  Inspection. A pre-storm inspection shall be required for all active construction sites involving exterior work and/or exterior storage of materials. The owner and contractor shall be responsible for insuring that the construction site has passed inspection prior to the issuance of a tropical storm warning or hurricane warning. The owner or contractor shall be available by phone until the site has passed the pre-storm inspection. Failure to properly secure a job site and pass inspection will be considered a violation of this section. The city may recover as costs of repairs or compliance, the costs associated with securing job sites that have not complied with this section in addition to any fines imposed by the code board. And such costs shall constitute a lien on the property. 
(4)  Materials stockpiled on site. Materials stockpiled on any construction site shall be handled as follows: 
a.  Band construction materials together and fasten them to the structure in such a manner to prevent the material from becoming airborne during a tropical storm or hurricane; or 
b.  Remove construction materials from the top of the structure and secure them to the ground; or 
c.  Remove construction materials from the project site; or 
d.  Store construction materials inside a structure if said structure is secure from tropical or hurricane force wind loads. 
(5)  The contents of construction site dumpsters must be removed or weighted and secured with rope, mesh or other durable, wind resistant material. 
(6)  Portable toilets shall be secured to the structure, dumpster or emptied and laid horizontal and secured to the ground. 
(7)  During the National Weather Service designated hurricane season, building or roofing materials shall not be loaded on a roof earlier than ten working days prior to the permanent installation of the materials. 
(8)  Material capable of becoming airborne. Construction materials, debris or any material capable of becoming airborne shall remain secured and stored on the project site or shall be removed from the project site until the National Weather Service, National Hurricane Center, or the city through local action has removed all persons of the city from those areas included in a tropical storm warning or hurricane warning. Construction shall not resume construction on any construction site until the site is brought into compliance with the construction site management plan. 
(q)  Residential construction management submission requirements. New single and two-family residential development and additions shall submit plans meeting the following requirements unless waived by the building official after review and determination that the requirement is not reasonably applicable. The building official shall determine the adequacy of the submission content based upon the scale and impact of the proposed project: 
(1)  Location of proposed demolition, if any. 
(2)  Grading and drainage surface water management plan for street and project site. 
(3)  Parking plan, including: 
a.  Location of on-site and abutting street parking areas. 
(5)  Location of construction trailers, loading/unloading area and material storage area. 
(6)  Location of chemical toilets. 
(7)  Location of dumpster. 
(8)  Traffic control plan, showing access with provision of adequate parking and delivery of materials. 
(9)  Other activities, where special conditions are identified by the building official. 
(10)  Proof of notice to owners of property within 100 feet of the outer limits of the subject property, as listed in the property appraiser's records, at least ten days prior to commencement of construction. The proof consists of a list of property owners and addresses and a receipt or other proof of mailing. Notice is to include: 
a.  A phone number for the contractor where a representative is available whenever construction activities are taking place on site and prior to a storm event. 
b.  The phone number for the city's community development department and police department. 
c.  An approximate timetable for construction activities to include any demolition, excavation, or pile driving activities. 
d.  When pile driving activities are proposed, notice shall be provided to owners of property within 300 feet of the outer limits of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 9-21-09)  
Sec. 98-71. - Demolition of structures. 
(a)  Submission of plans, bond. Prior to the issuance of any permit for the demolition of a structure or any portion thereof, the applicant shall submit to the building official for review and approval two copies of a demolition plan and, where required, a regrading and revegetation plan along with a bond in the amount of 125 percent of the estimated cost of implementing the regrading and revegetation plan. 
(b)  Demolition plan. The demolition plan shall include: 
(1)  A written description and/or graphic display of the buildings and/or portions of buildings to be demolished. 
(2)  A description of the means of demolition to be utilized. 
(3)  The expected date for demolition to begin. 
(4)  The estimated number of days necessary to complete the demolition and remove the resulting debris. The actual time of demolition, cleanup and, where applicable, regrading and revegetation shall not exceed 100 working days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(c)  Regrading and revegetation plan. If the proposed demolition will remove an entire building or any portion thereof, the applicant for a demolition permit shall also submit a regrading and revegetation plan prepared by a registered landscape architect. This plan shall include: 
(1)  A regrading plan providing for the regrading of the site so that it will be generally smooth and level so that there are no drop-offs, holes or other features which might pose a safety hazard or threaten to damage adjacent Property or any areas likely to hold standing water that might pose a potential health or safety hazard. 
(2)  A revegetation plan providing that the site shall be revegetated by being properly treated with topsoil, sprigged or sodded with a lawn grass commonly used in Pinellas County, and maintained until growth is self-sustaining. If the demolition site is beachfront property and the city building official determines that portions of the site are not suitable for revegetation with any of the lawn grasses commonly used in Pinellas County, then the city building official may approve revegetation of those portions of the demolition site with plants from the following list: 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 
Cakile 	Sea rocket 
Hetrotheca subaxillaris 	Camphorweed 
Ipomoea pes-carprae 	Railroad vine/beach morning glory 
Panicum amarularum 	Dune panic grass 
Paspalum vaginatum 	Salt jointgrass 
Scaevola plumieri 	Inkberry 
Sesuvium portulacastrum 	Sea purslane 
Smilax spp. 	Bamboo vine 
	Horsebriar 
	Greenbriar 
Spartina patens 	Saltmeadow cordgrass 
Uniola planiculata 	Sea oats 
 
or any other plants certified by a registered landscape architect as being equivalent to the species listed in this subsection. These plants shall also be maintained until they become self-sustaining. 
(3)  A written estimate, certified by a registered landscape architect, specifying the cost of implementing the regrading and revegetation plans. 
(4)  The estimated number of days necessary to complete the implementation of the regrading and revegetation plan. This time, other than the maintenance period necessary to achieve self-sustained growth, shall not exceed 90 days from the date demolition is begun. 
(d)  Regrading and revegetation bond. The applicant shall post and maintain at all times during completion of the regarding and vegetation, a surety or cash performance bond running to the city equal to 125 percent of the estimated cost of implementing the regrading and revegetation plans, to ensure the regrading and revegetation of the property within the time required by this article and otherwise to protect the city against any costs which it may incur for the subsequent revegetation of the property if the owner or permit holder fails to complete revegetation within the time required by this article. Upon failure of the permit holder or owner of property to remedy the conditions in violation of the requirements of this article within ten days after service of notice as provided in this section, the city manager is authorized to take all necessary steps to regrade and revegetate the property utilizing the proceeds from the bond. Any necessary costs incurred by the city for that purpose in excess of the bond amount, along with all costs incurred in establishing such lien, shall be a lien upon such property. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-72. - Vacant buildings, vacant structures and vacant or unimproved lots. 
(a)  Responsibilities of owners. All owners of nonresidential structures, vacant buildings, vacant structures and vacant or unimproved lots shall comply with the requirements in this article. 
(b)  Nonresidential structures. 
(1)  All nonresidential structures shall be watertight, weathertight, rodent proof and insect proof and in good repair. 
(2)  Every foundation, exterior wall and roof shall be reasonably watertight, weathertight and rodent proof, shall adequately support the building at all times, and shall be in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair. 
(3)  Every interior partition, wall, floor and ceiling shall be reasonably tight and maintained in a workmanlike state of repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(4)  All rainwater shall be so drained and conveyed from every roof, and the lot shall be so graded and drained, as not to cause dampness in the walls, ceilings, floors or basement of a dwelling. 
(5)  Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and rodent proof and shall be maintained in sound condition and repair, and secured with proper hardware. 
(6)  Every inside and outside stairway, every porch and every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and it shall be maintained in sound condition and repair. 
(7)  Every supplied plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in sanitary working condition, free from defect, leaks, and obstruction. 
(8)  Every toilet, restroom and bathroom floor shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water, and such floors shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(9)  Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed and installed that it will function safely, and effectively, and shall be maintained in good working condition. 
(10)  All exterior surfaces shall be protected from decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. All siding shall be weather-resistant and watertight. 
(11)  No abandoned or inoperative vehicle shall be permitted on nonresidential property in view of the general public in violation of chapter 34, article IV, of this Code, relating to abandoned or inoperative vehicles. 
(c)  Structures, unimproved lots. 
(1)  Every owner of a building, structure or lot, vacant or occupied, shall keep the premises in clean and sanitary condition, including yards, lawn, courts and driveways. 
(2)  Exterior premises shall be kept free from the excessive growth of weeds, grass and other flora. 
(3)  Every owner of a building, structure or lot, vacant or occupied, shall grade and maintain the exterior premises so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon. 
(4)  Animals and pets shall not be kept on the premises in such manner as to create unsanitary conditions or constitute a public nuisance. 
(5)  Every owner of a vacant building, structure or lot shall keep the premises reasonably free from rodents, insects and vermin. 
(6)  The roof of every vacant building or structure shall be well-drained of rain water. 
(7)  All exterior surfaces shall be properly maintained and protected from the elements by paint or other approved protective coating applied in a workmanlike fashion. 
(8)  Every owner of a building, structure or lot, vacant or occupied, shall be responsible for removing any unauthorized obsolete, noncomplying or any deteriorated signs, posters and graffiti from the building's exterior. 
(9)  All materials used to board or secure a vacant building against entry shall be painted in a workmanlike fashion in the same color as other exterior walls of the building. 
(10)  Every owner of a building or structure that is vacant and unsecured shall secure and maintain in secure condition all entrances and all other openings of such building or structure including, but not limited to, windows and doorways. 
(11)  Such vacant building or structure shall be secured as follows: 
a.  On all vacant buildings or structures other than vacant commercial storefronts, the ground floor entrances, windows and other openings of such vacant building or structure shall be secured and sealed with concrete block or other materials providing the same level of protection against forced entry as determined by the building official or his designee. For purposes of this section the term "ground floor entrances" shall include all openings which are readily accessible to a person six feet in height without use of a ladder or other climbing aid. 
b.  All other unsecured entrances, windows and openings not otherwise covered by this section shall be secured by wood or other similar materials approved by the building official or his designee. Entrances and windows above the ground floor shall be regarded as secure if the entrances are locked and not otherwise open to entry and the windows contain glass which is not cracked or broken or shutters which prevent entry. 
c.  As an alternative, vacant buildings and structures may be secured in accordance with a total building security plan if approved by the building official. 
d.  Whenever any ground floor window of a vacant commercial storefront is found to be shattered, cracked, missing or broken, the owner of such building shall be required to repair or replace the window. 
(12)  Every owner of a vacant building, structure or lot, shall provide and maintain all unpaved areas of the site with grass, ground cover, shrubbery, or other suitable plant material. Paving of vacant lots shall be prohibited unless a site plan has been approved by the planning and zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-73. - Unsanitary vacant properties declared nuisances; enclosure required; action by city when owner fails to enclose. 
(a)  The city commission finds and determines that there exist within the city numerous vacant lots and lots containing vacant buildings and structures whereon the excessive growth and accumulation of weeds, other plant life, trash and waste occurs in such manner as to cause infestation by rodents and wild animals, the breeding of mosquitoes and vermin and threatens or endangers the public health, or adversely affect and impair the economic welfare of adjacent property. Such properties constitute a public nuisance to the community. 
(b)  The presence of a fence or wall surrounding vacant lots and lots containing vacant buildings and structures is a deterrent to the unauthorized and illegal use of such lots as dumping sites for trash, debris and waste. 
(c)  The requirements set forth in this article are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(1)  Unsanitary vacant properties declared nuisances. The existence of excessive accumulation or untended growth of weeds or either dead or living plant life or any garbage or rubbish upon any vacant lot, tract or parcel of land or any land containing a vacant building or vacant structure and located within 200 feet of the boundary line of any improved property within the city, to the extent and in the manner that such property is or may become infested or inhabited by rodents, vermin or wild animals or may furnish a breeding place for mosquitoes, or threatens or endangers the public health, safety or welfare, or adversely affects and impairs the economic welfare of adjacent property, is hereby prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance. 
(2)  Enclosure required. 
a.  Any vacant building, structure or lot which is not completely enclosed by a wall or a black or green vinyl-coated fence and which is found in violation of this article by the city's special magistrate or county court judge or any such vacant lot which has been cleared by the city due to the owner's failure to comply with lot maintenance requirements of this article on two separate occasions in any two-year period shall be enclosed by its owner by a wall or a black or green vinyl-coated fence to of at least six feet in height. The code inspector shall notify such owner by certified mail when a wall or a black or green vinyl-coated fence is required pursuant to this section, and the owner shall have 45 days from receipt of such notice to cause the wall or a black or green vinyl-coated fence to be erected. 
b.  If an owner believes that the code inspector has erred in determining that enclosure is required, such determination may be appealed to the special magistrate. If the special magistrate determines that enclosure is required, the owner shall have 30 days from the date of such determination to enclose the property. 
c.  Where City Code permits walls or fences to exceed five feet in height, the owner may choose to erect a wall or a black or green vinyl-coated fence exceeding five feet in height in keeping with that code. Walls or fences erected pursuant to this section shall also conform to all other requirements of the Land Development Code, including those pertaining to the type of fencing materials permitted. 
(3)  Action by city when owner fails to enclose. If within 45 days after mailing of the required notice, or if an appeal is requested, within 30 days of the determination of the special magistrate, the required wall or fence has not been erected, the city may cause the subject property to be enclosed by a black or green vinyl-coated five-foot fence at the property owner's expense. Chainlink fence shall be used for this purpose where permitted. 
(4)  Unpaid costs to be secured by lien. The city shall certify the expense incurred by the city in enclosing the subject property whereupon such expenses, together with the applicable administrative fee, shall be billed to the property owner and shall become due and payable within 30 days of the mailing of such bill. Any such bill which has not been paid within the 30-day period shall become a lien upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-74. - Boarding of vacant buildings or dwellings. 
(a)  Findings and purpose. 
(1)  The city commission finds, determines, and declares that buildings which remain vacant and unoccupied for any unreasonable period of time become an attractive nuisance or dangerous condition to children, a harborage for insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests, an invitation to criminals as a temporary abode and as a place to conduct illegal conduct, frequently including illegal drug-related activity, and an increased fire hazard; that unkept and unsecured grounds surrounding such buildings invite the dumping of garbage and trash thereon and the congregation of unauthorized persons who use the property for illegal activity; that such buildings contribute to the growth of blight within the city, depress market values of surrounding properties, thereby reducing tax revenues, necessitate additional governmental services, significantly interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties, create an unhealthy and unsafe condition affecting the public, and constitute an unreasonable use of property and a public nuisance. 
(2)  The protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city requires the establishment and enforcement of the means by which such nuisance conditions may be prevented and abated. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall apply generally to all property throughout the city. 
(2)  Provisions of this article are to be supplementary and complementary to all of the provisions of this Code, state law, and any law cognizable in common law or in equity, and nothing in this article shall be read, interpreted, or construed in any manner so as to limit any existing right or power of the city to abate any and all nuisances. 
(c)  Responsibility for property maintenance. Every owner of real property within the city is required to maintain such property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this article, and such owner remains liable for violations thereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such property. 
(d)  Nuisances specified. It is declared unlawful and a public nuisance for any owner of any property in the city to maintain such property or to permit such property to be maintained in such a manner that any one or more of the conditions described in the following subsections are found to exist: 
(1)  Any vacant and unoccupied building of which doors, windows, or other openings are broken or missing, so as to allow access to the interior, or boarded and which is not secured in compliance with this article. 
(2)  Any vacant and unoccupied building of which doors, windows, or other openings are secured by boarding, but for which there is no current and valid boarding certificate as required by this article. 
(e)  Certificate required for boarding building. 
(1)  All buildings which are boarded shall require a certificate of boarding be issued by the city. The fee for boarding certificates shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(2)  No person shall erect, install, place, or maintain boards over the doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure or otherwise secure such openings by a means other than the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure without first applying for and, within 30 days of application, completing all of the steps necessary for the issuance of a boarding certificate, and thereafter having a valid and current boarding certificate issued by the building official. 
(3)  The building official shall issue a boarding certificate required by subsection (1) of this section upon the submission of a written application by the owner of the property or his authorized representative or contractor; upon the payment of the required fee; and upon the confirmation, through inspection by a city inspector, that the boarding or other method of securing the building or structure has been done in compliance with this article. 
(4)  The boarding certificate issued pursuant to this section shall authorize the boarding or other securing of a building or structure for a period of no greater than six months from the date of the issuance. Renewal of the boarding certificate may be granted by the building official after the initial six-month period for an additional six months. The issuance of a renewal boarding certificate shall be subject to all of the following conditions: 
a.  The boarding or other method of securing the building or structure has been done in compliance with this article, as confirmed by a city inspector after inspection of the building or structure by the inspector. 
b.  The owner or his authorized representative or contractor has submitted to the building official, prior to the hearing, a detailed plan for correction, repair, or rehabilitation of violations of state or local building and housing standards and for the securing of the doors, windows, and other openings by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure or, alternatively, a detailed plan for sale of the property to another person or entity with provision in the sale of correction, repair, or rehabilitation. 
c.  The owner or his authorized representative or contractor has submitted to the building official, prior to the hearing, a time line for applying for all appropriate permits for such work and for completing such work prior to the expiration of the renewal certificate or, alternatively, a time line for the sale of the property. 
d.  The renewal certificate may be revoked by the building official if the owner fails to comply with the plan for such work or fails to adhere to the submitted time line. 
(5)  A boarding certificate may not be extended beyond the renewal period except upon demonstration that good cause for the renewal exists. Good cause shall require a showing by the owner that the certificate renewal is made necessary by conditions or events beyond the owner's control, such as inability to obtain financing for repair or rehabilitation, inability to locate a suitable buyer, unanticipated delays in construction or rehabilitation, or unanticipated damage to the property. In addition, where appropriate, good cause shall also require a showing by the owner that the owner has exercised reasonable and due diligence in attempting to complete the needed correction, repair, or rehabilitation, or is attempting to sell the property. If the building official determines that there exists good cause to renew the certificate, the certificate may be renewed by the building official for a period of up to, but not more than, an additional six months, subject to all of the same conditions imposed on the original renewal certificate. 
(e)  Standards for securing building. 
(1)  Compliance with city specifications. The boarding of the doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure, or any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, shall comply with the specifications as required by the city. 
(2)  Additional requirements. In connection with the boarding of the doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure, or any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, the owner shall also comply with all of the following requirements: 
a.  All utility service to the building or structure shall be terminated by removal of the meters and termination of electric power at the pole. Compliance with this subsection a. may be waived in writing by the city as to the electric utility service if electricity is needed to power exterior security lighting, an alarm system, or equipment to be used in connection with the rehabilitation of the building or structure for which there is an active and current building permit. 
b.  The sewer shall be capped in a manner approved by the city so as to prevent the accumulation of methane gas in the building or structure. 
c.  The interior of the building or structure shall be cleaned of all trash, junk, garbage, debris, and solid waste, and personal possessions shall be removed from the interior of the building or structure, so as to eliminate any fire or health hazard and to prevent hindrance to firefighting equipment or personnel in the event of a fire. 
(f)  Exceptions. A boarding certificate shall not be required in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Temporary emergency situations, including, but not limited to, hurricane preparation and damage caused by weather. 
(2)  Property which is under the jurisdiction of the nuisance abatement board, pursuant to an order rendered by the nuisance abatement board. 
(3)  Property which is under the jurisdiction of the construction board of adjustment and appeals, pursuant to an order rendered by the construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(g)  Violations; enforcement. Violations of this article shall be enforced pursuant to any of the following provisions: 
(1)  By injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction upon a suit brought by the city. 
(2)  All other remedies and penalties available to the city under this Code, state law, federal law, or common law, including but not limited to those allowed by F.S. ch. 162. 
(h)  Each and every day during which a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(i)  Costs incurred by city; assessment of lien. All costs incurred by the city based upon actions taken by the city to cure violations of this article shall be charged and billed to the person in violation of this article. Unless payment is made within 30 days of such billing, the city commission may, by the adoption of a resolution levying such charges, assess against the property a lien in the amount of the charges outstanding, or such lesser amount as the city commission shall decide is just and fair. 
(1)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the building official to enforce this article and to proceed against each and every person found in violation of the requirements of this article. 
(2)  All inspections, regulations and enforcement of violations of the provisions of this article, unless expressly stated to the contrary, shall be under the direction and supervision of the building official. 
(3)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all lawful times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this article. If such building or premises are occupied, the building official shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(4)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-75. - Failure of property owner to comply. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city manager from immediately abating nuisances on an emergency basis by notifying the property owner of the existence of the nuisance, allowing the owner a period of two days from receipt of the notice to either abate the nuisance or file an appeal and if not completed or appealed within such time the city or its contractor may abate the nuisance and the cost of such abatement shall be secured by a lien on the property. Unless payment is made within 30 days of billing of such amount, the city commission may, by the adoption of a resolution levying such charges, assess against the property a lien in the amount of the charges outstanding, or such lesser amount as the city commission shall decide is just and fair 
An emergency is defined as the existence of any condition which poses an immanent threat to the physical health or safety of the public. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Sec. 98-76. - Priority of liens. 
All liens provided for by this article, to the extent allowed by law, shall be equal in rank and dignity with the lien of ad valorem taxes and shall be superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles, and claims in, to or against the property. Such lien shall be payable with interest at the maximum legal rate and shall have the maximum dignity and priority over other liens as may be allowed by law. Liens shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and in the public records of the Pinellas County as a lien against the property. Such liens shall be foreclosed in the same manner in which mortgage liens are foreclosed as may be provided by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Secs. 98-77—98-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEAWALLS, BULKHEADS AND RETAINING WALLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Waterways, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Beach and Shore Preservation Act, F.S. § 161.011 et seq. 
 
Secs. 98-96—98-98. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-07, § 1(b), adopted May 1, 2003, repealed §§ 98-96—98-98, which pertained to definitions; compliance; and permit application; issuance. See the Code Comparative Table. It should also be noted that a new Land Development Code is pending publication.  
Sec. 98-99. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-11, § 1, adopted April 15, 1997, repealed § 98-99, which pertained to expiration of approvals; notice when construction delayed, resumed. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 98-100. - Standards for seawalls, bulkheads and retaining walls not on Gulf of Mexico. 
All seawalls, bulkheads, and retaining walls constructed or altered, projected or prolonged, on or adjacent to waters of the county, other than those of the Gulf of Mexico shall be of concrete or aluminum construction in compliance with the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Concrete seawalls. 
a.  All seawalls, retaining walls, and bulkheads shall be of concrete, utilizing the tongue and groove sheet pile type construction, with poured in place concrete cap and tieback anchors. The concrete shall have a minimum test strength of 3,500 pounds per square inch (psi) at 28 days, and all reinforcing steel shall be covered with a minimum of two inches of concrete. 
b.  The concrete sheet piling shall have a minimum thickness of 5 5/8 inches and contain vertical steel reinforcement equivalent in cross sectional area to one # 4 deformed reinforcing bars spaced at eight inches on-center. Each slab shall have two no. 4 steel hairpins extending into the cap a minimum of three inches. 
c.  The poured in place concrete cap shall not be less than 9½ inches in thickness nor less than 16 inches in width. 
d.  The cap shall contain continuous horizontal steel reinforcement equivalent in cross sectional area to four # 4 deformed reinforcing bars. All splices shall be lapped not less than 40 diameters. However, the steel shall not be continuous through expansion joints. 
e.  All tieback rods shall be steel and shall have a cross sectional area equal to or greater than a # 8 reinforcing bar. All such rods shall be spaced not more than ten feet o/c and shall have two or more coats of an approved protection material. The length of all tie rods shall be equal to or greater than two times the height of seawall slab projecting above the ground line. In no case shall the tie rods be of shorter length than 12 feet. 
f.  All anchors shall be poured in place concrete, containing not less than 4½ cubic feet of concrete and have not less than 4½ square feet of vertical surface perpendicular to the alignment of the tie rod. Each anchor shall contain vertical and horizontal steel reinforcement equivalent in cross sectional area to two # 4 deformed reinforcing bars in each direction. 
g.  The penetration of each seawall slab into firm ground shall be equal to 0.6 times the height of the wall above the ground line or 0.4 times the total length of the slab, whichever is greater. In no case shall the seawall slab be of shorter length than eight feet. 
h.  The elevation for all seawalls, bulkheads and retaining walls fronting on the bay shall be equal to or greater than elevation 5.0 USCGS datum mean sea level. 
(2)  Aluminum seawalls. 
a.  Aluminum seawalls shall not have an exposed height of more than five feet. 
b.  Sheet piles shall be fabricated from aluminum alloy 6061-T6, conforming to ASTM designation B209 alloy 6061 for chemical composition, having a minimum thickness of 0.125-inch and minimum tensile strength of 35,500 psi. Corrugations shall have nominal nine-inch pitch, and nominal 2.5-inch depth. The penetration into firm ground shall be equal to 0.67 times the height of the wall above the ground line or 0.4 times the total length of the sheet, whichever is greater. In no case shall the total sheet be less than six feet in length. Where sheet lengths required are more than 8.5 feet, and where soil conditions, surcharges and other factors exceed the scope of these standard specifications, a special design shall be submitted, signed and sealed by a state registered professional engineer. 
c.  Cap and joint extrusion shall be fabricated from aluminum alloy 6063-T6, conforming to ASTM designation B221 alloy 6063 for chemical composition; and shall have a minimum thickness of 0.15-inch and a minimum tensile strength of 30,000 psi. The cap shall be a minimum of six inches wide and 5.75 inches deep. 
d.  Anchor rods and deadman anchor plates shall be fabricated from aluminum alloy 6061-TS, conforming to ASTM designation B221 alloy 6061 for chemical composition; and shall have a minimum thickness of anchor plates of 0.10-inch and a minimum tensile strength of 38,000 psi. The anchor plates shall not be less than 1.5 by 2.5 feet equipment with a 3-inch by 2.25-inch backing channel 0.25-inch thick and 1.5 feet long. Anchor plates shall be placed with the top at least two feet below the elevation of the wall cap. The anchor rods shall be not less than 0.75-inch in diameter and equipped with a rod sleeve, nut and curved washer where it passes through the cap. Anchor rods shall be installed continuously along the wall at a maximum spacing of 6.5 feet. The normal length shall be 12 feet. One tieback system shall be constructed at each end of the wall, and thereafter one tieback system shall be constructed at each interval of 6.5 feet on-center for the entire length. All tie rods shall be pretensioned after placement of backfill around anchor plates, but before final backfill of sheeting. Such pretensioning shall not tend to move the sheets or anchors. Tie rods shall be placed in the coping so that the anchor pull brings the coping in direct contact with a bayside corrugation of the wall sheeting. 
e.  Surcharge from fill behind the wall shall be controlled by limiting the slope to a maximum of ten degrees and prohibiting objects other than landscaping to be located closer than five feet from the wall cap. The minimum standards described above assume sandy soil with angle of repose of 30 degrees for soil against the wall. They also assume that the environment is not highly alkaline or acidic. If conditions require a design in excess of the limitations specified in this subsection, the wall shall be of concrete construction in accordance with subsection (1) of this section. 
f.  If the aluminum material is brought in contact with mortar or concrete, a coating of clear methacrylate lacquer shall be applied to the aluminum contact surface to prevent corrosion. There shall be no dissimilar metals or metal systems bonded to the wall. 
(Code 1960, § 13A-5(a); Ord. No. 62, § 6; Code 1983, § 6-46; Ord. No. 97-11, § 1, 4-15-97)  
Sec. 98-101. - Standards for seawalls, bulkheads and retaining walls on Gulf of Mexico. 
All seawalls, bulkheads or retaining walls constructed or altered on the Gulf of Mexico shall be of masonry construction in compliance with the following minimum standards: 
(1)  All seawalls and bulkheads shall be of concrete, utilizing the tongue and groove sheet pile type construction, with poured in place concrete cap and tieback anchors. The concrete shall have a minimum test strength of 3,500 pounds per square inch (psi) at 28 days and all reinforcing steel shall be covered with a minimum of 2½ inches of concrete. 
(2)  The concrete sheet piling shall have a minimum thickness of 7½ inches and contain vertical steel reinforcement equivalent in cross sectional area to # 6 deformed reinforcing bars spaced at six inches on-center. Each slab shall have two # 6 steel hairpins extending into the cap a minimum of three inches. All reinforcing steel shall be epoxy coated. 
(3)  The poured in place concrete cap shall not be less than 12 inches in thickness or less than 18 inches in width. 
(4)  The cap shall contain continuous horizontal steel reinforcement equivalent in cross sectional area to four # 5 deformed reinforcing bars. All splices shall be lapped not less than 40 diameters. However, the steel shall not be continuous through expansion joints. The cap shall also contain not less than four # 2 stirrups that encircle the horizontal steel, spaced equally 12 inches on-centers. Expansion joints shall normally be provided every 40 feet. 
(5)  All tieback rods shall be steel and have a cross sectional area equal to or greater than a # 9 reinforcing bar. All such rods shall be spaced not more than ten feet on-center and shall be encased in concrete with a minimum coverage of three inches. The length of all tie rods shall be equal to or greater than two times the height of seawall slab projecting above the ground line. In no case shall the tie rods be of shorter length than 16 feet. 
(6)  Tieback anchors shall be poured in place concrete, containing not less than 7.5 cubic feet of concrete, and have not less than 7.5 square feet of vertical surface perpendicular to the alignment of the tie rod. Each anchor shall contain horizontal steel reinforcement equivalent in cross sectional area to four # 4 deformed reinforcing bars and be provided with # 2 steel stirrups, 12 inches on-centers. 
(7)  The penetration of each seawall slab into firm ground shall be equal to or greater than 0.5 times the total length of the slab. In no case shall the seawall slab be of shorter length than 12 feet. 
(8)  The elevation for all seawalls, bulkheads and retaining walls fronting on the Gulf of Mexico shall be equal to or greater than elevation 6.0 feet USCGS datum mean sea level. 
(Code 1960, § 13A-5(b); Ord. No. 62, § 6; Code 1983, § 6-47; Ord. No. 97-11, § 1, 4-15-97)  
Sec. 98-102. - Cutting, removing tiebacks. 
No tiebacks shall be cut or removed in connection with the construction of facilities other than seawalls, or otherwise, without making provision in some manner to secure the stability of the installation, and such plans shall be approved by the building official prior to the cutting or removing of any tiebacks. 
(Code 1960, § 13A-8; Ord. No. 62, § 9; Code 1983, § 6-50; Ord. No. 97-11, § 1, 4-15-97)  
Sec. 98-103. - Duty to remove debris, tools, equipment after work completed. 
It shall be unlawful to permit debris, residue, tools and equipment resulting from or used during the progress of the work done under this article to remain in any waterway or on any lots, alleys, streets or thoroughfares for more than 15 days after completion of the work. The responsibility for removal of such debris or equipment is fixed upon the person in whose name the permit required by this article is issued. If the debris, residue, tools or equipment is not removed within the 15-day period, in addition to the penalties for violation thereof, the director of planning and development may enter upon any premises upon which such is found and employ such labor and take such steps as may be reasonably required to remove such. The cost and expense of such removal shall be and become a lien upon the premises improved by the work for which the permit was issued. 
(Code 1960, § 13A-3; Ord. No. 62, § 4; Code 1983, § 6-44; Ord. No. 97-11, § 1, 4-15-97)  
Sec. 98-104. - Appeals. 
Applications which require a variance from the siting requirements of subsection (4)a. or b. of section 98-98, and for which statements of "no objection" cannot be obtained, amy be appealed to the appropriate board of authority for a decision. 
The board shall hold a public hearing on such variance request in accordance with the procedures set forth in the land development regulations for other variances. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant establishes, by substantial competent evidence, that: 
(1)  A literal enforcement of the provisions of this article would result in extreme hardship due to the unique nature of the project and the applicant's property; 
(2)  The variance sought is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the applicant's property; and 
(3)  The granting of the requests variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this article and will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental or of adverse effect to the public interest and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 97-11, § 1, 4-15-97)  
Secs. 98-105—98-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V - FLOOD HAZARD MITIGATION REGULATIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, adopted Sept. 22, 2015, repealed Art. V, §§ 98-120—98-139, and reenacted said article as set out herein. Former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2003-11, § 1, adopted June 17, 2003. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 98-120.1. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida, hereinafter referred to as "this section." 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-120.2. - Scopes. 
The provisions of this section shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-120.3. - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of this section and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary or prolonged disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate practices, at the time of initial construction, in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22; 
(9)  Protect human life and health; 
(10)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(11)  Ensure that property owners are notified yearly the property is in a flood prone area; 
(12)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; and 
(13)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-120.4. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life; loss of property; health and safety hazards; disruption of commerce and governmental services; extraordinary public expenditure for flood protection and relief; and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands, which are inadequately elevated, flood proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-120.5. - Coordination with the Florida Building Code. 
This section is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-120.6. - Warning. 
The degree of flood protection required by this section and the Florida Building Code is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the Flood Insurance Study and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), requiring the city to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-120.7. - Disclaimer of liability. 
This section shall not create liability on the part of the city, its officers, agents, elected or appointed officials or employees thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY 
 
Sec. 98-121.1. - Conflict. 
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement in this section, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where the requirements of this section and another law, code or regulation conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-121.2. - Areas to which this section applies. 
This section shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the city as established in section 98-121.3. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-121.3. - Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. 
The Flood Insurance Study for Pinellas County, Florida and incorporated areas dated August 18, 2009, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying FIRMs, and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this section and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the Community Development Department, Building Division, 155 Corey Ave, St. Pete Beach, Florida 33706. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-121.4. - Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. 
To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to division 5 the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the city indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this section and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-121.5. - Other laws. 
The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-121.6. - Abrogation. 
This section supersedes any ordinance or City Code in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances or City Codes including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, storm water management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. This section shall not repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-121.7. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this section, all requirements shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 98-122.1. - Designation. 
The building official is designated as the floodplain administrator for the purposes of this section. The floodplain administrator may delegate the performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-122.2. - General. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this section consistent with the intent and purpose of this section and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this section without the granting of a variance pursuant to division 7. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-122.3. - Applications and permits. 
The duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review all applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this section; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries and a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  When interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation; 
(5)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(6)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(7)  Review all applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(8)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this section is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; 
(9)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the Building Department employees to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this section; 
(10)  Review all applications for permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this section have been satisfied; 
(11)  Advise applicant that additional federal and state permits may be required and ensure that all required state and federal permits have been received. The floodplain administrator shall require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the city permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-122.4. - Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. 
For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the current market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this section is required. 
For the purpose of making this determination, the cost to perform the improvements and the cost to perform the repairs shall not be cumulative from project to project. Costs of improvements and costs of repairs shall include all costs attributed to a project and shall be determined: 
(1)  By submission of a detailed cost estimate by a licensed contractor, provided such estimate includes all work required to complete the work described in the permit application; 
(2)  By submission of a summation of the prevailing market cost for all materials and labor including all expenses normally charged or incurred if the work were performed by a contractor (e.g., construction supervision and management, insurance, overhead and profit, demolition, etc.); or 
(3)  By the floodplain administrator if the applicant's submission and supporting data do not, in the opinion of the floodplain administrator, reasonably reflect the actual project cost; alternatively, the floodplain administrator may require submission of another estimate. If determined by the floodplain administrator the floodplain administrator may use (a) the most recent (at the start of construction) square foot valuation data for this area published by the International Code Council; (b) an estimated cost using current prices provided by Marshall and Swift; or (c) the replacement cost less the depreciation costs (at the start of construction) identified in a certified appraisal less than 12 months old. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-122.5. - Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
The floodplain administrator shall review requests that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to division 7. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-122.6. - Notices and orders. 
The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-122.7. - Inspections. 
The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in division 6 for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-122.8. - Other duties of the floodplain administrator. 
The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to section 98-122.4; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to FEMA and ensure that the entity responsible for maintenance within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is identified so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished; 
(3)  Inform an applicant that if the watercourse being altered or relocated is noted as a water/drainage feature on the city's future land use map, any change to the watercourse would require a comprehensive plan amendment to change the map, subject to agency and local government review including the Departments of Economic Opportunity, Environmental Protection, State, Transportation, Tampa Bay Regional Planning Council and Pinellas County; 
(4)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the FIRMs if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations. Such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
(5)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this section and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and 
(6)  Notify FEMA when the corporate boundaries of the city are modified. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-122.9. - Floodplain management records. 
Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including FIRMs; letters of map change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this section; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, in addition to documentation kept by the zoning official, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at the Community Development Department, Building Division, 155 Corey Ave, St. Pete Beach, Florida 33706. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 98-123.1. - Permits required. 
Any applicant who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this section, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). Permits shall include a condition that all other applicable city, state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development. Issuance of a permit by the city does not in any way create any right on the part of an applicant to obtain a permit from a state or federal agency and does not create any liability on the part of the city for issuance of the permit if the applicant fails to obtain requisite approvals or fulfill obligations imposed by a state or federal agency or undertakes actions that result in a violation of state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-123.2. - Floodplain development permits or approvals. 
Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this section for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-123.3. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(2)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
(3)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(4)  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
(5)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(6)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
(7)  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(8)  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(9)  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on Flood Insurance Rate Maps. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-123.4. - Permit procedures. 
To obtain a permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application with the floodplain administrator in writing on a form furnished by the city with any required fee prior to the start of development. The information provided shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval; 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site; 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended; 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in division 5; 
(5)  The plans or construction documents must be in duplicate and drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structure, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and their location; 
(6)  State the valuation of the proposed work; 
(7)  Evidence that the proposed development will fully comply with all the provisions of this section; 
(8)  Base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less; 
(9)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent; 
(10)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-123.5. - Validity of permit or approval. 
The issuance of a permit pursuant to this section shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this section, the Florida Building Code, or any other ordinance or City Code. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-123.6. - Issuance of permit. 
The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit if the application fully complies with the provisions of this section and shall deny the application and refuse to issue a permit if the application does not fully comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-123.7. - Expiration. 
A permit shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-123.8. - Suspension or revocation. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this section or any other city, state or federal ordinance, regulation or requirement. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-123.9. - Other permits required. 
Permits shall include a condition that all other applicable city, state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The Southwest Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065 and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for construction, reconstruction, changes, or physical activities for shore protection or other activities seaward of the coastal construction control line; F.S. § 161.141. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the joint coastal permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(5)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(6)  Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-123.10. - Certificate of occupancy. 
Prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued, the following must be submitted and approved by the floodplain administrator: 
(1)  Declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement). 
(2)  As-built survey by a registered land surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 5. - SITE PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 
 
Sec. 98-124.1. - Information for development in flood hazard areas. 
The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this section shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the FIS, they shall be established in accordance with section 98-124.2(2) or (3). 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the FIS, such elevations shall be established in accordance with section 98-124.2(1). 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
(8)  Delineation of the coastal construction control line or notation that the site is seaward of the coastal construction control line, if applicable. 
(9)  Extent of any proposed alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, provided such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this section but that are not required to be prepared by a licensed professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-124.2. - Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate zone A). 
Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-124.3. - Additional analyses and certifications. 
As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed professional engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in section 98-124.4 and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the FIS or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as zone AO or zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in section 98-124.4. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-124.4. - Submission of additional data. 
When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 98-125.1. - General. 
Development for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-125.2. - Development other than buildings and structures. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and the conditions of issued permits. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-125.3. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and the conditions of issued permits. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-125.4. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. 
Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
(1)  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
(2)  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 98-124.2(3)(b), the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-125.5. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. 
As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in section 98-125.4. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-125.6. - Manufactured homes. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 7. - APPEALS AND VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 98-126.1. - General. 
Requests for variances from the strict application of this section are limited to functionally dependent uses and historic structures. The city commission shall hear and decide on requests for variances for functionally dependent uses as defined in this section. The historic preservation board (herein "board") shall hear and decide on requests for variances for historic structures as designated by Division 28, Land Development Code. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the city commission shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-126.2. - Appeals. 
The city commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this ordinance. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board or city commission may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida Statutes. The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeals, both granted and denied and report any variances to FEMA as requested. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-126.3. - Limitations on authority to grant variances. 
Both the city commission and/or board may authorize variances from the provisions of this section after receipt of an application which provides all relevant information required by the floodplain administrator both the city commission and/or board shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications, the considerations for issuance in section 98-126.7, and the conditions of issuance, all of which are contained in section 98-126.8., and the comments and recommendations of the, floodplain administrator including those based upon the Florida Building Code. Both the city commission and board have the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this section. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-126.4. - Restrictions in floodways. 
A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in section 98-124.3. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-126.5. - Historic buildings. 
A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, reconstruction, restoration or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, existing buildings, chapter 12, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, reconstruction, restoration or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, reconstruction, restoration and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. Historic properties may be required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-126.6. - Functionally dependent uses. 
A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this section, provided the variance meets the requirements of section 98-126.4, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-126.7. - Considerations for issuance of variances. 
In reviewing requests for variances, the board or city commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this section, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future individual owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion for the proposed use; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan, the FIS for the area and this section; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges; 
(11)  The necessity to the development of a waterfront location; and 
(12)  Economic hardship and self-created hardship are not relevant factors and shall not be considered as reasons to grant a variance. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-126.8. - Conditions for issuance of variances. 
After consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this section variances shall be granted by the board or city commission only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this section or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the board or city commission that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, based on the considerations set forth for issuance of a variance, due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; and 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and 
d.  The variance receives the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the board or city commission; and 
e.  No variance shall be granted for development which was constructed without a permit, or beyond the scope of a permit, unless it meets the considerations set forth for the issuance of a variance and receives the affirmative vote of a super-majority of the board or city commission. 
(3)  No variance, if granted, shall be effective until a copy of the variance with the name of the owner and the legal description of the property is recorded in the office of the clerk of the court so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. The application shall provide notice to, and each application shall acknowledge that, the granting of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance (in some cases amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage or increases of 100 percent or greater) and construction pursuant to the variance increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 8. - VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 98-127.1. - Violations. 
Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this section that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this section, shall be deemed a violation of this section. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this section or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-127.1.2. - Declaration of violation. 
(a)  Where a violation of this section has been found to exist by: 
(1)  A court of competent jurisdiction; 
(2)  The special magistrate; 
(3)  The written admission of a property owner, or 
(4)  The city commission. 
[If] the violation has not been corrected, the city commission may declare the property to be in violation of this section and forward the declaration to FEMA. The issuance of the declaration may cause the property to be denied flood insurance and no permits will be issued for any improvements to the property except permits for the maintenance of structures existing at the time the declaration is made and permits for the removal of violations of this section. 
(b)  The declaration shall be approved by resolution of the city commission and should meet the requirements of section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 as implemented by part 73 of 44 CFR and any other applicable law. The declaration shall be recorded in the public records. The owner/occupant shall be required to obtain a new certificate of occupancy stating the existence of a compliant structure from the floodplain administrator to ensure compliance. The declaration may be rescinded by resolution of the city commission, provided that the resolution meets the requirements of section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act. 
(c)  Structures existing on the property at the time a declaration is approved by city commission shall not be, in addition, cited for violating the requirements of this section. Violations of the City Code, not including violations of this section, which exist on the date of the declaration, may be cited. 
(d)  Any violation existing on the date of the declaration for which no building permit was issued which does not meet the requirements of the Florida Building Code (except the provisions of this section) shall be removed. Any violation which is required to obtain a building permit to correct shall be removed (except the provisions of this section). 
(e)  The floodplain administrator may require such documents and certificates and perform such inspections as are reasonably necessary prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy. 
(f)  Any work done after the date of the declaration is a violation of this section, may be cited for violating this section, and shall be removed. No variances to this subsection shall be granted. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-127.1.3. - Authority. 
For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this section and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-127.1.4. - Unlawful continuance. 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 9. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 98-128.1. - Scope. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall have the meanings shown in this section. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-128.2. - Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. 
Where terms are not defined in this section or the City Code and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-128.3. - Terms not defined. 
Where terms are not defined in this section, the City Code, or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-128.4. - Definitions. 
Alteration of a watercourse means a dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
ASCE 24 means a standard titled flood resistant design and construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
Base flood means a flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "one-percent-annual chance flood." 
Base flood elevation means the elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the FIRM. 
Basement means the portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure consisting of walls and a roof, built of permanent construction that is impervious to the elements, and built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
Coastal construction control line means the line established by the State of Florida pursuant to F.S. § 161.053, and recorded in the official records of the community, which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a 100-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions. 
Coastal high hazard area means a special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V zones" and are designated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) as zone V1-V30, VE, or V. 
Declaration of land restriction (non-conversion agreement) means a form provided by the floodplain administrator to be signed by the owner and recorded on the property deed in official records of the clerk of courts, for the owner to agree not to convert or modify in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the building permit and these regulations, enclosures below elevated buildings. 
Design flood means the flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the city's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Design flood elevation means the elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the city's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
Encroachment means the placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
Existing building and existing structure means any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 22, 1970. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Fill means any material (usually soil, dirt, sand or similar non-biodegradable material) used to elevate the grade of property to a level higher than the grade of the property as it existed prior to the start of construction. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood damage-resistant materials means any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. 
Flood hazard area means the greater of the following two areas: 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the city's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means the official map of the city on which FEMA has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means the official report provided by FEMA that contains the FIRM, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. 
Floodplain development permit or approval means an official document or certificate issued by the city, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this section. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floodway encroachment analysis means an engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a Florida licensed professional engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
Florida Building Code means the family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
Functionally dependent facility (use) means a facility (use) which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings; 
(2)  Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(3)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(4)  Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places as long as the state historic preservation program is approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(5)  Individually listed as a local landmark pursuant to the city's historic preservation program as long as the city's historic preservation program is certified by the state as a certified local government program, and the state historic preservation program is approved by the Secretary of the Interior. 
Letter of Map Change (LOMC) means an official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective FIRM or FIS. Letters of Map Change include: 
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) means an amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) means a revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) means a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with this section. 
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) means a formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective FIRM or FIS; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
Light-duty truck means, as defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the on-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. 
Mangrove stand means an assemblage of trees which are mostly low trees noted for a copious development of interlacing adventitious roots above the ground and which contain one or more of the following species: black mangrove (Avicennia germinans); red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle); white mangrove (Languncularia racemosa); and, buttonwood (Conocarpus erecta). 
Manufactured home means structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
Market value means the price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this article, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means the vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means for the purposes of administration of this section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after May 22, 1970 1 [] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Project means any work done for which a permit is required during the time period from when the work begins until the permit is closed and shall include all work and permits necessary to make a structure safe to be occupied. A permit may be closed by issuance of a certificate of occupancy or an approved final inspection. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [See F.S. § 320.01]. 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use 
Special flood hazard area means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. 
Standard single exterior door means a movable barrier used to seal or close-off entry to a building which is constructed of wood, metal or glass, not more than 36 inches wide and that swings on hinges. 
Standard double exterior door means a movable barrier used to seal or close-off entry to a building which is constructed of wood, metal or glass, not more than 76 inches wide and that swings on hinges. 
Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, for either new construction or substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement occurred within 180 days of the date the permit was issued. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would be equal to or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this section, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this section or the Florida Building Code. 
Watercourse means a river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
This date was corrected by scrivener's error and matches date found in existing building and existing structure definition. 
 
DIVISION 10. - BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 98-129.1. - Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
Pursuant to section 98-123.3., buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of division 14. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-129.2. - Buildings and structures seaward of the coastal construction control line. 
If extending, in whole or in part, seaward of the coastal construction control line and also located, in whole or in part, in a flood hazard area: 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed to comply with the more restrictive applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building Section 3109 or Section 1612, or Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322, as applicable. 
(2)  Minor structures and non-habitable major structures as defined in F.S. § 161.54, shall be designed and constructed to comply with the intent and applicable provisions of this section and ASCE 24. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 11. - SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 98-130.1. - Minimum requirements. 
Subdivision proposals shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-130.2. - Subdivision plats. 
Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; and 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 98-124.2(1) of this ordinance; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of division 12 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 12. - SITE IMPROVEMENTS, UTILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 
 
Sec. 98-131.1. - Minimum requirements. 
All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  In coastal high hazard areas (zone V), buildings and structures are located a minimum of ten feet landward of the reach of mean high tide; 
(3)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(4)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-131.1.1. - Use of structural and nonstructural fill in flood hazard areas (zones AE). 
In flood hazard areas other than coastal high hazard areas (zone V), the use of fill is prohibited except for stem wall construction. Minor amounts of fill shall be allowed to: 
(1)  Provide adequate lot grading for drainage; 
(2)  The use of fill will not create any additional storm water runoff onto abutting property; 
(3)  Proper swales are provided along all abutting properties; 
(4)  The fill is used for landscaping, sidewalks and driveways; 
(5)  In the absence of proper swales a concrete wall at least eight inches high is provided; and 
(6)  If all roofs adjacent to abutting properties shall have gutters with all roof surface water directed away from abutting properties. 
Exception: 
The use of structural fill is permitted in the following districts: 
CC-1 Commercial District, CC-2 Commercial District, TC-1 Town Center Core District, TC-2 Town Center Corey Circle and Coquina West Districts, Traditional Hotel District THD, CC1 Commercial Corridor Blind Pass Road District, CC2 Commercial Corridor Gulf Blvd. District, (LR) Large Resort, AC Activity Center District, PAG Pass-A-Grille Overlay District and B/HC Boutique Hotel/Condo District. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-131.1.2. - Use of nonstructural fills in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas (zone V), limited non-compacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge (thereby rendering the building free of obstructions) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects or wave deflection. The floodplain administrator shall approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect and/or soil scientist, along with the any supporting data required by the floodplain administrator, which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully considered: 
(1)  Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive material compaction; 
(2)  Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave deflection to adjacent properties; 
(3)  Slope of fill will not cause wave run up or ramping; and 
(4)  The use of fill shall not create any additional storm water runoff onto abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-131.2. - Sanitary sewage facilities. 
All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-131.3. - Water supply facilities. 
All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-131.4. - Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. 
No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in section 98-124.3(1) demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-131.5. - Limitations on placement of fill. 
Subject to the limitations of this section, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-131.6. - Limitations on sites in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas, alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be permitted only if such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and only if the engineering analysis required by section 98-124.3(4) demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. Construction or restoration of dunes under or around elevated buildings and structures shall comply with section 98-133.8(3). 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 13. - TANKS 
 
Sec. 98-132.1. - Underground tanks. 
Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-132.2. - Above-ground tanks, not elevated. 
Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of section 98-132.3. shall: 
(1)  Be permitted in flood hazard areas (zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(2)  Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-132.3. - Above-ground tanks, elevated. 
Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-132.4. - Tank inlets and vents. 
Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 14. - OTHER DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 98-133.1. - General requirements for other development. 
All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this section or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the requirements of section 98-131.4 if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE-24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of Florida Building Code for wet locations. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-133.2. - Fences in regulated floodways. 
Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of section 98-131.4. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-133.3. - Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. 
Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the requirements of section 98-131.4. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-133.4. - Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. 
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 98-131.4. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of section 98-124.3(3). 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-133.5. - Concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be: 
(1)  Structurally independent of the foundation system of the building or structure; 
(2)  Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any structure; and 
(3)  Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four inches. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-133.6. - Decks and patios in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following: 
(1)  A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck. 
(2)  A deck or patio that is located below the design flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than 12 inches or that is constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave run-up and wave reflection that would increase damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(4)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of 12 inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave run-up and wave reflection. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-133.7. - Other development in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the appropriate federal, state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave run-up and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control structures; 
(2)  Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters; and 
(3)  On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems defined in 64E-6.002, F.A.C., as filled systems or mound systems. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-133.8. - Nonstructural fill in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas: 
(1)  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings. 
(2)  Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than one unit vertical to five units horizontal shall be permitted only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave run-up and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  Where authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the diversion of floodwater or wave run-up and wave reflection if the scale and location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the lowest horizontal structural member of the building. 
(Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 15. - MANUFACTURED HOMES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, added provisions to the Code designated as div. 15, §§ 98-133.9—98-133.12, 98-133.15, and 98-133-16; however, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as div. 15 §§ 98-134.1—98-134.6, as set out herein, for purposes of maintaining Code format. 
 
Sec. 98-134.1. - General. 
All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this ordinance. If located seaward of the coastal construction control line, all manufactured homes shall comply with the more restrictive of the applicable requirements. 
(Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-134.2. - Foundations. 
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that: 
(1)  In flood hazard areas (zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 and this ordinance. 
(2)  In coastal high hazard areas (zone V), are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.3 and this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-134.3. - Anchoring. 
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-134.4. - Elevation. 
All manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (zone A) or Section R322.3 (zone V). 
(Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-134.5. - Enclosures. 
Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 or R322.3 for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 98-134.6. - Utility equipment. 
Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
DIVISION 16. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND PARK TRAILERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, added provisions to the Code designated as div. 16, § 98-133.17; however, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as div. 16, § 98-135.1, as set out herein, for purposes of maintaining Code format. 
 
Sec. 98-135.1. - Placement. 
Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall comply with Section 23.2 of the Land Development Code. Permanent placement of recreational vehicles and park trailers is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 2-26-19)  
Secs. 98-136—98-159. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 98-160. - Fire inspections and permits. 
The inspection and permit services set forth in this article shall be provided through the fire department of the city. Fees for such services shall be set forth in Appendix "A" to this Code. This section shall not preclude associated fees being charged for these services by any other department or designee of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 07-44, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 98-161. - Fire inspection and permit fees. 
[Fire inspection and permit fees shall be as follows:] 
(1)  General site development/site plan review: 
Plan review (large developments > 15,000 sq. ft.). 
Plan review (small developments < 15,000 sq. ft.). 
Re-submittals. 
(2)  Fire protection/life safety systems: 
Plan review, inspections and acceptance test. 
Re-submittals. 
Re-inspections and red tag. 
(3)  Fire prevention inspections: 
Certificate of occupancy inspection. 
Re-inspection. 
Business tax inspection. 
Hotels. 
Small (< 15,000 sq. ft.). 
Large (> 15,000 sq. ft.). 
Apartments and transient occupancies buildings. 
Assisted living facilities, per floor. 
Foster homes. 
Daycares. 
Other (specialty facilities). 
(4)  Special events—Permits and inspections: 
Temporary structure permit. 
Beach fire permit. 
Outdoor cooking permit. 
Fireworks permit—Application fee and site inspection. 
(Ord. No. 07-44, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Chapter 99 - FORECLOSURE REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 99-1. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish a process to limit and reduce the amount of deteriorating property located within the city, which property about which a public notice of default has been filed, is in foreclosure, or where ownership has been transferred to lender or mortgagee by any legal method. It is further intended to establish a registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of inadequate maintenance of abandoned and vacated properties subject to a mortgage or properties subject to mortgages that are in default. 
(Ord. No. 09-24, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 99-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where the context will permit and no definitions are provided herein, the definitions provided in the Florida Building Code shall apply. 
Abandoned real property means any real property that is vacant and/or is under a public notice of default, notice of mortgagee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale and/or properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title is retained by the mortgagee, and any properties transferred under a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure sale, a short sale or any other legal means. 
Default means that the mortgagee files a foreclosure action or public notice of default on the mortgage. A mortgage shall be considered in default at such time as the mortgagee declares said mortgage to be in default either in writing, by recording a lis pendens, or by its actions, or commences foreclosure proceedings. 
Enforcement officer means any fulltime law enforcement officer, building official, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by the city. 
Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, electricity, water or other utilities turned off, stagnant swimming pool, statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents, among other evidence. 
Foreclosure means the judicial process by which a property, placed as security for a mortgage loan, after a judicial process, is to be sold at an auction to satisfy a debt upon which the borrower has defaulted. 
Vacant means any building or structure that is not lawfully occupied or inhabited by human beings. 
(Ord. No. 09-24, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 99-3. - Applicability. 
This chapter relates to abandoned and vacant property and to property subject to a mortgage that has been determined by the mortgagee to be in default. 
(Ord. No. 09-24, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 99-4. - Penalties. 
Violations of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement by the City of St. Pete Beach special magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 09-24, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 99-5. - Registration of real property mortgagee holding mortgages in default. 
(a)  Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the city shall perform an inspection of the property upon default by the mortgagor or prior to the issuance of a notice of default. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it shall be deemed vacant or abandoned and the mortgagee shall, within two days of the inspection, register the property with the code enforcement office on forms provided by the office or its designee, even though the real property may not be vacant. If the mortgage on the property is in default, no later than ten days after the date that a default is declared, the mortgagee shall register the property with the code enforcement office electronically via the internet and further located at http://www.stpetebeach.org/vacant registry with forms provided at said address. 
(b)  If the property is occupied but remains in default, it should be inspected monthly by the mortgagee or mortgagee's designee. 
(c)  Within ten days of the date the mortgagee declares its mortgage to be in default, the mortgagee shall register the real property with the city's designee and, at the time of registration, shall designate in writing a local property manager to inspect, maintain and secure the real property subject to the mortgage in default. 
(d)  Registration. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a minimum the name of the mortgagee, the mailing address of the mortgagee, e-mail address, and telephone number and name of the local property manager and said person's address, e-mail address, and telephone number. The local property manager shall be responsible to inspect, secure and maintain the property. The property manager named in the registration shall be located within 20 miles of the City of St. Pete Beach and available to be contacted by the city, Monday through Friday between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., holidays and lunch hours accepted. The city shall charge a fee of $150.00 for any registration or a modification of registration and it may assign and delegate the collection of such fee to an independent contractor. 
(e)  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as well as any properties transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(f)  Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual registration requirement, inspection, security, and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain vacant or subject to having been declared by a mortgagee to be in default. 
(g)  Any person or other legal entity that has registered a property under this chapter must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten days of the change. 
(h)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly register or to revise from time to time the registration to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this chapter is a violation of the codes of the city and may result in a citation by the code enforcement officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the special magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction that any property is in violation of city's ordinances, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with its ordinance and place a lien/s on the property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and to bring it into compliance, which lien may be assigned to either the entity that performs the work or arranges to have the work performed. 
(Ord. No. 09-24, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 99-6. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state, or local law, discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned or not being properly maintained. Weeds, overgrown brush or dead vegetation over ten inches tall are prohibited. 
(b)  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. Yards shall be landscaped and maintained pursuant to the standards set forth in the code. Landscaping shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground cover, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential, commercial or industrial installation, as applicable. Landscaping shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material. 
(c)  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation, cutting and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings and weeds. 
(d)  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that pool and spa water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris. Pools and spas shall comply with the enclosure requirements of the City Code and the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly maintain the property is a violation of the code of ordinances of the City of St. Pete Beach and may result in the issuance of a citation by the code enforcement officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the special magistrate, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with its ordinances and place a lien/s on the property and assign it as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 09-24, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 99-7. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this chapter shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child or adult to access the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing or boarding. 
(c)  If a mortgage on the property is in default on the property and has become vacant or abandoned, a local property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee to perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance with this Code and the local property manager must perform weekly inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws or ordinances of the city. 
(d)  When the property becomes vacant or abandoned, it shall be posted with the name and 24-hour contact telephone number of the local property manager. The posting shall be no less than 18 inches × 24 inches, and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of 45 feet. The posting shall contain the following language: 
THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY ___________. TO REGISTER PROPERTY AND OBTAIN AN APPROVED POSTER, ___________. 
(e)  The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street or if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is at all times visual from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant materials. 
(f)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly inspect and secure the property, and post and maintain the signage noted in this section, is a violation of this chapter and shall result in the issuance of a notice of violation by a code compliance officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by a special magistrate, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section, and place a lien/s on the property and assign it as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 09-24, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 99-8. - Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty. 
Whoever opposes obstructs or resists any enforcement officer, or any person authorized by the city, in the discharge of duties as provided in this chapter, upon conviction may be sanctioned as provided in this Code, or F.S. ch. 162. 
(Ord. No. 09-24, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 99-9. - Immunity of enforcement officer. 
Any enforcement officer, or any person authorized by the city to enforce this chapter, shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry or trespass upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-24, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 99-10. - Additional authority. 
The code enforcement administrator shall have authority to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any property affected by this chapter to require an on-site security guard. Failure to comply with the terms of this chapter shall constitute a continuing public nuisance. The city shall have the authority to promptly abate the public nuisance, in whole or in part, at the expense of the mortgagee or other responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 09-24, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 99-11. - Supplemental provisions. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to, injunction, abatement or as otherwise provided by code. 
(Ord. No. 09-24, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Chapter 106 - FLOOD CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Waterways, ch. 94. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 106-1—106-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DRAINAGE REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; drainage generally, F.S. ch. 298; adoption or amendment of land development regulations, F.S. § 163.3194. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 106-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Absorption area means any area, designed or natural, capable of allowing stormwater percolation. 
Building means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind which has enclosing walls for 50 percent of its perimeter. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof." For the purpose of this article, each portion of a building separated from other portions by a firewall shall be considered as a separate building. 
City engineer means the person responsible for reviewing drainage plans for the city and enforcing the provisions and standards of this article. 
Department means the department of planning and development. 
Design storm means the storm frequency as outlined in the design criteria in sections 106-28 and 106-52 through 106-59. 
Detention means the collection and storage of surface water for subsequent controlled discharge at a rate which is less than the rate of inflow. 
Developer means any person engaged in any type of development of improved or unimproved land. 
Development means the construction or installation of a structure, impervious surface, drainage facility or part thereof of land, whether or not previously developed. 
Drainage facility means any component of the drainage system. 
Drainage plan means the detailed analysis required by sections 106-28 and 106-52 through 106-59. 
Drainage system means the system through which water flows from the land. It includes all storm drain lines, retention ponds and outfalls. 
Engineer, when used alone, means the registered professional engineer responsible for preparing the plans required under this article. 
Erosion means the damage caused by unrestricted surface waters which shall include the movement of silt, soils or foreign material. 
Flood means the inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
Grading means the moving of earth or materials for the purpose of development or redevelopment or the temporary or permanent alteration of existing topography of the land. 
Impervious surface means a surface which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. The term includes most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, any granular material such as concrete, asphalt, crushed stone, rock, gravel or shell placed on an impervious base such as plastic, tarpaper, asphalt sealed shell or similar material which interferes with the natural ground absorption of stormwater and other similar structures. 
Improved land means the land that has been altered or improved from its natural state, including but not limited to grading, paving, drainage, installation of structures, etc., that ultimately increased the value of or altered the original integrity of the land. 
Lawful buildable area means the area of a site in which development, as defined in this section, can lawfully take place without variances. 
Owner means the person in whom is vested the fee ownership, domination or title of property, i.e., the proprietor. This term may also include a tenant, if chargeable under the lease for the maintenance of the property, and any agent of the owner or tenant. The term "owner" shall include a public entity when that entity has a right-of-way easement, interest or any ownership interest. 
Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, and includes any individual, firm, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest or any other legal entity. 
Sediment means solid material, whether mineral or organic, that is in suspension, and is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin. 
Sedimentation facility means any structure or area which is designed to hold runoff water until suspended sediments have settled. 
Site means any tract, lot or parcel or combination of tracts, lots or parcels of land which are in one ownership or are contiguous and in diverse ownership where development is to be performed as a part of a unit, subdivision or project or which is site planned as a whole. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts, joined together in some definite manner. The term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof." 
Subsurface drainage means any approved method used as a vehicle to transmit groundwater, such as under drains, perforated drains or storm drain lines. 
Unimproved land means the land that has not been altered or improved from its natural state, including but not limited to grading, paving, drainage, installation of structures, etc., that ultimately increased the value of or altered the original integrity of the land. 
Vegetation means all plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, mosses and grasses. 
Water or community waters means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground or in the atmosphere. It includes the water in any watercourse, water body or drainage system. It also includes diffused surface water and water percolating, standing or flowing beneath the surface of the ground, as well as coastal waters. 
Water body means any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir or other area which ordinarily or intermittently contains water and which has a discernible shoreline. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, street, roadway, swale or wash in which water flows in a definite channel, bed or banks. 
Watershed area means an area allowing or generating stormwater or irrigation water runoff. 
Wetlands means those areas where: 
(1)  The soil is ordinarily saturated with water; or 
(2)  Wetlands vegetation, as designated by the state department of environmental protection, is the dominant plant community. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 2; Code 1983, § 7-1; Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-1), 5-20-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 106-27. - Interpretation. 
If the requirements of this article be in conflict with any provision of chapter 134, pertaining to zoning, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 7(N); Code 1983, § 7-2; Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-2), 5-20-97)  
Sec. 106-28. - Compliance. 
(a)  Any development, redevelopment or alteration of a site, except as specified in sections 106-54 and 106-55, shall conform to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If the development, redevelopment or alteration involves over 50 percent of the lawful buildable area of a previously developed site, or over one-half acre of the site, regardless of the percentage, the entire site shall conform to the requirements of this article as if the entire site has been developed. 
(c)  If the new development is on a previously undeveloped site, the entire site shall comply with the requirements of this article, regardless of the percentage of development. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 3; Code 1983, § 7-3(a); Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-3(a)), 5-20-97)  
Secs. 106-29—106-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DRAINAGE PLAN 
 
Sec. 106-51. - Violations; maintenance; restoration. 
(a)  Any person who commences or conducts an activity described in sections 106-28 and 106-52 through 106-59 without prior approval of a drainage plan, deviates from an approved drainage plan or fails to maintain drainage facilities under the person's ownership or control shall be guilty of a violation of this article. The city may act to maintain such drainage facilities if the lack of maintenance constitutes a public nuisance. The cost of such maintenance shall then become a lien on the property on which the facilities are located. 
(b)  Any activity undertaken in violation of this article shall be halted immediately after written notice by the city. The violator may be required to restore any altered land to its undisturbed condition or restore it to such condition in which it would not shed stormwater in violation of the control requirements for stormwater runoff contained in this article. If restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time and the alteration constitutes a public nuisance, the city may act to restore the property. The cost of the restoration shall then become a lien upon the property where such illegal activity occurred. 
(c)  The city shall follow the procedure set forth in chapter 46 in restoring property or maintaining drainage facilities and placing a lien on the property. 
(d)  If a pond or other water body is entirely surrounded by private property so that the general public does not have access to use and enjoy the water body, maintenance of such ponds or other water bodies shall be accomplished by the city only with respect to drainage as part of the overall drainage system of the city. If a public nuisance should be created as the result of a lack of maintenance of such pond or other water body, where it is entirely surrounded by private property owners, the city may carry out necessary maintenance and charge the cost of such maintenance to the abutting property owners. The city shall follow the procedure set forth in chapter 46 in maintaining such pond or water body and placing a lien on the property. 
(e)  For the purposes of this article it shall be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists when one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Drainage facilities are not maintained properly so that as a result water has flooded or is reasonably likely to flood land not owned by the owner of the land on which the drainage facilities are located or water has flooded or is reasonably likely to flood a building whether or not located on land owned by the owner of the drainage facilities. 
(2)  Activity has been undertaken in violation of this article and as a result water has flooded or is reasonably likely to flood land not owned by the owner of the land on which the unlawful activity has taken place or a building or part thereof, whether or not located on land owned by the owner of the land on which the unlawful activity has taken place. 
(3)  A pond or other water body entirely surrounded by private property has not been properly maintained and as a result water has flooded or is reasonably likely to flood land other than that owned by the owners of land directly abutting such pond or water body or a building or part thereof, whether or not located on land owned by the owner of land directly abutting such pond or body of water. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 6; Code 1983, § 7-5; Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-5), 5-20-97)  
Sec. 106-52. - Approval required prior to development; submission of plan. 
(a)  Prior to development or grading and land balancing of any land specified in this division, approval of a drainage plan shall be obtained from the city engineer. The city engineer shall not be required to approve such a plan until site plan approval and, as required, plat approval has been obtained. Issuance of this approval is contingent upon the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The developer shall submit to the department of planning and development two copies of a drainage plan prepared by a professional engineer. At the time of the submission of a drainage plan, the applicant shall pay the city a filing fee as established by resolution of the city commission and listed in the fee schedule in appendix A to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 3; Code 1983, § 7-3(b)(1); Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-3(b)(1)), 5-20-97)  
Sec. 106-53. - Information required. 
(a)  The drainage plan shall provide an up-to-date survey of the proposed land to be developed, redeveloped or graded and land balanced showing the number and location of existing trees; adequate elevations or contours to determine the existing and proposed drainage patterns; and all ditches, canals, streams, storm sewers and all other key topographic features located within or directly adjacent to or serving the land to be developed or cleared. The calculations for runoff, detention and pipe sizes shall be submitted. The department may require such additional information as deemed necessary to determine if the plan meets the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The drainage plan shall also contain the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner, engineer and the developer. In addition, the legal description of the property shall be provided. 
(2)  A plan for the control of erosion and sedimentation which specifies in detail the type and location of control measures, the stage of development at which they will be put into place or used and provisions for the maintenance of them. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 3; Code 1983, § 7-3(b)(2); Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-3(b)(2)), 5-20-97)  
Sec. 106-54. - Single-family homes and duplexes. 
The owner of an individual single-family home or duplex shall not be required to submit formal drainage plans in accordance with the requirements of sections 106-52(b) and 106-53 but shall be governed by the following requirements: 
(1)  The maximum lot area covered by impervious surfaces, including the principal building and all accessory structures, driveways, walkways, swimming pools and docks and other structures or materials which prevent the infiltration of water into the ground, shall be limited to 70 percent of the net buildable lot, excluding any portion of the property lying seaward of the city's coastal construction setback line. 
(2)  Swales shall be required along all property lines that are not contiguous with public rights-of-way and shall be graded to direct stormwater runoff into either the street or into a waterway. 
(3)  Gutters and downspouts shall be required on all roof eaves that are within five feet of a property line adjacent to a neighboring property. 
(4)  There shall be no fill used as structural support higher than 16 inches above the crown in the road with the exception that the interior of stemwall construction may be filled. Noncompacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping or aesthetic purposes provided the fill has the ability to wash out during storm surge, thereby rendering the building free of obstruction prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. The building official shall approve design plans for landscaping or aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by a certified engineer, architect, or soil scientists, which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully considered: 
a.  Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction; 
b.  Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave defection to adjacent properties; and 
c.  Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 3; Code 1983, § 7-3(b)(3); Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-3(b)(3)), 5-20-97; Ord. No. 99-53, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 00-35, § 1, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 106-55. - Minor additions, alterations or improvements to existing development. 
Minor additions and alterations to an existing development are exempted from the requirements of sections 106-52(b) and 106-53. For the purpose of this article, a minor addition, alteration or improvement is defined as an addition which increases existing gross floor by no more than five percent or vehicular use areas by ten percent or alterations and repairs, the cost of which in the aggregate does not exceed or equal 25 percent of the permit value assessment of the structure before the first improvement is started or, if the structure has been damaged and being restored, before the damage occurred. Removal and replacement of impervious surface cover with a permeable cover shall be credited towards the minor addition, alteration or improvement thresholds set forth in this section. Such credit shall be subtracted as a square footage or dollar amount, whichever is applicable, prior to calculation of the appropriate threshold percentages. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 3; Code 1983, § 7-3(b)(4); Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-3(b)(4)), 5-20-97)  
Sec. 106-56. - Fee payment in lieu of drainage improvements. 
Some existing developments undergoing additions, alterations or improvements which exceed the thresholds described in section 106-55 may be permitted to pay a fee in lieu of installing drainage improvements when it is determined by the city that the requirements of this article are impractical or impossible to construct on the site. All such determinations shall be made on a case-by-case basis. The amount of the fee shall be based on an amount per square foot of the entire site, such amount to be established by resolution of the city commission and is listed in appendix A to this Code. Moneys collected under this section shall be used by the city to make upgrades, improvements and extensions of the existing drainage system. In no case shall this provision be permitted where the intent of this article can be met. 
(Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-3(b)(5)), 5-20-97)  
Sec. 106-57. - Review. 
The drainage plan will be reviewed by the department within 60 days of receipt unless other reviews required by ordinance require more time, in which case the time shall extend 60 days beyond completion of such review. If the drainage plan is in compliance with the requirements of this Code and this article, approval shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 3; Code 1983, § 7-3(c); Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-3(c)), 5-20-97)  
Sec. 106-58. - Inspection of improvements. 
Upon completion of improvements under this article, the city engineer shall inspect the site for compliance with the approved plan. A certificate of compliance must be issued by the inspection officer before a certificate of occupancy can be issued for any related structure or before any paved access (curb cuts) to public streets from the site may be granted. If the application is for grading and land balancing only and no structure or paving is specified, a certificate of compliance must be issued if a financial guarantee acceptable in form to the city attorney and in the amount approved by the city manager is provided. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 3; Code 1983, § 7-3(d); Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-3(d)), 5-20-97)  
Sec. 106-59. - Approval criteria and procedures. 
(a)  Drainage plans shall be approved only if they demonstrate that the proposed development or grading and land balancing has been planned and designed and will be constructed and maintained to meet the standards in this section. 
(b)  No development or redevelopment of a site shall cause the rate of stormwater discharge to be released from the post-developed site to exceed the rate of stormwater discharge of the predeveloped site. Additional stormwater discharge created by the development or redevelopment of the site shall be retained on-site and released at a rate no greater than the rate of the predeveloped site. 
(c)  If there is an absence of data to adequately determine the "natural unimproved state," such as a redevelopment project, the existing runoff discharge may be calculated using a runoff coefficient of 0.3. 
(d)  The proposed development or grading and land balancing shall not allow erosion or flooding to effect any significant damage to adjacent areas during or after construction. 
(e)  In determining runoff, pipe sizes, detention requirements, etc., for the site to be developed, the following criteria and methods shall be used: 
(1)  Criteria for calculating stormwater runoff. 
a.  The maximum rate of runoff released from a site and the required retention volume shall be calculated using the rational formula as follows: 
Q = Cia 
Where: 
Q 	is the rate of runoff in cubic feet per second; 
C 	is the coefficient of runoff; 
i 	is the intensity of rainfall in inches per hour, pursuant to the current state department of transportation rainfall intensity curves for zone VI, using a ten-year, one-hour design storm; and 
a 	is the drainage areas in acres. 
 
Other formulas, where appropriate, as described in the Basis for Review for Surface Water Management Applications within the Southwest Florida Water Management District, may be used when such other formulas are acceptable to the city engineer. 
b.  The coefficient of runoff shall be determined by the type of existing and future development, the soil characteristics and the topography of the land. The following table listing the general ranges shall be used, subject to variation in accordance with generally accepted scientific principles: 
Lawns: 	
	Sandy soil, flat (2% slope) 	0.10—0.15 
	Sandy soil, average (2%—7% slope) 	0.15—0.20 
	Clayey soil, flat (2% slope) 	0.14—0.20 
	Clayey soil, average (2%—7% slope) 	0.20—0.30 
Commercial: 	
	Downtown areas 	0.70—0.95 
	Neighborhood areas 	0.50—0.70 
Residential: 	
	Single-family areas 	0.30—0.50 
	Multi-units, detached 	0.40—0.60 
	Multi-units, attached 	0.60—0.70 
	Apartment dwelling areas 	0.50—0.70 
Industrial: 	
	Light 	0.50—0.80 
	Heavy 	0.60—0.90 
Parks 	0.10—0.25 
Playgrounds 	0.20—0.35 
Unimproved areas 	0.10—0.30 
Streets and vehicular use areas: 	
	Asphalt 	0.70—0.95 
	Concrete 	0.80—0.95 
	Brick 	0.60—0.80 
Drives and walks 	0.75—0.85 
Roofs 	0.75—0.95 
 
c.  The criteria for determining the rainfall intensity shall be the current state department of transportation rainfall intensity curves for zone VI, Tampa. The time of concentration shall be based on the department of transportation velocity of runoff curves or other proven engineering methods, as approved by the city engineer. 
(2)  Stormwater detention. All proposed detention areas shall be designed using the recommended criteria listed in subsection (e)(1) of this section and design calculation shall be submitted with the site plan. Detention areas shall be designed, where possible, so that they will be completely dry within three days. Detention areas that contain water continuously or more than three days following rain shall be designed, to the maximum extent possible, to provide for maintenance of aquatic life to destroy mosquito larva. 
(3)  Approved methods of water detention. Design of proposed detention areas shall be in accordance with best management practices as follows and approved by the city engineer: 
a.  Detention pond. Surface area, depth, bank slopes and outfall shall be designed according to site requirements and department standards. 
b.  Grass, loose rock or landscaped absorption areas. Surface area, configuration and type shall be designed according to site requirements and department standards. 
c.  Grass, loose rock or landscaped absorption areas. Surface area, configuration and type shall be designed according to site requirements and shall be subject to review by the city engineer and his approval. A percolation test shall be required to verify ground absorption capabilities. 
d.  Subsurface drain or percolation field. Length, size and depth of drainpipe, size and type filter material and location of field shall be designed according to site requirements, and shall be subject to the review and approval of the city engineer. A percolation test shall be required to verify ground absorption capabilities. 
e.  Vehicular use areas designed with restrictive stormwater inlets or restrictive pipe sizes. Parking areas shall be designed with sufficient detention areas that, when used in conjunction with a restrictive storm sewer system, shall control the volume of water runoff to conform with this section. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 3; Code 1983, § 7-3(e); Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-3(e)), 5-20-97)  
Sec. 106-60. - Variances. 
(a)  Where strict adherence to this article is impossible or impractical to enforce, the appropriate board of authority may, upon receipt of a written request, authorize a variance. However, such variance shall be limited to the minimum variance required to make adherence to this article possible and practical. Any request for a variance to this article shall be submitted in writing and shall clearly and in detail state what adjustment is warranted. The appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee as set by ordinance. The criteria for variances contained in article II of chapter 22 shall apply to such application for a variance. The notice provisions and procedures contained in article II of chapter 22 shall be followed by the applicant and the board. The appropriate board of authority shall not act without first having received a written analysis of the facts of the appeal from the director. 
(b)  Within 15 days after action of the appropriate board of authority, but not thereafter, their decision may be appealed to the circuit court as provided by article II of chapter 22; otherwise, the decision of the appropriate board of authority becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 81-48, § 4; Code 1983, § 7-4; Ord. No. 97-14, § 1(7-4), 5-20-97)  
Secs. 106-61—106-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORM WATER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— At the request of the city, Ord. No. 99-71, §§ 1—9, adopted Dec. 21, 1999, has been included herein as Art. III, §§ 106-86—106-94. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 106-86. - Intent. 
This article is hereby adopted by the City of St. Pete Beach for the purpose of maintaining efficient, economic, and safe operation of the separate storm sewer system, and for the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the public within the City of St. Pete Beach. This article is intended to prevent and abate pollution through the regulation and control of connections and discharges to the City of St. Pete Beach's Separate Storm Sewer System and to limit the use of the City of St. Pete Beach's Separate Sewer System to the collection, conveyance, treatment, and disposal of storm water through appropriate regulation and enforcement. The prohibitive discharge standards contained herein were developed under the authority of Section 5 of the Act and 40 CFR 122, applicable DEP, SWFWMD regulations and applicable home rule power. 
(Ord. No. 99-71, § 1, 12-21-99)  
Sec. 106-87. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this article: 
Authorized official means any employee or agent of the City of St. Pete Beach authorized in writing by the city manager to administer or enforce the provisions of this article. 
City manager means the City Manager of the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. 
Discharge means any direct introduction of any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter. 
Illicit discharge means any discharge to the City of St. Pete Beach's Separate Storm Sewer System that is not composed entirely of storm water except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the separate storm sewer system) and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities. 
Person means any natural individual, corporation, partnership, institution, or other entity. 
Site of industrial activity means any area of facility used for manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage, as defined under 40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(14) of regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, as amended. 
Storm water means any storm water runoff, and surface runoff, drainage, and any storm water defined by 40 CFR Parts 122, 123 and 124 Supplementary Information VI(b). 
Separate storm sewer system means the system of conveyances owned by the City of St. Pete Beach used for collecting, storing and transporting storm water but not including any facilities intended to be used in accordance with applicable law for collecting and transporting sanitary or other wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 99-71, § x, 12-21-99)  
Sec. 106-88. - Industrial activity. 
(a)  General prohibitions. Any discharge into the separate storm sewer system in violation of any federal (including 40 CFR Part 122), state, water management district, county, municipal or other law, rule, regulation or permit is prohibited. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. By adoption of industrial activity storm water regulations or by issuance of industrial activity storm water permits or both, the City of St. Pete Beach's City Commission may impose reasonable limitations as to the quality of storm water (included without limitation the designation of maximum levels of pollutants) discharged into the separate storm sewer system from sites of Industrial activity. Any promulgation of such regulations and issuance of permits by the City of St. Pete Beach's City Commission shall be in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  NPDES permits. Any person who holds a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit shall provide a copy of such permit to the city manager no later than the later of: 60 calendar days after the effective date of this article or 60 calendar days after issuance. 
(Ord. No. 99-71, § 3, 12-21-99)  
Sec. 106-89. - Illicit discharges. 
(a)  General prohibitions. Except as set forth under subsection (c) of this section or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of storm water is prohibited. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. Any discharge to the separate storm sewer system containing any sewage, industrial waste, or other waste materials, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, order or permits, is prohibited. 
(c)  Authorized exceptions. The following discharges are exempt from the general prohibition set forth under paragraph (a) of this section: flows from fire fighting, water line flushing and other contributions from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, direct infiltration to the separate storm sewer system, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washings and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands. 
(d)  Illicit connections. No person may maintain, use or establish any direct or indirect connection to the separate storm sewer system that results in any discharge in violation of this article. This prohibition applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit, or other authorization, or whether permissible under laws or practices applicable or prevailing at the time the connection was made. 
(Ord. No. 99-71, § 4, 12-21-99)  
Sec. 106-90. - Spills and dumping. 
(a)  General prohibitions. Except as set forth under section 106-89(c) of this article or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of storm water is prohibited. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. Any discharge to the separate storm system containing any sewage, industrial waste, or other waste materials, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, order or permits, is prohibited. 
(c)  Notification of spills. As soon as any person has knowledge of any discharge to the separate storm sewer system in violation of this article, such person shall immediately notify the city manager and if such Person is directly or indirectly responsible for such discharge, then such person shall also take immediate action to ensure the containment and clean up of such discharge and shall confirm such telephone notification in writing to the City Manager at City of St. Pete Beach City Hall, 7701 Boca Ciega Dr., St. Pete Beach, Florida 33706, within three calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 99-71, § 5, 12-21-99)  
Sec. 106-91. - Inspections and monitoring. 
(a)  Authority for inspections. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or regulation, or permit issued hereunder, or whenever an authorized official has reasonable cause to believe there exists any condition constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or regulation or permit issued hereunder, any authorized official may enter any property, building or facility at any reasonable time to inspect the same or to perform any duty related to enforcement of the provisions of this article or regulations or permits used hereunder; provided that (1) if such property, building, or facility is occupied, such authorized official shall first present proper credentials and request permission to enter, and (2) if such property, building, or facility is unoccupied, such authorized official shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the property, building or facility, and shall request permission to enter. Any request for permission to enter made hereunder shall state that the owner or person in control has the right to refuse entry, and that in such event that entry is refused, the authorized official may enter to make inspection only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. If the owner or person in control refuses permission to enter after such request has been made, the authorized official is hereby authorized to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining entry. Routine or area-wide inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, including but not limited to random sampling and sampling in areas with evidence of storm water contamination, non-storm water discharge or similar factors. 
(b)  Authority for monitoring and sampling. Any authorized official may install and maintain such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering of discharges to the separate storm sewer system. During any inspections made to enforce the provisions of this article or regulations or permits issued hereunder, any authorized official may take any samples deemed necessary. 
(c)  Requirements for monitoring. The city manager or authorized official may require any person engaging in any activity or owning any property, building or facility (including but not limited to a site of industrial activity) to undertake such reasonable monitoring of any discharge(s) to the separate storm sewer system and to furnish periodic reports. 
(Ord. No. 99-71, § 6, 12-21-99)  
Sec. 106-92. - Administrative order. 
The city manager may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge, or eliminate any connection to the separate storm sewer system, determined by the city manager to be in violation of any provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 99-71, § 7, 12-21-99)  
Sec. 106-93. - Penalties. 
Failure to comply with the requirements of this article or any permit or approval granted or authorized hereunder shall constitute a violation of this article. Violations of this article shall upon conviction be punished as provided in 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 99-71, § 8, 12-21-99)  
Sec. 106-94. - Civil remedies. 
In addition to the penalties provided in section 106-93, the City of St. Pete Beach's City Commission is hereby authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding, including suite for injunctive relief, in order to prevent or abate violations of this article; and the city shall be entitled to recover a civil penalty for each violation of this article in an amount not more than $5,000.00 for each offense. If a violation is continued, each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 99-71, § 9, 12-21-99)  
Secs. 106-95—106-152. - Reserved.  
Chapter 118 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Development review board, § 2-31 et seq.; future of the city planning committee, § 2-241 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rules Powers, F.S. ch. 166; local government comprehensive planning and land development regulations act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 118-1—118-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 
 
Sec. 118-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Comprehensive development plan means a long-range or master plan for the physical development of the city and those environs reasonably expected within the next 20 years or so to become a physical part of the city either through annexation or a close interrelationship resulting from the normal and expected economic development of the area, such plan among other things to provide for present and future vehicular traffic and other transportation arteries and terminals; a well-ordered design for future use and reuse of land; order for the healthful and convenient location of population to prevent undue concentration in parts or under-population in others; the promotion of good civic design in buildings and structures, and useful and aesthetic arrangement of open spaces; efficiency in the location of public buildings; and wise and efficient expenditure of public funds for capital improvements of the physical facilities of the city, all features of such plan to be assembled and maintained in a document or series of documents and maps and other descriptive matter. 
Official map means a map, but not the zoning map, including and designating certain features of the comprehensive plan that have been officially adopted by the city commission for enforcement through such powers and influence then available that the city is able to exercise in effecting the plan. Among other features, the official map may show existing rights-of-way, setback lines for future widening of street rights-of-way, and proposed sites for public parks, playgrounds, buildings, and other facilities. 
Subdivision means a division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land, whether improved or unimproved, into two or more lots or parcels of land, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or development or, if the establishment of a new street is involved, any division of such parcel, providing that any division of land into parcels of more than three acres not involving any change in street lines or public easements shall not be deemed to be a subdivision within the meaning of this article. The term includes a resubdivision as well as initial subdivision. 
Subdivision ordinance means an ordinance, duly adopted by the city commission, regulating and establishing standards for the subdivision of land within the city, as provided in chapter 126. 
Zoning plan means a legal document duly adopted by the city commission consisting of a written text and a zoning map regulating the use of land, the size, location and height of buildings, and the density of population within the city, as provided in chapter 134. 
(Code 1960, § 2-17; Ord. No. 114, § 1; Ord. No. 412; Code 1983, § 17-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 118-27. - Adopted. 
The city adopts by reference the comprehensive plan, as amended through the adoption date of this Code. 
(Code 1960, § 2-21; Ord. No. 81-19, § 1; Code 1983, § 17-2; Ord. No. 89-25, § 1, 11-7-89) 
State Law reference— Adoption of comprehensive plan, F.S. § 163.3161(6); amendment of comprehensive plan, F.S. § 163.3187.  
Sec. 118-28. - Public participation in comprehensive planning process. 
The city shall comply with all local ordinances and state statutes pertaining to public participation in the comprehensive planning process. 
(Code 1983, § 17-2.1; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 2, 10-11-16)  
Sec. 118-29. - City street name map. 
(a)  A street name map of the city, which shall include all legally established streets, street names, alleys, and other rights-of-way, whether established by plat, dedication or other method, shall be prepared by the city and be maintained on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  An address ranges schedule shall be attached as schedule A to the city street name map maintained by the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1960, § 2-22; Ord. No. 114, § 6; Ord. No. 11; Code 1983, § 17-3; Ord. No. 95-23, § 1, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 95-43, §§ 1, 2, 10-17-95) 
Editor's note— The attachment is not set out in this article, but is on file and available for inspection in the city clerk's office.  
Secs. 118-30—118-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FEES 
 
Sec. 118-56. - Appropriate board of authority fees. 
The schedule listed in this section shall apply to appropriate board of authority fees. All fees shall be established by resolution of the city commission and are listed in appendix A to this Code. Fees shall be charged for the following: 
(1)  Conceptual site plan: 
a.  Small scale (residential under five units, commercial under one-half acre). 
b.  Large scale (residential over five units, commercial over one-half acre). 
(2)  Preliminary site plan: 
a.  Small scale (residential under five units, commercial under one-half acre). 
b.  Large scale (residential over five units, commercial over one-half acre). 
(3)  Final site plan, includes preliminary if done within two months of preliminary approval: 
a.  Small scale (residential under five units, commercial under one-half acre). 
b.  Large scale (residential over five units, commercial over one-half acre). 
c.  Variance with site plan review per variance requested. 
d.  Mailings. 
(4)  Technical review committee included with preliminary or final: 
a.  Minor modifications requiring administrative review only, involving five percent or less of square footage of structure or area of approved plan. 
b.  Temporary uses, other than parking. 
c.  Easement/right-of-way vacations. 
d.  Subdivision/lot line adjustments. 
e.  Conditional uses/special exceptions. 
(5)  Amendments to approved site plans, either involving major modifications or board appearance: 
a.  Small scale (residential under five units, commercial under one-half acre). 
b.  Large scale (residential over five units, commercial over one-half acre). 
c.  Administrative appeals to board. 
d.  Board extensions. 
(6)  Concurrency review, as a separate request: 
a.  Small scale (residential under five units, commercial under one-half acre). 
b.  Large scale (residential over five units, commercial over one-half acre). 
c.  Zoning ordinance amendment. 
d.  Rezoning, additional to land use change if appropriate. 
e.  Land use change. 
(7)  Other miscellaneous items: 
a.  Comprehensive plan. 
b.  Land development regulations. 
c.  Property file review. 
d.  Miscellaneous research and letters. 
e.  LDR portions. 
f.  Comprehensive plan portions (elements). 
g.  Sign ordinance. 
h.  Zoning maps. 
i.  Land use maps. 
j.  Miscellaneous maps. 
(Code 1960, § 2-23; Ord. No. 82-33, § 1; Ord. No. 329, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 81-38, §§ 1, 2; Code 1983, § 17-4; Ord. No. 86-11, § 1, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 9-17-91; Ord. No. 91-36, § 1, 11-5-91) 
State Law reference— User fees authorized, F.S. § 166.201; fee schedule for local planning agency services authorized, F.S. § 163.3174(4).  
Chapter 131 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 
 
Sec. 131-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless communications towers and antennas to accomplish the following objectives: 
• Protection of residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; 
• To encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas; 
• To minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
• To strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
• To encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
• To encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
• To enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; 
• To consider the public health and safety of communication towers; and 
• To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
In furtherance of these objectives, City of St. Pete Beach shall give due consideration to the comprehensive plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas. 
(Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 7-15-97)  
Sec. 131-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: 
Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
City manager means the person appointed by the city commission as the chief administrative official for the city or the designated representative thereof. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
Non-residential zoning district means the C-2 Tourist Residential, C-2A Tourist Commercial and C-3 General Commercial Zoning Districts. 
Pre-existing towers and pre-existing antennas means any tower or antenna for which a building permit or special exception has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto. 
(Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 7-15-97)  
Sec. 131-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in City of St. Pete Beach shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in paragraphs (b) through (d), inclusive. 
(b)  Amateur radio station operators/receive only antennas. This chapter shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. This provision shall not be construed as exempting amateur radio station operators or receive only antennas from the provisions of any other applicable code or ordinance. 
(c)  Pre-existing towers or antennas. Pre-existing towers and pre-existing antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter, other than the requirements of section 131-4(f) and (g). This provision shall also apply to the subsequent repair and maintenance of existing towers and antennas that were approved and erected under this chapter, provided such repair and maintenance do not result in any substantial alterations. 
(d)  AM array. For purposes of implementing this chapter, an AM array, consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right. 
(Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 7-15-97)  
Sec. 131-4. - General requirements. 
(a)  Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. 
(b)  Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot. 
(c)  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the city manager an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of City of St. Pete Beach or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The city manager may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of City of St. Pete Beach, provided, however that the city manager is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(d)  Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings. 
(3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(e)  Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(f)  State or federal requirements. All towers shall meet current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(g)  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the City of St. Pete Beach concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(h)  Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in City of St. Pete Beach irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries. 
(i)  Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities. 
(j)  Owner's authorization. Applicants for a permit to locate an antenna and/or a tower within the City of St. Pete Beach shall provide the city manager with a properly executed document showing the owner's authorization to use the property for which the application is sought. 
(k)  Public notice. For purposes of this chapter, any special exception request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved use or special exception shall require public notice to all abutting property owners and all property owners of properties that are located within the corresponding separation distance listed in section 131-7(b)(5)b., Table 2, in addition to any notice otherwise required by the zoning ordinance. 
(l)  Signs. No advertising signs shall be allowed on any antenna or tower. 
(m)  Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of section 131-8. 
(n)  Multiple antenna/tower plan. The City of St. Pete Beach encourages the users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process. 
(Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 7-15-97)  
Sec. 131-5. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require administrative approval or special exception approval. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted: 
(1)  Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by City of St. Pete Beach, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by city commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 7-15-97)  
Sec. 131-6. - Administratively approved uses. 
(a)  General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of administrative approvals for towers and antennas. 
(1)  The city manager may administratively approve the uses listed in this section. 
(2)  Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the city manager providing the information set forth in sections 131-7(b)(1) and 131-7(b)(3) of this chapter and a nonrefundable fee as established by the city commission. 
(3)  The city manager shall review the application for administrative approval and determine if the proposed use complies with sections 131-4, 131-7(b)(4) and 131-7(b)(5) of this chapter. 
(4)  The city manager shall respond to each such application within 60 days after receiving it by either approving or denying the application. 
(5)  In connection with any such administrative approval, the city manager may, in order to encourage shared use, administratively waive any zoning district setback requirements in section 131-7(b)(4) or separation distances between towers in section 131-7(b)(5) by up to 50 percent. 
(6)  In connection with any such administrative approval, the city manager may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles, administratively allow the reconstruction of an existing tower to monopole construction. 
(7)  If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file an application for a special exception pursuant to section 131-7 prior to filing any appeal that may be available under the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  List of administratively approved uses. The following uses may be approved by the city manager after conducting an administrative review: 
(1)  Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with the terms of subsections a. and b. below. 
a.  Antennas on existing non-tower structures. Any antenna which is attached to an existing non-tower structure shall be approved by the city manager as an accessory use to any commercial, institutional, or multifamily structure of eight or more dwelling units, provided: 
1.  The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the highest point of the structure; 
2.  The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations; and 
3.  The antenna complies with all applicable building codes. 
b.  Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which is attached to an existing tower may be approved by the city manager and, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers, collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following: 
1.  A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower, unless the city manager allows reconstruction as a monopole. 
2.  Height. 
(i)  An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed 30 feet over the tower's existing height, to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna. 
(ii)  The height change referred to in subsection 2.(i) may only occur one time per communication tower. 
(iii)  The additional height referred to in subsection 2.(i) shall not require an additional distance separation as set forth in section 131-7. The tower's pre-modification height shall be used to calculate such distance separations and setbacks. 
3.  Onsite relocation. 
(i)  A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna may be moved onsite within 50 feet of its existing location, provided such relocation shall not have an adverse effect on neighboring uses. 
(ii)  After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation, only one tower may remain on the site. 
(iii)  A relocated onsite tower shall continue to be measured from the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances between towers pursuant to section 131-7(b)(5). The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way be deemed to cause a violation of section 131-7(b)(5). 
(iv)  The onsite relocation of a tower which comes within the separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands as established in section 131-7(b)(5) shall only be permitted when approved by the development review board. 
(2)  New towers in non-residential zoning districts. Locating any new tower in a non-residential zoning district, provided a licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the applicant; the city manager concludes the tower is in conformity with the goals set forth in section 131-1 and the requirements of section 131-4; the tower meets the setback requirements in section 131-7(b)(4) and separation distances in section 131-7(b)(5); and the tower meets the following height and usage criteria: 
a.  For a single user, up to 120 feet in height; 
b.  For two users, up to 150 feet in height; and 
c.  For three or more users, up to 180 feet in height. 
(3)  Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not require the use of towers. 
(Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 00-44, § 2, 10-17-00)  
Sec. 131-7. - Special exception permits. 
(a)  General. The following provisions shall govern the approval of special exceptions for towers or antennas by the city commission: 
(1)  If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under section 131-5 of this chapter or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to section 131-6 of this chapter, then a special exception shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts. 
(2)  Applications for special exception under this section shall be reviewed by the development review board under the procedures and requirements of the zoning ordinance, except as modified herein. Upon completing its review at a regularly scheduled hearing, the board shall forward its recommendations to the city commission for final determination. 
(3)  In considering a special exception, the development review board or the city commission may impose conditions to the extent that such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
(4)  Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
(5)  An applicant for a special exception shall submit the information described in this section and a non-refundable fee as established by the city commission. 
(b)  Towers. 
(1)  Information required. In addition to any information required for applications for special exception pursuant to the zoning ordinance, applicants for a special use permit for a tower shall submit the following information: 
a.  A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), comprehensive plan classification of the site and all properties within the applicable separation distances set forth in section 131-7(b)(5), adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parking, and other information deemed by the city manager to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter. 
b.  Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable). 
c.  The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties. 
d.  The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to section 131-4(c) shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known. 
e.  A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials. 
f.  Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination. 
g.  A description of compliance with sections 131-4(c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (j), (l), and (m), 131-7(b)(4), 131-7(b)(5) and all applicable federal, state or local laws. 
h.  A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future users. 
i.  A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the proposed new tower. 
(2)  Factors considered in granting special exceptions for towers. In addition to any standards for consideration of special exception applications pursuant to the zoning ordinance, the development review board shall consider the following factors in determining whether to recommend approval of a special exception: 
a.  Height of the proposed tower; 
b.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
c.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Surrounding topography; 
e.  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
f.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
g.  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
h.  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as discussed in section 131-7(b)(3) of this chapter. 
(3)  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's a proposed antenna. An applicant shall be required to submit information related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
a.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
f.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(4)  Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers for which a special exception is required; provided, however, that the development review board may recommend reduction of the standard setback requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby: 
a.  Towers shall be located in accordance with the site plan approved at the time the special exception is granted. 
b.  Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
(5)  Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a special exception is required; provided, however, that the development review board recommend reduction of the standard separation requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby. 
a.  Separation from off-site uses/designated areas. 
1.  Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas as specified in Table 1, except as otherwise provided in Table 1. 
2.  Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the minimum standards established in Table 1. 
Table 1: Separation from adjacent uses and/or designated areas. 
Adjacent Use/Designated Area 	Separation Distance 
Developed or vacant single-family or duplex residentially zoned land which is either platted or has preliminary subdivision plan approval which is not expired 	200 feet or 300% height of tower whichever is greater 
Existing multifamily residential units greater than duplex units 	100 feet or 100% height of tower whichever is greater 
Non-residentially zoned lands or non-residential uses 	None; only setbacks apply 
 
b.  Separation distances between towers. 
1.  Separation distances shall be required between proposed and pre-existing towers pursuant to Table 2. The separation distances shall be measured by drawings or following a straight line between the base of thee existing tower and the base of the proposed tower. 
Table 2: Separation distances between towers. 
Tower Types 	Lattice 	Guyed 	Monopole 75 ft. in Height of Greater 	Monopole Less Than 75 ft. in Height 
Lattice 	5,000 	5,000 	1,500 	750 
Guyed 	5,000 	5,000 	1,500 	750 
Monopole 75 Ft in Height or Greater 	1,500 	1,500 	1,500 	750 
Monopole Less Than 75 feet in Height 	750 	750 	750 	750 
 
(6)  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided however, that the development review board may recommend waiver of such requirements, as it deems appropriate. 
(7)  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special exception is required; provided, however, that the development review board may recommend waiver of such requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby. 
a.  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. 
b.  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived. 
c.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer. 
(8)  Variances. The city commission, upon recommendation from the development review board, may allow deviations from this section to reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if it concludes that the goals of this chapter are better served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 00-44, § 2, 10-17-00)  
Sec. 131-8. - Buildings or other equipment storage. 
Equipment shelters and cabinets associated with antennas shall be approved along with the approval of towers and antennas. 
(1)  Equipment shelters shall meet the applicable requirements of the building codes and shall be sited so as to meet the setback requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. Equipment shelters may, in as much as possible, be required to be designed and constructed in such a way as to harmonize with surrounding uses. 
(2)  Equipment cabinets shall be designed and constructed to meet all applicable safety and health codes. Further, equipment cabinets, other than those mounted on rooftops, shall not be located within the traffic visibility triangles established by the zoning ordinance and shall be appropriately screened from neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 7-15-97)  
Sec. 131-9. - Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. 
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City of St. Pete Beach notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said 90-day shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 7-15-97)  
Sec. 131-10. - Non-conforming uses. 
(a)  Not expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a non-conforming use or structure. 
(b)  Pre-existing towers. Pre-existing towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such pre-existing towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a pre-existing tower shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Rebuilding damaged or destroyed non-conforming towers or antennas. Notwithstanding section 131-9, bona fide non-conforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval or a special exception and without having to meet the separation requirements specified in sections 131-7(b)(4) and 131-7(b)(5). The type, height, and location of the tower onsite shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in section 131-9. 
(Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 7-15-97)  
Chapter 132 - COMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 132-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt specific regulations relating to the use of rights-of-way for the erection of telecommunication antennae or towers and any accessory equipment supporting the same within the city right-of-way. The applicant shall obtain a permit pursuant to of this chapter prior to commencing any construction and shall thereafter comply with all applicable terms therein. 
In furtherance of these objectives, City of St. Pete Beach shall give due consideration to the comprehensive plan, land development regulations, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 3(Exh. A), 6-27-18)  
Sec. 132-2. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively set forth below: 
Abandonment means the permanent cessation of all uses of a utility facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a utility facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used. By way of examples, and not limitation, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where the conduit, continues to be used shall not be considered abandonment. 
Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
Applicant shall mean any person requesting permission to place or maintain facilities in a right-of-way, or who has previously done so. 
Application shall mean a request submitted by an application to the City for a permit. 
Authority shall mean the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. 
Authority utility pole shall mean a utility pole owned by the authority in the city rights-of-way. The term does not include a utility pole owned by a municipal electric utility, a utility pole used to support municipally owned or operated electric distribution facilities, or a utility pole located in the city rights-of-way within: 
(1)  A retirement community that: 
a.  Is deed restricted as housing for older persons as defined in F.S. § 760.29(4)(b); 
b.  Has more than 5,000 residents; and 
c.  Has underground utilities for electric transmission or distribution. 
Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace one or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. This term does not include the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure in the public right-of-way. 
Communication services shall have the meaning found in F.S> § 202.11, as may be amended. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a threat to life, health, or property, or may create an out-of-service condition. 
Emergency action means any action in the public right-of-way, including repair, replacement, or maintenance of any existing equipment of facility, which is necessary to alleviate an emergency. 
Equipment or facility means any a line, conduit or duct, utility pole, transmission or distribution equipment (e.g., an amplifier, power equipment, optical or electronic equipment, a transmission station, switching or routing equipment), cabinet or pedestal, handhole, manhole, vault, drain, location marker, appurtenance, or other equipment or facility associated with communications services located in the city rights-of-way. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Permit means the right-of-way utilization permit which must be obtained before a person may place or maintain any facility in a city right-of-way. 
Permittee means any person to whom a permit to place or maintain a facility in a city right-of-way has been granted by the city. 
Person means any natural person or any association, company, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, governmental entity, or other legal entity. 
Place or maintain, placement and maintenance , or placing or maintaining shall mean to erect, construct, install, maintain, place, repair, extend, expand, remove, occupy, locate or relocate. A person that owns or exercises physical control over facilities located in the public right-of-way, such as physical control to maintain and repair, is "placing or maintaining" the facilities. A person providing service only through resale or the use of a third party's unbundled network elements is not "placing or maintaining" the facilities through which such service is provided. The transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of the public right-of-way does not constitute "placing or maintaining" facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
Right-of-way means the surface and space above and below any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, open to travel by the public, including streets, easements and sidewalks, but excluding parks. Right-of-way means the public right-of-way, not private right-of-way. 
Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, or information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
Telecommunication antenna or antenna , a mounted devise used for the transmission of telecommunication services of communications services, including but not limited to traditional small cell technology. 
Telecommunication tower or tower means a self-supporting lattice, guyed or monopole structure constructed from grade which supports telecommunications or communication service facilities. The term tower shall not include amateur radio operator's equipment, as licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. 
Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of antennas that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume; and 
(2)  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and utility poles or other support structures. 
Utilities means, any water, sewer, gas, drainage, monitor well, sprinkler or culvert pipe and any electric power, telecommunication, signal, communication, or cable television conduit, fiber, wire, cable, or operator thereof, including utilities operated by the city. 
Utility pole shall mean a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part to provide communications services or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function. The term includes the vertical support structure for traffic lights but does not include a horizontal structure to which signal lights or other traffic control devices are attached and does not include a pole or similar structure 15 feet in height or less unless an authority grants a waiver for such pole. 
Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location which enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including radio transceivers, antennas, wires, coaxial or fiber-optic cable or other cables, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration, and equipment associated with wireless communications. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not include: 
(1)  The structure or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to the structure on which the equipment is collocated; 
(2)  Wireline backhaul facilities; or 
(3)  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna. 
Wireless infrastructure provider shall mean a person who has been certified to provide telecommunications service in the state and who builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless support structures but is not a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services shall mean any communications services provided using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using wireless facilities. 
Wireless services provider shall mean a person who provides wireless services. 
Wireless support structure shall mean a freestanding structure, such as a monopole, a guyed or self-supporting tower, or another existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. The term does not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 3(Exh. A), 6-27-18)  
Sec. 132-3. - Registration. 
(a)  Registration required . Any communications services provider, wireless provider, or wireless infrastructure provider that places or seeks to place facilities in the city rights-of-way shall register with the city. 
(b)  Registration information . Any communications services provider, wireless provider, or wireless infrastructure provider shall provide the following information to the city in a format acceptable to the city: 
(1)  Name of the registrant; 
(2)  Name, address, telephone number, and electronic mail address of a contact person for the registrant; 
(3)  The number of the registrant's current certificate of authorization issued by the Florida Public Service Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or the Department of State; and 
(4)  Proof of insurance or self-insuring status adequate to defend and cover claims. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 3(Exh. A), 6-27-18)  
Sec. 132-4. - Permit for antenna or tower in city rights-of-way. 
The city will review the application presented by the applicant and determine whether the proposed antenna or tower will adversely interfere with public safety and usage, including but not limited to: future road improvements, traffic safety setback areas, residential safety setback areas, regional transportation plans, specific projects named in the comprehensive land use plan, drainage projects, utility projects, sidewalks, bike paths/lanes, future signalization, airport operation and/or planned and current pedestrian/bike trails. The city will also determine if the proposed communications tower or antenna complies with this article. If a public project included in a capital improvement plan approved by a governmental entity or otherwise anticipated by the city would be negatively impacted, or if the characteristics of the proposed tower does not comply with this article, the city shall deny the application stating the reasons in writing. In addition to the provisions of chapter 131 of the city's Code of Ordinances titled "Wireless Communication Towers and Antennas," with this section controlling in case of conflict, the application must include the following or it will be denied as incomplete: 
(1)  Applicant's legal name, company mailing address, email address and phone number, contact person's name and telephone number, the number of the applicant's current certificate of authorization issued by the Florida Public Service Commission, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and/or the Department of State; 
(2)  Exact location of the proposed installation(s); 
(3)  Type/model of antenna(e) or tower(s) to be erected; 
(4)  Method of installation (include direction of guy wires if utilized); 
(5)  Proposed start time and completion time for installation; 
(6)  Means of repairing right-of-way damage during installation; 
(7)  Subject to the requirements of paragraph (13), scaled sketches and plans that depict the exact nature of installation including, but not limited to: 
a.  Right-of-way width and road pavement width; 
b.  Location of all other utilities in right-of-way, including signals; 
c.  Any sidewalks in or near right-of-way; 
d.  Cross sections to reflect location of tower or antenna; 
e.  Include an aerial map showing the location of the tower and any lines; and 
f.  Show area of work in relation to nearest road intersection, bridge or other physical feature. 
(8)  Applications shall include a non-expiring $25,000.00 bond for each new tower. In lieu of individual bonds for each tower, the city may approve a higher cost, one-time, non-expiring bond per application in an amount commensurate with the work proposed in the application. 
(9)  Proof of insurance adequate to defend and cover claims, based upon the installation for which the permit is sought, and with the city listed as an additional insured; 
(10)  Distance from top of tower(s) to collapsible point(s), if any, and fall radius depicted on aerial photograph or survey; 
(11)  Feasibility statement discussing use of camouflage techniques, if possible, and possibility of placing equipment within or against tower(s); 
(12)  Demarcation of adjacent zoning designations and description of how the proposed tower(s) conforms to adjacent zoning restrictions; 
(13)  Items 1—7 and 10 listed above must be signed and sealed by a professional structural engineer certified in the State of Florida (unless permittee is using exempt employees pursuant to F.S. § 471.003(2)(b)2(d), as may be amended) and, where the antenna(e) is not being co-located on a currently permitted pole, or on the replacement of a currently permitted pole, must include accurate depiction of topographic improvements and the relationship to the actual right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 3(Exh. A), 6-27-18)  
Sec. 132-5. - Permitting requirements for small wireless facilities. 
For a small wireless facility, a permit is required for (i) each antenna associated with the facility located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of antennas that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume; or (ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility, cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. 
(1)  Alternate location review . Upon receipt of a permit application to install a small wireless facility, the city shall have 14 days to review the application to determine whether the proposed small wireless facility shall be placed on an alternative structure or may place a new utility pole. In making such a determination, the city shall consider the following objective design standards and reasonable spacing requirements for ground-based equipment: 
a.  All small wireless facilities shall use camouflage techniques which incorporate architectural treatment to conceal or screen their presence from public view through design to unobtrusively blend in aesthetically with the surrounding environment. 
b.  New and replacement wireless support structures and utility poles that support small wireless facilities shall match the style, design, and color of the existing utility poles in the surrounding area. Further, all wireless support structures and utility poles shall meet current safety standards in applicable codes. 
c.  Ground-based equipment boxes for small wireless facilities must be located in areas with existing foliage or another aesthetic feature to obscure the view of the equipment box. Additional plantings may be required to meet this condition. Any new landscaping in the city rights-of-way must be approved by the city, which may require a landscape maintenance agreement to be executed prior to approval. 
d.  With the exception of electric meters and disconnect switches, equipment such as back-haul components shall not be mounted on the exterior of the pole. 
e.  No exposed wiring or conduit is permitted. 
f.  The grounding rod may not extend above the top of sidewalk and must be placed in a pull box, and the ground wire between the pole and ground rod must be inside an underground conduit. 
g.  All pull boxes must be vehicle load bearing, comply with FDOT Standard specification 635 and be listed on the FDOT approved products list. A concrete apron must be installed around all pull boxes not located in the sidewalk. No new pull boxes may be located in pedestrian ramps. 
(2)  Alternate location negotiation . The city may negotiate any alternate location with the applicant. If an agreement is not reached within 30 days after the date the city requests an alternate location, the applicant must notify the city of such non-agreement and the city must grant or deny the original application within 90 days after the date the application was filed. A request for an alternate location, and acceptance of an alternate location, or a rejection of an alternate location must be in writing and provided by electronic mail. Additionally, the design standards may be waived by the city upon a showing by the applicant that the design standards are not reasonably compatible for the particular location of a small wireless facility or that the design standards impose an excessive expense. The waiver shall be granted or denied within 45 days after the date of the request. 
(3)  Height limitations for small wireless facilities . The height of small wireless facilities shall not exceed ten feet above the authority utility pole, utility pole, or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is to be collocated. 
(4)  Height of utility poles . The height of a new utility pole is limited to the tallest existing utility pole as of July 1, 2017, located in the same right-of-way, other than a utility pole for which a waiver has previously been granted, measured from grade in place within 500 feet of the proposed location of the small wireless facility. If there is no utility pole within 500 feet, the height of the new utility pole shall be limited to 50 feet. 
(5)  Time for completing completeness review of applications . For applications in which the city does not request use of an alternate location, the city must make a determination as to whether an application is complete within 14 days. If an application is deemed incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing information. An application is deemed complete if the city fails to provide notification to the applicant within 14 days. 
(6)  Applications processed on a nondiscriminatory basis . The city shall process applications on a nondiscriminatory basis. Thus, applications shall be processed on a first-come, first-served basis. 
(7)  Time for completing approval or denial . The city shall grant or deny an application within 60 days after receipt of the application. If the city fails to take action on a complete application within 60 days, the application shall be deemed approved. If the city elects not to negotiate an alternate location, the applicant and city may mutually agree to extend the review period. The city shall grant or deny the application at the end of the extended period. The city must approve a complete application unless it violates the city's Land Development Code or Code of Ordinances. 
(8)  Effective life of approved permit application . A permit issued pursuant to an approved application shall remain effective for one year unless extended by the city for an additional year. The city may only grant a single extension. 
(9)  Notification of approval or denial . The city shall notify an applicant of any approval or denial by electronic mail on the same day a decision is made. If the city denies an application, the denial must state in writing the basis for the denial, including the specific code provisions on which the denial was based. In the event of a denial, the applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the application within 30 days after notice of the denial. The city shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after receipt or the application is deemed approved. Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. 
(10)  Consolidated applications . An applicant who seeks to collocate small wireless facilities may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 30 small wireless facilities. If the application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the city may separately address small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been received or which are denied. Small wireless facilities or micro wireless facilities shall not be collocated on an authority utility pole or erect wireless support structure in a location subject to covenants, conditions, restrictions, articles of incorporation, and bylaws of a homeowners' association. 
(11)  Permitting criteria . The city may deny a proposed collocation of a small wireless facility in the city rights-of-way if the proposed collocation: 
a.  Materially interferes with the safe operation of traffic control equipment; 
b.  Materially interferes with sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes; 
c.  Materially interferes with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement; 
d.  Materially fails to comply with the 2010 edition of the Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual; and 
e.  Materially fails to comply with any applicable codes. 
(12)  Collocation on authority utility poles . Collocation of small wireless facilities on authority utility poles shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The authority may not enter into an exclusive arrangement with any person for the right to attach equipment to authority utility poles. 
b.  The rates and fees for collocations on authority utility poles must be nondiscriminatory, regardless of services provided by the collocating person. 
c.  The rate to collocate a small wireless facility on an authority utility pole shall be per pole annually as listed in schedule "A" of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
d.  Agreements between the authority and wireless providers that are in effect on July 1, 2017, and that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the city rights-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on authority utility poles, remain in effect, subject to application of termination provisions. The wireless provider may accept the rates, fees, and terms established under this subsection for small wireless facilities and utility poles that are the subject of an application submitted after the rates, fees, and terms become effective. 
e.  A person owning or controlling an authority utility pole shall offer rates, fees, and other terms that comply with this subsection. By the later of January 1, 2018, or three months after receiving a request to collocate its first small wireless facility on a utility pole owned or controlled by the authority, the person owning or controlling the authority utility pole shall make available the rates, fees, and terms for the collocation of small wireless facilities on the authority utility pole which comply with this subsection. 
1.  The rates, fees, and terms must be nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral and must comply with this subsection. 
2.  For an authority utility pole that supports an aerial facility used to provide communications services or electric service, the parties shall comply with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C. s. 224 and implementing regulations. The good faith estimates of the person owning or controlling the pole for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation must include pole replacement if necessary. 
3.  For an authority utility pole that does not support an aerial facility used to provide communications services or electric service, the authority shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation, including necessary pole replacement, within 60 days after written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the applicant. Alternatively, the authority may require the applicant seeking to collocate a small wireless facility to provide a make-ready estimate at the applicant's expense for the work necessary to support the small wireless facility, including pole replacement, and perform the make-ready work. If pole replacement is required, the scope of the make-ready estimate is limited to the design, fabrication, and installation of a utility pole that is substantially similar in color and composition. The authority may not condition or restrict the manner in which the applicant obtains, develops, or provides the estimate or conducts the make ready work subject to usual construction restoration standards for work in the city rights-of-way. The replaced or altered utility pole shall remain the property of the authority. 
4.  An authority may not require more make-ready work than is required to meet applicable code or industry standards. Fees for make-ready work may not include costs related to preexisting damage or prior noncompliance. Fees for make-ready work, including any pole replacement, may not exceed actual costs or the amount charged to communications services providers other than wireless services providers for similar work and may not include any consultant fee or expense. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 3(Exh. A), 6-27-18)  
Sec. 132-6. - Permitting requirements for new communications facilities, wireless facilities, and wireless support structures. 
(a)  Permits required . In addition to a right-of-way utilization permit, new communications facilities, wireless facilities, and wireless support structures in city rights-of-way shall meet the following permitting requirements, as determined by the city using best professional judgment, which may include consultation with the city engineer or other appropriate city staff: 
(1)  All new communications facilities, wireless facilities, and wireless support structures shall be located to avoid any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians, bicyclists, or motorists. 
(2)  New communications facilities, wireless facilities, and wireless support structures shall avoid being placed in a city rights-of-way of a residential zone district, as defined in the land development codes of the city, to the greatest extent possible. An applicant shall demonstrate through an engineering analysis why it is unable to locate new communications facilities, wireless facilities, and wireless support structures outside a residential zone district. 
(3)  New communication facilities, wireless facilities, and wireless support structures shall be located on non-local roadways to the greatest extent possible. An applicant shall demonstrate through an engineering analysis why it is unable to locate the proposed communication facilities, wireless facilities, and wireless support structures in such areas instead of on local roadways and alleyways. 
(4)  New communication facilities, wireless facilities, and wireless support structures shall maintain a clear zone from the back-of-curb to the inward edge of a communication facility, wireless facility, or wireless support structure. Unless otherwise determined by the city, a minimum six foot wide pedestrian clear zone between the back-of-curb and the outward edge of a communications facility, wireless facility, or wireless support structure. 
(5)  New communication facilities, wireless facilities, and wireless support structures shall be located at least ten feet from a driveway and at least 30 feet from the center of existing trees with matured diameter of eight inches or greater. 
(6)  The size and height of new communication facilities, wireless facilities, and wireless support structures in the city rights-of-way shall be no greater than the maximum size and height of any other utility pole, communications facility, wireless facility or wireless support structure located in the city rights-of-way within 250 feet of the proposed structure. 
(7)  New communication facilities, wireless facilities, and wireless support structures shall be placed along common side-lot lines and not in front of residences, buildings, or places of business. 
(8)  Any new proposal to construct a new communication facility, wireless facility, or wireless support structure must be collocated. The city may waive this requirement only if the applicant can demonstrate to the city why the services cannot be collocated on an existing communication facility, wireless facility, wireless support structure, or utility pole in the city rights-of-way. 
(b)  Design requirements . New communications facilities, wireless facilities, and wireless support structures shall meet the following design requirements: 
(1)  All communication facilities shall use camouflage techniques which incorporate architectural treatment to conceal or screen their presence from public view through design to unobtrusively blend in aesthetically with the surrounding environment. 
(2)  New and replacement poles that support communication facilities shall match the style, design, and color of the existing poles in the surrounding area. Further, all poles shall meet current safety standards such as using breakaway connections and the like. 
(3)  Ground-based equipment boxes must be located in areas with existing foliage or another aesthetic feature to obscure the view of the equipment box. Additional plantings may be required to meet this condition. Any new landscaping in the city rights-of-way must be approved by the city, which may require a landscape maintenance agreement to be executed prior to approval. 
(4)  With the exception of electric meters and disconnect switches, equipment such as back-haul components shall not be mounted on the exterior of the pole. 
(5)  No exposed wiring or conduit is permitted. 
(6)  The grounding rod may not extend above the top of sidewalk and must be placed in a pull box, and the ground wire between the pole and ground rod must be inside an underground conduit. 
(7)  All pull boxes must be vehicle load bearing, comply with FDOT standard specification 635 and be listed on the FDOT approved products list. A concrete apron must be installed around all pull boxes not located in the sidewalk. No new pull boxes may be located in pedestrian ramps. 
(c)  Written application requirements . No permit shall be issued unless an applicant submits a written application to the city in accordance with this chapter. An application for a permit shall be filed in the form and manner specified by the city (e.g., the city may require that any or all parts of such requests be filed in an electronic form of the city's choosing and contain such information as may be required by the city, including, at a minimum, the information contained in this section. The city may require the applicant to provide such additional information as the city deems necessary to complete its review of a requested permit. At a minimum, the applicant shall submit the following information in its permit application: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant who is requesting the permit and written evidence that such applicant has legal authority to place, maintain, or remove the equipment or facilities covered by the requested permit in the city rights-of-way and will own and control all such equipment and facilities after completion of construction; 
(2)  A description of the functions, dimensions, and proposed locations of all equipment and facilities covered by the requested permit; 
(3)  The specific location, depth, dimensions, and length of each proposed new or replacement duct, conduit, or other underground facility and the specific location, depth, dimensions, and height of any utility pole covered by the requested permit; 
(4)  A description of the manner in which the work covered by the requested permit is to be undertaken (i.e., proposed construction methods and techniques) and a proposed date for commencement of work and an estimate of the time required to complete all such work; 
(5)  A city-approved traffic control plan for vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area to be affected by the proposed work; 
(6)  Proof of insurance; 
(7)  Identification and description of any utility or other distribution or transmission system to which any equipment or facility covered by the requested permit is to be connected or attached; 
(8)  Drawings (in such detail and form as may be specified by the city) which show: (i) city rights-of-way in the area of the proposed construction; (ii) locations of all existing equipment and facilities in the area of proposed construction; (iii) all equipment and facilities to be installed or removed; and (iv) the routes of all transmission and distribution lines to be installed or removed; and (v) the sites of all other equipment and facilities to be installed or removed in the city rights-of-way; and 
(9)  Construction and/or engineering drawings signed and sealed by a structural engineer (in sufficient detail and form as may be specified by the city to demonstrate structural stability of the communications facilities) which show the locations of all new equipment and facilities in the city which the applicant plans to place in the city rights-of-way in the next 12 months or such other time period as may be specified by the city. 
(10)  Photographic or video documentation of the condition of the city rights-of-way in the area to be affected by the proposed work preconstruction. 
(d)  Fees . To the extent allowed by state law, the city is authorized to set reasonable fees and charges for the implementation of this chapter. Such fees shall be set by resolution and incorporated in schedule "A" of the city's Code of Ordinances. Fees charged will completely finance the expenditures of administering this chapter. No permit shall be granted until such time as all applicable fees are paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 3(Exh. A), 6-27-18)  
Sec. 132-7. - Accessory equipment. 
Accessory equipment: All equipment attached to or connected with a co-located antenna or tower must comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Equipment boxes located at grade must be located in areas with existing foliage or another aesthetic feature to obscure it from the view, to the greatest extent possible, use camouflaging techniques to blend in with the surrounding area. The application must include a depiction of such camouflaging for approval by the city. 
(2)  Equipment boxes at the base of the tower must not exceed 25 cubic feet of volume; 
(3)  Equipment mounted to the exterior of a pole shall be a minimum of 12 feet above finished grade, excluding the electric meter and disconnect switch. Each pole mounted equipment component shall be no more than 15 cubic feet in area. The external finish of the equipment cases shall generally match the color of the pole. All mounting and banding fixtures shall also match the color of the pole; 
(4)  No exposed wiring or conduit is permitted. Above the electric meter and disconnect switch, all conduit and wiring shall be located inside the pole; 
(5)  Electric meters and disconnect switches shall not be located on the side of the pole that faces the sidewalk, or if there is not currently a sidewalk, the area identified by city staff for the preferred placement of any future sidewalk. Conduit leading to the electric meter box and disconnect switch shall generally match the color of the utility pole; 
(6)  The grounding rod may not extend above the top of sidewalk and must be Placed in a pull box; and the ground wire between the pole and ground rod must be inside an underground conduit; 
(7)  Where feasible, all pull boxes shall be located outside of the sidewalk or pedestrian ramp. A concrete apron must be installed around all pull boxes not located in the sidewalk; 
(8)  All pull boxes must be vehicle load bearing, comply with FDOT standard specifications and be listed on the FDOT approved products list; 
(9)  Every five years from city permit issuance date, inspection reports must be submitted to the city by the applicant. These inspection reports must certify that the tower has not had any structural degradation and/or that any structural degradation has been rectified. Failure to submit an inspection report within 60 days after the due date will result in the revocation of the permit for non-compliance. The actual inspection must be physically performed within six months prior to the due date. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 3(Exh. A), 6-27-18)  
APPENDIX A - FEE SCHEDULE 
This appendix includes fees and charges that do not appear in other sections of the Code of Ordinances. 
Description 	Amount 
Chapter 2. Administration 
Miscellaneous fees: 	
 Photocopy charges: 	
 Per side of page 	0.15 
 Per two-sided duplicated page 	0.20 
 Reprint of color photos up to 5" x 7" 	3.00 
 Reprint of color photos larger than 5" x 7" 	Actual cost of duplication 
 DVD or CD of meetings 	5.00 
Administrative fees: 	
 Returned Check fee 	25.00 
 Credit Card Processing Fee 	2.50% 
 Notarization of documents, per document 	No charge 
 Preparation of declaration and notarization of domicile, per preparation 	7.00 
 Temporary street banners permitted by chapter 122 pertaining to signs: 	
 Erection by city employees 	184.00 
 City civic associations or charitable special events, no fee 	
 Certification of city records by city clerk's office (F.S. § 119.07.1(a)), per document 	1.00 
 Fees for off-duty fire department personnel special detail work per person (minimum three hours) 	50.00 
 Special event fire vehicle charge per hour per vehicle (minimum three hours) 	25.00 
Chapter 10. Amusements and Entertainment 
Article II. Adult Entertainment Establishments 	
Permit fee for employee of licensed adult entertainment establishment 	25.00 
Permit renewal fee for employee of licensed adult entertainment establishment 	25.00 
Replacement of lost permit for employee of licensed adult entertainment establishment 	25.00 
Adult use business fees: 	
 Adult use establishment license; fee for zoning review 	375.00 
 Adult use establishment nonrefundable license fee 	25.00 
Annual licensing regulatory fees for adult entertainment establishments: 	
 Adult theater: 	
 Having only adult booths, for each booth 	450.00 
 Having only a hall or auditorium, for each seat 	450.00 
 Having only an area outdoors designed to permit viewing by customers seated in vehicles, for each parking space 	450.00 
 Having a combination of two or more of the items listed in subsections (a)(1)a—(1)c of this section, the cumulative license fee applicable to each under subsections (a)(1)a—(1)c of this section 	
 Special adult cabaret 	450.00 
 Adult photographic studio 	450.00 
 Physical culture establishment 	450.00 
 Adult bookstore/video store 	450.00 
Change of name of adult use establishment 	5.00 
Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation of adult entertainment license or permit 	25.00 
Plus, deposit for costs of administrative hearing officer 	250.00 
Certified mail/postage/handling 	
 Per certified letter (depending on the weight of letter) 	Time & Material 
 Per noncertified letter (depending on the weight of letter) 	Time & Material 
 Copies, per copy per letter 	0.15 
Administrative costs for letters of violation/notices of hearing/hearing agenda/hearing minutes per hour for preparation of each of the following documents: Notice of violation letter, notice of hearing letter, agenda, findings of fact letter, minutes, notary fee, lien filing fee, courier service 	15.00 
Chapter 26. Businesses 
Regulatory fee for unlicensed businesses 	15.00 
Special Event Administrative Regulations and Fees 	
Event fees: 	
  Type IA Event: St. Pete Beach Resident/Business event that does not require site plan review, on-site inspections, other city services, permits from other governmental agencies and are limited to three consecutive days 	
  Type IB Event: Non-Resident/Business event that does not require site plan review, on-site inspections, other city services, permits from other governmental agencies and are limited to three consecutive days 	
  Type IIA Event: St. Pete Beach Resident/Business event that requires any of the following: site plan review, on-site inspections, other city services or additional permits from other governmental agencies 	
  Type IIB Event: Non-Resident/Business event that requires any of the following: site plan review, on-site inspections, other city services or additional permits from other governmental agencies 	
  Type III Event: Any event that the City Manager or his/her designee determines cannot be permitted as a Type IA, IB, IIA, or IIB due to complexity of event or other impacts of the event. The fee shall be determined following review of the event impact 	
 
Special event fees: 
Attendance 	Type IA 	TypeIB 	Type IIA 	Type IIB 	Type III 	
Up to 249 	$25.00 	$50.00 	$75.00 	$100.00 	TBD 	
250—500 	$50.00 	$100.00 	$250.00 	$350.00 	TBD 	
501—999 	$75.00 	$150.00 	$500.00 	$650.00 	TBD 	
1,000+ 	$100.00 	$200.00 	$750.00 	$1,000.00 	TBD 	
Non-Permitted Event Fee - 3 times event fee plus cost incurred by City 	
 
Description 	Amount 
Beach Wedding: 
 St. Pete Beach Resident 	$100.00 
 Non-Resident 	250.00 
Beach Wedding with no Commercial support (i.e., no equipment, chairs, etc.) limited to 20 people: 	
 St. Pete Beach Resident 	50.00 
 Non-Resident 	75.00 
Business permit for fire and other altered goods sale or going out of business sale: 	
 First 60 days 	20.00 
 Additional 15 days 	5.00 
Chapter 38. Elections 
Candidate guidebook administrative costs 	10.00 
Qualifying fee for position of mayor-commissioner or city commissioner 	40.00 
Chapter 42. Emergency Services 
Article II. Alarm Systems 	
Response to fourth or succeeding false alarm 	150.00 
Chapter 46. Environment 
Article II. Nuisances 	
Lot clearing or mowing by city: 	
Administrative fee 	200.00 
Lot mowing charges for vacant or improved lots in an amount equal to the city cost for mowing, in addition to administrative fee in subsection (1) of this section 	
Tree trimming in an amount equal to the city cost for trimming, in addition to administrative fee in subsection (1) of this section 	
Clerical work, secretarial services and all other notification costs at rate equivalent to actual city cost. Attorney's fees equal to actual charge to the city 	
Article III. Junked, Wrecked, Abandoned Property 	
Storage of abandoned or unclaimed property, per day 	10.00 
Chapter 50. Library 
Special, temporary "tourist" card for visitors from outside the Tampa Bay Area 	
 Up to 90 days 	25.00 
 90—180 days 	50.00 
 Over 180 days 	100.00 
Books returned in such condition that they cannot be returned to circulation 	Replacement value 
50-3 becomes 50-3-2 	
50-3 becomes 50-3-3 	
50-3 becomes 50-3-4 	
Copies from the self-service photocopy machine 	0.20 
Print-outs from the public computers, per page 	0.20 
Chapter 58. Parks and Recreation 
Fees and Memberships: 	
 Resident daily use (visitor) fees for multi-facilities (gym, arts studio, fitness room) 	1.00 
 Non-resident daily use (visitor) fees for multi-facilities (gym arts studio, fitness room) 	2.00 
Warren Webster 	60.00 
Park/pool pavilion 	25.00 
All Don Vista Rooms: Mary Nabors, Mary Tracy, Don Vista "A", "B" and "C" 	25.00 
Gymnasium 	75.00 
Raymond Room 	75.00 
Boca Ciega Room (entire floor) 	200.00 
½ Boca Ciega Room 	100.00 
Balcony Room and Board Room 	20.00 
Under the CC Building and Courtyard 	60.00 
Friday/Saturday/Sunday rental of Community Center: 	
4 hours: 	
 Standard (Friday & Sunday) 	1,000.00 
 Premium (Saturday) 	1,500.00 
6 hours: 	
 Standard (Friday & Sunday) 	1,500.00 
 Premium (Saturday) 	2,000.00 
8 hours: 	
 Standard (Friday & Sunday) 	2,000.00 
 Premium (Saturday) 	2,500.00 
10 or more: 	
 Standard (Friday & Sunday) 	2,500.00 
 Premium (Saturday) 	3,000.00 
Additional Rental Charges: 	
 Pool umbrella—Party rental 	25.00 
Staff Cost: 	
 Staff (min. two hours) 	20.00 
 Staff holiday pay (min. two hours) 	45.00 
Rental of park property based on the number of anticipated attendees: 	
 Residents: 	
 50—100 	150.00 
 101—250 	250.00 
 251—500 	350.00 
 Nonresidents: 	
 50—100 	250.00 
 101—250 	350.00 
 251—500 	400.00 
Deposit 	50.00—500.00 
Rental deposit for facilities: 	
 Under 50 people 	100.00 
 Over 50 people 	500.00 
The resident hourly and time block room rental fees will be ten percent less than the standard fee schedule 	
Pool (151—180 guest) 	200.00 
Additional Rental Charges: 	
 Pool Umbrella - Party Rental 	25.00 
Staff Cost: 	
 Staff (Min. 2 hrs) 	20.00 
 Staff Holiday pay (Min. 2 hrs) 	45.00 
Pass-a-Grille Patio Rental: 	
 City operated markets: $25.00 + tax per vendor 	

 4 p.m. - 10 p.m.: $450.00 for three hour rental (minimum) + tax; additional $100.00 for each additional hour after three hours; $200.00 deposit due at time of booking. 	
Chapter 62. Peddlers and Solicitors 
Article II. Commercial Solicitations 	
Solicitation permit fee, per individual, yearly 	100.00 
Chapter 78. Taxation 
Article IV. Business License Tax 	
Business tax license application fee 	10.00 
Transfer of business tax license to another person: 	
Transfer of business tax license from one location to another: 	
 Not less than 	3.00 
 Not more than 	25.00 
Chapter 82. Traffic and Vehicles 
Parking decals: 	
 Employees of businesses operated on premises only in Pass-a-Grille area and south of 31st Avenue, employees of businesses operated on premises having frontage on Beach Plaza 	25.00 
 City resident or nonresident owning property within city 	20.00 
Parking permits: 	
 Gulf Way and Eighth Avenue area: 	Below 
 Houses and apartments having street addresses on Gulf Way from First Avenue to 22nd Avenue and Eighth Avenue 	Below 
"A" Permit purchase by record title owner of each unit 	20.00 
On-premises businesses in Pass-a-Grille 	Below 
One-day permits for operators of commercial watersports businesses at Merry Pier, for resale at same price to legitimate customers 	4.00 
Gulfwinds Condominium, Friendly Native Condominium and Ramar Apartments and Starlight Towers Condominium 	Below 
"E" Permit Purchase by record title owner of unit, each 	20.00 
Hanging meter permits for Pass-a-Grille business owners to be used by customers 	35.00 per yr. 
Parking meter rates for coin-operated parking meters per hour 	2.00 
Parking meter rates for parking pay stations 	2.75 per hour 
Parking meter rates County Park Beach Access parking pay stations 	2.75 per hour 
"C" and "D" Controlled parking residential parking annual permit 	5.00 
"C" and "D" Controlled parking residential temporary parking permit 	3.00 per mo. 
Daily parking permits: 	
 Daily B permit for city metered parking spaces and non-metered city streets requiring, parks and lots requiring B permit (other than County Park) 	$27.00 per day 
 Temporary non-metered B permit—Must provide proof of owning or residing at an address fronting a city non-metered B Permit only zone 	$3.00 per month 
 Temporary one-day non-metered B permit—Must provide proof of owning or residing at an address fronting a city non-metered B permit only zone. Cannot be consecutive days 	Up to 20 one-day permits $3.00 
Storage charge for impounded motor vehicle, per day 	35.00 
Chapter 86. Utilities 
Identification or location of sanitary sewer tap-in 	25.00 
Fats, Oils and Grease annual inspection fee 	100.00 
Fats, Oils and Grease re-inspection fee 	50.00 
Chapter 90. Vehicles for Hire 
Permit fees for taxicabs and public conveyances: 	
 Each vehicle 	50.00 
 Each driver 	10.00 
Driver's permit fee 	10.00 
Chapter 94. Waterways 
Article IV. Water Taxis 	
Fee for water taxi permit, per year 	100.00 
Renewal fee, per year 	100.00 
Chapter 98. Buildings and Building Regulations 
General site development/Site plan review—Fire: 	
 Plan review (developments less than 15,000 sq. ft. and no higher than three stories in height) 	250.00 
 Plan review for buildings greater than 15,000 sq. ft. or three stories in height 	350.00 
 Re-submittals 	100.00 
Building construction: 	
 Plan review (developments less than 15,000 sq. ft. and no higher than three stories in height) 	250.00 
 Plan review for buildings greater than 15,000 sq. ft. or greater than three stories in height 	350.00 
 Building four stories or higher add additional fee per floor 	50.00 
 Re-submittals 	100.00 
Fire protection/Life safety systems: 	
 Plan review, inspections and acceptance test 	250.00 
 Re-submittals 	100.00 
 Re-inspections and Red tag 	50.00 
Fire prevention inspections: 	
 Certificate of occupancy inspection 	No charge 
 Periodic-inspection 	50.00 
 Business tax inspection (For fire inspection of new occupancy) 	50.00 
 Hotels 	
 - Small (< 15,000 sq. ft.) 	100.00 
 - Large (> 15,000 sq. ft.) 	150.00 
 Restaurants (each restaurant within a hotel or business will be charged individually in addition to hotel or business inspection fee) 	75.00 
(Less than 50) 
150.00 
(More than 50) 
 Apartments, condominiums and transient occupancies buildings 	50.00 per floor 
 Apartments, condominiums hotels and transient occupancies building four stories or higher add additional fee per floor 	25.00 
 Assisted living facilities—Per floor 	50.00 
 Foster homes 	50.00 
 Daycares 	50.00 
 Other (Specialty facilities: Marina, boat repair, auto repair type facilities and other facilities/business types not covered) 	150.00 
Special events—Fire-Permits and inspections: 	
 Temporary structure permit 	25.00 
 Beach fire permit 	25.00 
 Outdoor cooking permit 	25.00 
 Fireworks permit—Application fee and site inspection 	150.00 
Special events/Temporary use 	100.00 
Chapter 106. Flood Control 
Planning and Zoning Fees 	
 Mobile Food Establishment Permit 	170.00 
 Renewal of Mobile Food Permit 	85.00 
 Site Plan Review (initial and one revision) 	
  Not located In CRD Lot less than 5,000 sq. ft. 	500.00 
  Lot greater than 5,000 sq. ft. 	1,000.00 plus 
100.00 for each additional 5,000 sq. ft. or portion thereof 
  Each re-submittal review 	250.00 
 Within CRD: 	
  Lot less than 5,000 sq. ft. 	1,200.00 
  Lot greater than 5,000 sq. ft. 	1,200.00 plus 
125.00 for each additional 5,000 sq. ft. or portion thereof 
  Each re-submittal review 	350.00 
 Zoning Review (where no building permit is required) 	50.00 
 Preliminary Plat 	500.00 plus 
direct costs for review 
 Final Plat 	300.00 plus 
any direct costs and recording fees 
 Required Mailing 	0.20 per piece plus associated mailing costs 
 Planned Development Review 	1,000.00 
 Each re-submittal review 	125.00 
 Temporary Use approval 	100.00 plus 
direct mailing costs 
 Vacation of Easement/ROW request 	375.00 plus 
direct mailing costs 
 Conditional Use Permit 	500.00 plus 
direct mailing costs 
 Conditional Use Permit with Variance Request 	700.00 plus 
direct mailing costs 
 Conditional Use Permit with Planning Board Review 	1,000.00 plus 
direct mailing costs 
 Administrative Appeal to City Manager 	250.00 
 Administrative Appeal to Special Magistrate 	500.00 
 Concurrency Review 	75.00 plus 
direct costs (includes consulting engineer charges for review of utility capacity, transportation analysis and other required concurrency issues) 
 Variance Request 	500.00 plus 
direct mailing cost 
 Certificate of Appropriateness 	50.00 
 With FEMA Variance 	100.00 plus 
direct mailing costs 
 Land Development Code Text change 	800.00 plus 
direct mailing costs 
 Land Development Code Map change 	2,000.00 plus 
direct mailing costs 
 Comprehensive Plan Amendment (not in CRD) 	2,500.00 plus 
direct mailing costs 
 Comprehensive Plan Amendment (in CRD) 	3,000.00 plus 
direct mailing costs 
 Sign Permit 	25.00 plus 
building permit fee 
Building Permit Fees: 	
 Plan Review 	½ of Building Permit Fee 
 Building Permit Base fee 	50.00 plus 
16.00 per $1,000.00 of project valuation 
 Plan Revisions 	15.00 per sheet 
 Certificate of Occupancy 	100.00 
 Conditional Certificate of Occupancy 	100.00 for each 30 days of portion thereof 
 Certificate of Completion 	100.00 
 Permit placard replacement 	15.00 
 Penalty fee for failure to post permit card 	50.00 
 Re-inspection fee 	50.00 
 Stop Work Order 	100.00 
 Permit Extension 	50.00 
 Permit Reinstatement 	50% of original permit fee applied to remaining work to be completed 
 Transfer of Permit 	15.00 or 10% of original permit fee whichever is greater 
 Commencement of work without permit 	3 times permit fee 
Chapter 130. Vegetation 
Tree removal permit application filing fee 	25.00 
Tree removal permit appeal fee 	20.00 
 
;adv=10; WASTEWATER CONNECTION FEES 
Residential: Single-family, single condominium, single apartment ..... $2,668.00 
Commercial: Fee for commercial structures (other than units) will be based on water meter size. 
5/8 " or ¾" ..... $2,668.00 
1" ..... 6,670.00 
1½" ..... 13,340.00 
2" ..... 21,344.00 
3" ..... 42,688.00 
4" ..... 66,700.00 
6" ..... 133,400.00 
8" ..... 213,440.00 
WASTEWATER USER FEES 
Monthly wastewater (sewer) rates shall be charged to all customers using the wastewater (sewer) utility system of the city. The rate is based on a base component, flow component (3,000 gallons), rate for usage (1,000 gallons) over flow component, purchased wastewater (sewer) treatment pass-through, and annual index adjustment. Each wastewater (sewer) customer shall be billed as follows: 
Residential base rate: $33.91 for the first 3,000 gallons, or fraction thereof, of potable water used per residential unit. 
Residential excess rate: $11.19 for each 1,000 gallons, or fraction thereof, of potable water used by the customer in excess of the residential base rate. 
Commercial base rate: $33.91 for the first 3,000 gallons, or fraction thereof, of potable water used by the customer. 
Commercial excess rate: $11.19 for each 1,000 gallons, or fraction thereof, of potable water used by the customer in excess of the commercial base rate. 
(Ord. No. 98-16, § 1, 5-5-98; Ord. No. 98-24, § 1, 5-1-98; Ord. No. 98-27, attch., 7-7-98; Ord. No. 99-11, § 1, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 99-17, § 6, 3-2-99; Ord. No. 99-20, § 2, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 99-31, § 2, 5-18-99; Ord. No. 99-48, § 2, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 00-34, § 1, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 00-44, § 2, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 00-48, § 3, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 01-22, § 1, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 01-36, § 1, 10-2-01; Ord. No. 01-45, § 1, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 02-09, § 2, 2-19-02; Ord. No. 03-03, § 2, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 03-05, § 3, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 03-20, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 04-22, § 4, 11-23-04; Ord. No. 05-04, § 2, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 05-05, § 2, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 05-10, § 2, 2-22-05; Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 07-36, § 1, 10-23-07; Ord. No. 07-46, § 1(Att. A), 11-27-07; Ord. No. 08-30, § 6, 8-12-08; Ord. No. 09-26, § 1, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 09-27, § 1, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 09-18, 9-21-09; Ord. No. 10-05, § 1(Att. A), 4-13-10; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1(Att. A), 5-25-10; Ord. No. 10-33, Att. A, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 10-39, § 4, 1-11-11; Ord. No. 11-25, § 1(Att. A), 9-27-11; Ord. No. 11-26, § 1(Att. A), 9-27-11; Ord. No. 11-31, § 1(Att. A), 10-25-11; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 2-14-12; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-28-12; Ord. No. 12-12, § 1, 7-24-12; Ord. No. 13-10, §§ 1, 2, 3-26-13; Ord. No. 15-23, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 16-12, § 1(Exh. A), 6-14-16; Ord. No. 16-16, § 1, 9-20-16; Ord. No. 16-21, § 1(Exh. A), 10-25-16; Ord. No. 17-05, § 2(Exh. A), 4-11-17; Ord. No. 17-08, § 2(Exh. A), 7-11-17; Ord. No. 17-12, § 3(Exh. A), 11-28-17; Ord. No. 18-05, § 2(Exh. A), 6-26-18; Ord. No. 18-10, § 2(Exh. A), 9-25-18) 



LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE CITY OF ST. PETE BEACH, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published in 2003 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
Effective June 1, 2003 
____________ 

CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Alan Johnson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Melinda Pletcher 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Terri Finnerty 
Domonick "Rick" Falkenstein 
Ward Friszolowski 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Wayne Saunders 
City Manager 
____________ 
Rebecca C. Haynes 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Andrew Dickman 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This volume constitutes a publication of the Land Development Regulations of the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. 
    Source material used in the preparation of this publication of the Land Development Regulations was Ordinance Number 03-7, as amended. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included in this volume. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of John Dombroski, Vice President of Supplements, and Anne Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Theresa McMaster, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; article and section analyses; editor's notes; numbering system; code comparative table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. 
(c) ;hg;Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. 2003. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omits." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 2010-31  2-22-11 Include 21 2010-32  1-11-11 Include 21 2011-03  5-24-11 Include 22 2011-17  6-28-11 Include 22 2011-18  7-12-11 Include 22 2010-18 11- 8-11 Include 23 2010-21 11-22-11 Include 23 2011-21 11-22-11 Include 23 2011-32 11-22-11 Include 23 2012-14  9-12-12 Include 24 2012-16  9-12-12 Include 24 2011-42  1-24-12 Include 25 2012-22 11-13-12 Include 25 2013-03  1-22-13 Include 25 2013-04  1-22-13 Include 25 2013-05  1-22-13 Include 25 2013-06  1-22-13 Include 25 2013-08  2-26-13 Include 26 2013-14  4-23-13 Include 26 2013-25 11-26-13 Include 27 2014-06  7- 8-14 Omit 27 2014-0010 11- 5-14 Include 28 2015-03  5-26-15 Include 29 2015-16  8-25-15 Include 30 2015-21  9-22-15 Include 30 2015-22 12-15-15 Include 31 2016-13 10-11-16 Include 32 2016-15 10-25-16 Include 32 2016-08 10-11-16 Include 33 2016-19  2-28-17 Include 33 2016-24  1-10-17 Include 33 2017-01  2-28-17 Include 33 2017-07  6-13-17 Include 34 2017-12 11-28-17 Include 35 2017-17 11-14-17 Include 35 2017-30  2-27-18 Include 36 2018-02  6-12-18 Include 37  
DIVISION 1 - INTRODUCTION 

Sec. 1.1. - Title and purpose. 
    This ordinance shall be known as the "Land Development Code." The provisions of this Land Development Code shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. 
    The purpose of the Land Development Code is to promote the orderly and efficient development of the City of St. Pete Beach, in accordance with the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; promote or enhance aesthetics; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to protect natural and historic resources; and to facilitate adequate and concurrent provision of transportation, water, sewerage, parks and other public improvements, facilities and services. 
    These regulations have been made with reasonable consideration, among many things, as to the character of the districts hereinafter provided for, and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land, air and water throughout the city, consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 1.2. - Rules of construction. 
    For the purposes of these regulations, the following rules of construction shall apply: 
(a)  These regulations shall be construed to achieve the purposes and intent for which they are adopted. 
(b)  In case of a conflict between the text of these regulations and any caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text of these regulations shall control. In case of a conflict between a chart and an illustration, the chart shall control. All illustrations included in these regulations are for illustrative purposes only. 
(c)  In case of any conflict in limitations, restrictions, or standards applying to an individual use or structure, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
(d)  The words "shall," "must," and "will," are mandatory in nature, implying an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. 
(e)  The word "may" is permissive in nature. 
(f)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(g)  Words used in the singular number include the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. 
(h)  Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender. 
(i)  Any act authorized by these regulations to be carried out by a specific official or agency of the city is impliedly authorized to be carried out by a designee of such official or agency. Any transfer of duties to a different official impliedly transfers the authority to carry out acts under these regulations. 
(j)  The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
(k)  Any words and terms not defined herein shall have the meaning indicated by common dictionary definition. 
(l)  Any reference to Florida Statutes shall be construed to be a reference to the most recent enactment of such statute, and shall include any amendments as may from time to time be adopted. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 1.3. - Purposes and matters regulated; application of regulations; schedule of district regulations. 
(a)  Purposes. The regulations and restrictions herein prescribed are in furtherance of the general purposes set forth in section 1.1 and have the objectives of: 
(1)  Reducing, or eliminating, elements of present and future harmful incompatibility between uses permitted in the same district or neighboring districts; 
(2)  Segregating uses which cannot be made reasonably compatible into separate districts; and 
(3)  Encouraging and promoting proper, orderly and efficient development of land according to the needs of the general public, as set forth in the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Matters regulated. Matters regulated include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Use of land and water for residential, commercial and other uses; 
(2)  Size of lots, yards and other spaces; 
(3)  Maximum coverage of lots by buildings and other structures and uses; 
(4)  Height, size, location, erection and construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings and other structures; 
(5)  Density of population and intensity of uses; 
(6)  Provision of public facilities and services concurrent with the impacts of development; and 
(7)  Protection of natural and historic resources. 
(c)  Application of regulations. Except as hereinafter provided, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any structure or land be used or occupied which does not comply with all the regulations established by this ordinance for the district in which the building or land is located. No part of a yard, other open space, parking or loading space required for a building or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, open space, parking or loading space similarly required for another building or use. 
    No building or use shall be relocated from one zoning lot to another or relocated to another location on the same zoning lot unless such building, structure or use shall thereafter conform to all of the applicable provisions of this ordinance and the provisions of Chapter 98 - Buildings and Building Regulations, of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances. 
    In no case shall there be more than one main structure and the customary accessory structures on one lot when single-family residential is the principal use of the lot. No yard, or lot, now existing, or hereinafter created, shall be reduced in dimensions or area below the minimum requirements herein for the district in which it is located. No structure shall be erected on a lot heretofore or hereinafter reduced below minimum dimensions or area required by law, nor shall such lot be offered for sale or sold, except to used in such combination with adjacent lots as will produce conformity with the requirements of this ordinance, provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a lot which was of record, either by plat or by deed describing the lot by metes and bounds or otherwise, in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court, Pinellas County, Florida, on August 1, 1972, being the date of final adoption of Ordinance 200 containing similar provisions. 
    Within each district, the regulations set forth herein shall be minimum regulations and shall apply to each class or kind of building or land. The regulations may specify the uses permitted, the uses permissible as conditional uses provided that reasonable requirements of a special nature are met to reduce or eliminate harmful incompatibility, the off-street parking and loading requirements for each use, and identify the uses or characteristics of uses that are prohibited. 
(d)  Calculation of residential and transient accommodation densities. Maximum residential and transient accommodation densities within the applicable zoning district regulations, when calculated by multiplying the lot area by the number of units per acre permitted results in any fractional unit, are always rounded downward to the next whole number. This provision shall not be subject to any variance granting authority provided elsewhere within the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Schedule of district regulations. Except for regulations applying to more than one zoning district which appear in the supplemental regulations herein and elsewhere, regulations for the individual districts appear in the specific district regulations divisions. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 1.4. - Conflicts with other ordinances, covenants or agreements. 
    Wherever higher or more restrictive standards are established by the provisions of any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation than are established by the provisions of this ordinance, those regulations shall govern. This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreements between parties, except that if this ordinance imposes greater restriction, this ordinance shall control. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 1.5. - Severability. 
    Should any section or provision of this Land Development Code be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of these regulations as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 1.6. - Effective date. 
    This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final adoption. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 1.7. - Official zoning map adopted. 
    The Official Zoning Map of the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida, and incorporated herein by reference, is hereby adopted as part of this ordinance and shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and not henceforth reproduced as part of this ordinance. A copy of the official zoning map may be purchased. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 1.8. - Transitional rules. 
(a)  Transition period. Where a complete application for development approval is pending on the effective date of these regulations, the provisions of the regulations in effect when the application was filed shall govern the review and approval of the application for development approval. If such application is approved within six months of the date of adoption of these regulations, then the applicant shall be entitled to complete the development, provided that construction begins within six months of the issuance of such approval and is diligently pursued to completion. For the purposes of this section, "diligently pursued" shall mean that following the commencement of construction, there shall be ongoing construction activity to completion with no periods of inactivity exceeding 14 consecutive days. 
(b)  Existing unlawful uses and structures. A nonconforming structure or use lawfully existing, pursuant to the prior ordinance, at the time of the adoption of these regulations is hereby deemed lawful as of that date only if it conforms with all of the requirements of these regulations. However, if such structure or use does not conform with all of the requirements of these regulations, then such structure or use remains nonconforming hereunder. 
(c)  Existing permitted uses. When a lot is used lawfully on the effective date of these regulations and the district regulations of this chapter classifies such use as a "permitted use" in the zoning district in which it is located, such use is hereby deemed to be a lawful permitted use for the purposes of these regulations. 
(d)  Existing special exceptions (conditional uses). When a lot is used lawfully on the effective date of these regulations and the district regulations of this chapter classifies such use as a "conditional use" in the zoning district in which it is located, such use is hereby deemed to be a lawful conditional use for the purposes of these regulations. If the use was approved as a special exception prior to the effective date of these regulations and if the approval of such special exception was subject to one or more conditions, those conditions shall continue in full force and effect unless a new conditional use approval is obtained in accordance with Division 4 of these regulations. Such previously approved special exceptions shall not be subject to the revocation provision of section 4.11. 
(e)  Abandoned previously established special exceptions. Not withstanding the provisions of paragraph (d) above, any previously granted special exception use not in operation on the date of the adoption of these regulations shall be considered to have been voluntarily abandoned, and no such use shall be re-established without a new conditional use approval, provided such use is permitted as a conditional use within the district in which the property is located. Otherwise, such use may not be re-established. 
(f)  Additions to, expansions or alterations of, or changes of use in existing special exception uses. Any addition to or expansion of a previously approved special exception, which is now considered a conditional use, shall require new conditional use approval in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Division 4 of these regulations for new conditional uses. Any change in a lawful conditional use to a new use shall be permitted only if these regulations classify the new use as a permitted use or a conditional use in the zoning district in which it is located, and only in accordance with the approval procedures set forth in these regulations for such use. 
(g)  Previously granted variances. All variances granted prior to the effective date of these regulations, and any conditions attached thereto, shall remain in full force and effect, and the recipient of the variance may proceed to develop the property in accordance with the plans previously approved. However, if the recipient of the variance has failed to commence construction before the variance expires, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
(h)  Final site and development plans. In the event a final site and development plan has been approved by the city commission prior to the effective date of these regulations, and has automatically expired pursuant to the prior Land Development Code, then a new site plan approval in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Division 4 of these regulations is required. In the event a final site and development plan or development plan has been approved by the city commission and would be eligible to request a time extension for validity under the prior regulations, then the city commission may extend the approval for one additional two-year period in accordance with the procedures and requirements of these regulations. In either event, there shall be no requirement to rezone the property to its former district if and when the previously approved final site and development plan or development plan expires and the provisions of these regulations pertaining to expiration of rezonings shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 1.9. - Repeal of ordinances in conflict. 
    This ordinance repeals the following chapters, articles and sections of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances: 
(a)  Chapter 126, Subdivisions, of the Code of Ordinances; 
(b)  Chapter 134, Zoning, of the Code of Ordinances; 
(c)  Article II, Trees, of Chapter 130 of the Code of Ordinances; 
(d)  Article III, Coastal Construction and Excavation, of Chapter 98 and sections 98-96 through 98-98 of the Code of Ordinances; 
(e)  Article II, Development, Maintenance and Preservation of Dunes, of Chapter 114 of the Code of Ordinances; 
(f)  Any other section or ordinance that is in conflict with the terms of this Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
DIVISION 2 - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2.1. - Words, terms and phrases defined. 
    All words used in this chapter shall carry their customary dictionary meanings, except the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandonment means the cessation of the use of property without the intention of transferring rights to the property or of resuming the use of the property. 
    Accent or under-story tree means a tree with a crown spread of less than 15 feet and a height of 20 feet at maturity. 
    Accessory means a use, building or structure, or part of a building or structure which: 
(1)  Is subordinate to and serves the principal building or structure or principal use; 
(2)  Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or structure or principal use served; 
(3)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use; and/or 
(4)  Is located on the same lot as the principal building or structure or principal use served, with the exception of such accessory off-street parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same lot as the building or use served. 
    Adult day care center means any building, buildings, or part of a building, whether operated for profit or not, in which is provided through its ownership or management, for a part of a day, basic services to three or more persons who are 18 years of age or older, who are not related to the owner or operator by blood or marriage, and who require such services. 
    Adult entertainment establishment means any use or establishment which is defined as such by Chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of St. Pete Beach, Florida. 
Aggrieved  person: 
(1)  The city 
(2)  The applicant for a development permit, and 
(3)  Any person or entity which will suffer to a greater degree than the general public an adverse effect to a legally recognized interest protected or furthered by the Land Development Code or the St. Pete Beach Comprehensive Plan. 
    Alley means a right-of-way providing a secondary means of access and service to an abutting property. 
    Ancillary, nonresidential use means off-street parking, drainage retention areas and open space buffer areas for adjacent, nonresidential uses. 
    Animal clinic means a facility for the medical care of domestic animals, but which does not offer boarding for the animals. 
    Applicant means a person seeking any determination or approval under, or permits required by, this ordinance. 
    Appropriate board of authority refers to the board or committee appointed by the city commission to administer the Land Development Code. 
    Assisted living facility means any building or buildings, section or distinct part of a building, private home, boarding home, home for the aged, or other residential facility, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide housing, meals, and one or more personal services for a period exceeding 24 hours to one or more adults who are not relatives of the owner or administrator and is licensed under the provisions of F.S. Ch. 400, Pt. III. 
    Automotive rental agency means a use in which the purpose is the short-term (for periods of less than 12 months duration) rental or leasing of automobiles, trucks and/or utility trailers, including facilities for customer pick-up and return of vehicles. Such facilities may include the storage of and routine appearance maintenance (washing and vacuuming) of the vehicles rented or leased by the agency. 
    Automotive retail store means a facility used for the retail sale of automotive parts and accessories. Such uses shall not include a car wash, automotive service and repair, or the sale of gasoline or other fuels, and all activities of automotive retail services businesses shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
    Automotive sales lot means a lot or parcel, with or without structures, upon which new and/or used automobiles, light trucks, motorcycles, mopeds, recreational vehicles, and other licensed vehicles are displayed and sold. This definition shall not include non-licensed vehicles such as bicycles, segways, and golf carts. 
    Automotive service and repair means a use which provides specialized services and/or repairs for automobiles, trucks and other vehicles, including, but not limited to, muffler shops, body shops, transmission shops, automotive paint shops, tire stores which also offer mounting services, and quick-change oil and lubrication shops. 
    Automotive service station means a facility that is designed for the retail sales of gasoline and diesel fuels, which may include convenience food sales. 
    Bar (cocktail lounge, saloon). See "Eating and drinking establishment - Bar (cocktail lounge, saloon)." 
    Bay window means a projection normally of a depth of two to three feet from the side of a residential structure that has three walls, one parallel with principal structure and two that extend outward from the principal structure at an angle to form the bay window, that primarily consist of windows, usually made up of one large window in the wall that is parallel with the side of the structure from which the bay window projects and two smaller windows, one on each angular wall. 
    Beach means that area of unconsolidated material that extends landward from the mean low water line to the place where there is marked change in material or physiographic form, or to the line of permanent upland vegetation, usually the effective limit of storm waves. 
    Beach bar. See "Eating and drinking establishment - Beach bar." 
    Bed and breakfast inn. See "Transient accommodation use - Bed and breakfast inn." 
    Boat lift means a device for lifting boats out the water for storage over the water. Boat lifts shall be inclusive of all post and floating lift systems, but exclusive of davits where the davit base is not within the waters of the county. 
    Boat sales and repair facilities means a use in which the purpose is the repair and/or retail sale of boats and other watercraft to the public. Such use may or may not be located on the water or associated with a marina. 
    Body art means the practice of physical body adornment by establishments and artists using, but not limited to, the techniques of body piercing and tattooing. This definition does not include ear piercing. 
    Buffer means any combination of vegetation, walls, fencing, berms and open spaces which are used to physically separate and screen land uses. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
    Building, completely enclosed means a building separated on all sides from adjacent open space or from other buildings by permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by closed windows and normal entrance or exit doors. Such doors shall not be kept open except for normal ingress and egress. This definition shall apply to any building in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance and to any building constructed thereafter. 
    Building expansion means any enlargement or extension of a building which provides additional gross floor area. An enlargement or expansion into an existing carport, screened enclosures, pedestrian covered walkway, off-street parking and/or loading area, courtyard, or similar structure or area which changes the use of that area shall be considered a building expansion. 
    Building line means the lines established by dimensional requirements of a required yard that is inside a zoning lot and parallel with front, secondary front, side and rear property lines of the zoning lot which, when taken together, define the area within which all structures must be located. 
    Building site. See "Zoning lot." 
    Canopy means a tree having a crown spread of greater than 15 feet and a minimum height of 20 feet at maturity. 
    Car wash means a facility which allows the public, in return for payment, to wash their own vehicles or to have their vehicles washed either by mechanical means or by others. Such use includes both freestanding car washes and the type of coin-operated car wash commonly associated with filling stations. 
    Catastrophic event means the involuntary loss suffered from a major storm, such as, but not limited to, flooding, wind, fire or similar event. 
    Change of use means the replacement of or substitution for the existing or former use of a premises with a use of a different classification under the building regulations, fire codes or this Code. 
    Charter and tour boat operations, excluding vessels for hire as defined herein and water taxis as defined in Chapter 94, mean any boating operation under the command of a licensed captain which offers hourly trips, day-trips and/or night-trips to the public for a fee, including the provision of related activities such as fishing, snorkeling, sunset cruises, dining cruises, dolphin watches and similar activities. 
    Check-cashing means a person or business that for compensation engages, in whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose. 
    Child care means the care, protection, and supervision of a child, for a period of less than 24 hours a day on a regular basis, which supplements parental care, enrichment, and health supervision for the child, in accordance with his or her individual needs, and for which a payment, fee, or grant is made for care. 
    Child care facility includes any child care center or child care arrangement which provides child care for more than five children unrelated to the operator and which receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care, wherever operated, and whether or not operated for profit. The following are not included: 
(1)  Public schools and nonpublic schools and their integral programs, except as provided in F.S. § 402.3025; 
(2)  Summer camps having children in full-time residence; 
(3)  Summer day camps; 
(4)  Bible schools normally conducted during vacation periods; and 
(5)  Operators of transient establishments, as defined in F.S. Ch. 509, which provide child care services solely for the guests of their establishment or resort, provided that all child care personnel of the establishment are screened according to the Level 2 screening requirements of F.S. Ch. 435. 
    Church. See "places of worship." 
    City commission means the duly elected body of officials who have overall responsibility for establishing policies and procedures for the operations of the City of St. Pete Beach. 
    City manager means the person appointed or contracted by the city commission to supervise the daily administrative operations of the City of St. Pete Beach or the employee(s) of the City of St. Pete Beach designated by the city manager to perform certain specified duties. 
    Clinic means an establishment used for medical or dental care which is comprised of a variety of medical specialties and which has equipment on site to diagnose and administer treatment on an outpatient basis. 
    Club (community service) means non-profit clubs whose primary function is to provide social and humanitarian services to the community (such as Women's Clubs, League of Women Voters, Garden Club, Junior League, Jaycees, Kiwanis, Masons, Rotary Club, the Shriners, and others of a similar nature). 
    Club (private), for the purposes of these regulations and when applicable to non-commercial districts, means those associations and organizations of a fraternal or social character which are not operated for profit. The term "private club" shall not include casinos, nightclubs, bottle clubs and similar uses in districts where such uses are not permitted or permissible. 
    Coastal construction control line (CCCL) means the surveyed line established by the State of Florida along the Gulf of Mexico beyond which all construction requires permitting by the Florida Department of Natural Resources and the City of St. Pete Beach. 
    Commercial boat docking facility means a Class D dock that is not part of a marina use that is used in connection with charter and tour boat operations but does not offer docking facilities to the general public. 
    Commercial dock. See "Dock - Commercial dock." 
    Commercial equipment means any machinery or device that is placed outside of a building and used in conjunction with a business use. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, refrigeration equipment, propane tanks, storage or wash racks, waste or refuse containers or compactors, and vending machines dispensing items other than publications. 
    Commercial kitchen means an establishment where food and beverages are prepared for off-site consumption. Typical uses include catering facilities. This classification does not include businesses involved in the processing or manufacturing of food products. 
    Commercial parking lot. See "Parking lot (commercial)." 
    Commercial recreation, for the purposes of these regulations, commercial recreation uses consist of privately owned and operated tennis, racquet ball and handball courts, miniature golf courses, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, skateboard facilities, water slides, batting and archery facilities, bowling alleys, amusement parks, game or amusement facilities housing ten or more games or amusement devices which are available for use by the public. 
    Commercial water sports mean operations that offer any of the following activities to the public in return for payment: 
(1)  The rental of personal watercraft or jet skis; 
(2)  The rental of human-powered or wind-powered watercraft; or 
(3)  Parasailing, water-skiing, or other similar towing operations. 
    Communications facilities means facilities which are completely enclosed and for radio or television broadcasts or telephone and data switching. (See also Chapter 131, St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances.) 
    Communications tower means a tower erected for the purpose of transmitting, repeating or receiving radio or television signals or for the purpose of providing telephone and data networking. (See also Chapter 131, St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances.) 
    Community residential home means a dwelling unit licensed under the provisions of F.S. Ch. 419, to serve clients of the department of children and family services, which provides a living environment for up to 14 unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care by supportive staff as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of the residents. 
    Complete application means an application for development approval that contains the supporting documentation required by these regulations. 
    Comprehensive Plan means the St. Pete Beach Municipal Comprehensive Plan, and any amendments thereto that meet the requirements of F.S. Ch. 163, as adopted by the city commission. 
    Concurrency management statement means the impact statement which is a report or study that identifies, resolves and eliminates negative or adverse impacts on existing and future city systems and facilities. These impacts can include the effect a proposed development may have on solid waste; police, fire and emergency medical services; wastewater and water; traffic; and the municipal tax base. (See also Chapter 102, St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances.) 
    Conditional use means a use that has operational, physical and other characteristics that may be different from those of the predominant permitted uses in a zoning district, but which is a use that complements or may otherwise be compatible with the intended over-all development within a district, provided that specified standards are met. 
    Condominium. See: "Residential dwelling unit - Multifamily." 
    Construction means new work, repairs, replacements and extensions to structures. 
    Continual construction means construction performed by a full complement of workers and equipment mobilized at the project site, actively engaged in incorporating materials and equipment into the building or structure each normal working day. 
    Corner lot. See "Lot types - Corner lot." 
    Crown means the upper portion of a tree made up of branches, twigs and leaves. 
    Day care center/kindergarten means a use, with no facilities for overnight stays, which provides child care and/or training for pre-school children and may provide after-school care for older children, including any child care arrangement which provides child care for more than five children unrelated to the operator and which receives payment, fee or grant for any of the children receiving care, wherever operated, and whether or not for profit, as defined and regulated by F.S. Ch. 402. 
    Demolition means the removal of a building, structure or portions thereof from a site. 
    Density means a measurement (ratio) of the number of dwelling or transient accommodation units allowable to a specified amount of land. As used in this ordinance, the calculation of density does not include land devoted to public rights-of-way, submerged lands and lands seaward of the State of Florida Coastal Control Line. (See also "intensity" and "floor area ratio.") 
    Development means the excavation or alteration of existing ground elevations, the carrying out of any building activity, the making of any change in the use or appearance of any structure or land, the dividing of land, rezoning, conditional use, variance, commercial dock, or any other request for official action of the city having the effect of development of land. 
    Development order or permit means any order granting, denying, or granting with conditions an application for a development approval including the following: 
(1)  Site plan approval; 
(2)  Conditional use approval; 
(3)  Land subdivision approval; 
(4)  Variance; 
(5)  Land use amendments; 
(6)  Rezoning; 
(7)  Developments of regional impact; 
(8)  Commercial dock; or 
(9)  Any other official action of the city having the effect of permitting the development of land. 
    Development site. See "Zoning lot." 
    Dock means any structure, including a pier, wharf, loading platform, tie poles, dolphins, accessory structures, or a boat lift which is constructed on piles, over open water, or which is supported by flotation on the waters of the county. Docks are further classified as follows: 
(1)  Residential dock means a dock that is permitted as an accessory to a one- or two-family residential use which is built on pilings over water or supported by flotation devices, and is designed or used to provide moorage for one or more boats without charge. 
(2)  Commercial dock means a structure on piles over water or a structure that is defined as a commercial dock by the county environmental resources management division and which is designed or used to provide a berth for and access to one or more private, charter, commercial or party boats further classified and defined, as follows: 
a.  Class A means any dock used in connection with a hotel, motel, restaurant and where the slips are not rented, leased or sold, but utilized as an enhancement to the principal function of the basic facility. 
b.  Class B means any dock used in connection with a social, fraternal club or organization, and where use of the facility is restricted to members only or multiuse private docks owned individually or in common by the residents of any residential development with three or more residential units. 
c.  Class C means any dock constructed and maintained by the local municipality. 
d.  Class D means any dock where the primary function is the collection of revenue for profit. This classification applies to all commercial marinas and commercial boat docking facilities. 
    Dry cleaners. See "Laundry - Dry cleaning." 
    Dumpster means a box-like container having a lid or access doors, generally having an interior capacity of two cubic yards or more and weighing in excess of 150 pounds, and requiring lifting and emptying by mechanical means or devices, into which unwanted waste and refuse materials, food products, yard waste or other discarded items are placed or stored for later removal and final disposal by a waste management service. 
    Dune means a mound or ridge of loose sediments, usually sand, lying landward of the beach and deposited by any natural or artificial means. 
    Duplex. See: "Residential dwelling unit - Two-family." 
    Dwelling unit. See "Residential dwelling unit." 
    Easement means a grant by a property owner of the right of use of his land by another party for a specific purpose. 
    Eating and drinking establishment means a business primarily engaged in serving prepared food and/or beverages for consumption on or off the premises. Such uses are regulated by type as follows: 
Bar/lounge means a business serving beverages for consumption on the premises as a primary use or as an accessory use to a hotel or motel and including on-site service of alcohol, including beer, wine, and mixed drinks. 
Restaurant, full-service means a restaurant providing food and beverage services to patrons who order and are served while seated and pay after eating. Takeout service may also be provided. 
Restaurant, limited-service means an establishment where food and beverages may be consumed on the premises, taken out, or delivered, but where limited table service is provided. This classification includes cafes, cafeterias, coffee shops, delicatessens, fast-food restaurants, sandwich shops, limited-service pizza parlors, self-service restaurants, and snack bars with indoor or outdoor seating for customers. This classification includes bakeries that have tables for on-site consumption of products. It excludes catering services that do not sell food or beverages for on-site consumption (See "commercial kitchen"). 
Restaurant, take-out only means a restaurant where food and beverages are prepared on a customer-demand basis and may be taken out or delivered, but are not consumed on the premises. No seating or other facilities for on-premises dining are provided. 
Restaurant with drive-through service means any eating or drinking establishment which has direct window service allowing customers in motor vehicles to pick up food or drink for off-premise consumption. 
Outdoor dining means a delineated area, including patios and similar areas, affiliated with a restaurant unenclosed by walls where tables, seating and other furnishings are provided for patrons of the restaurant for eating and drinking. 
Outdoor drinking means a delineated area, including patios and similar areas, affiliated with a bar/lounge unenclosed by walls where tables, seating and other furnishings may be provided for patrons of the bar/lounge for consuming beverages. For temporary lodging uses, the outdoor drinking area may occupy a portion of a private sand beach affiliated with an accessory hotel or motel bar reserved for the exclusive use of overnight guests. 
    Essential governmental services mean distribution or service connection facilities, structures, and appurtenances thereto, for gas, electricity, land line telephone, water, sanitary sewer, storm water, fuel, law enforcement and fire and rescue services, and other similar consumable public commodities or services owned and operated by a governmental entity or public utility. 
    Family means one or more individuals related by blood, marriage, or adoption or fostering of children under the age of 25, and up to two unrelated persons who serve as caretakers, servants, or housekeepers, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household unit. Family shall also be defined as four or less unrelated individuals for the purposes of residential occupancy. The term "family" shall not be construed to mean a fraternity, sorority, club, or other institutional group. 
    Fast food restaurant. See "Eating and drinking establishment - Fast food restaurant." 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Financial institution means any establishment, the primary business of which is concerned with such state or federally regulated activities as banking, savings and loans, and consumer loan companies. Such institutions are regulated by whether or not they provide drive-through service to customers. 
    Filling station. See "Automotive service station." 
    Floating dock. See "Dock." 
    Floor area means the total floor area of the portion of a building that is above ground. Floor area is measured from the exterior faces of a building or structure. Floor area does not include the following: 
(1)  Vent shafts and courts; 
(2)  Basement areas with more than one-half of its height below ground level; 
(3)  Roof area; 
(4)  Roof top mechanical equipment, and associated enclosures; 
(5)  Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls that are more than 42 inches in height, for 50 percent or more of their perimeter; and 
(6)  Structured parking garages. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the total amount of gross floor area of all buildings on a zoning lot in relation to the total square footage of zoning lot area, expressed as a ratio. The calculation of the floor are ratio excludes land devoted to public rights-of-way, submerged lands and lands seaward of the State of Florida Coastal Control Line. 
    Front yard. See "Yard - Front yard." 
    Funeral home. See "Mortuary." 
    Garage, private customer and employee means a structure that is accessory to a non-retail commercial establishment, building or use and is primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles operated by customers, visitors and employees of such building and that is not available to the general public. 
    Garage, private residential means a structure that is ancillary to a residential building and that is used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned or leased and operated by the residents thereof and that is not available to the general public. 
    Garage, public means a structure, or portion thereof, other than a private customer and employee garage or private residential garage, used primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles and is available to the general public. 
    Government use means any use for exclusively public purposes without reference to the ownership of the building or structures or the realty upon which it is situated by any department or branch of the federal government, State of Florida, Pinellas County, City of St. Pete Beach, or the Pinellas County School Board. 
    Grade. See "Grade, natural." 
    Grade, average means the average natural elevation of the ground level, measured in feet above mean sea level. 
    Grade, finished means the final elevation of the ground level after development, measured in feet above mean sea level. 
    Grade, natural means the elevation of the ground level in its natural state, before construction, filing or excavation, measured in feet above mean sea level. 
    Gross floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but not including interior parking spaces or loading space for motor vehicles. 
    Gross land area means the total land area within the property boundaries of the subject parcel specifically excluding any public road rights-of-way or submerged land. 
    Guest room. See: "Transient accommodation unit." 
    Height means the vertical distance above the base flood elevation to the highest point of a flat roof, to the deck of a mansard roof or to the average height between the plate and the ridge of gable or hip roofs, not including chimneys, antennas, elevator shafts, mechanical rooms or other non-habitable areas. 
    Historic building or site means a property, site, zoning lot, building, or structure that has been designated as "historic" by the city commission or that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places as being worthy of protection, enhancement and perpetuation because of its cultural, historic, architectural, or archaeological significance and integrity. 
    Historic preservation . See Division 28 herein. 
    Home occupation means a business, profession, occupation, or trade which is conducted within a portion of a residential building or accessory building for the economic gain or support of a resident of the dwelling, and which is incidental and secondary to the residential use within the dwelling. 
    Hotel. See "Transient accommodation use - Hotels and motels. (1) Hotel." 
    Impervious surface means any material that prevents absorption of storm water into the ground. 
    Impervious surface ratio (ISR) means a measurement of the intensity of hard-surfaced development on a site. An impervious surface ratio is the relationship between the total area covered by impervious surfaces on a site and the gross land area of the zoning lot, excluding any portion of the property lying Gulfward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. The impervious surface ratio is calculated by dividing the square footage of the area of all impervious surfaces on the site by the square footage of the gross land area, excluding any portion of the property lying Gulfward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
    Intensity means the amount or magnitude of a use on a site or allowed in a zoning district. Generally, it is measured by floor area. Intensity may be measured by such things as number of employees, amount of production, trip generation, or hours of operation. (See also "Density" and "Floor area ratio.") 
    Interior lot. See "Lot types - Interior lot." 
    Kennel means a facility for the keeping of more than five adult dogs or ten adult cats on site. "Adult" means having attained the age of one calendar year or greater. Kennels are regulated on the basis whether they have outdoor runs or not. 
    Kitchen means any room or portion of a room within a building designed and/or used or intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food, which may also include, but is not limited to, stoves, microwave ovens, sinks, refrigerators, storage or other food preparation equipment, or any combination thereof. This may not include outside grilling facilities or other items determined by the city manager as not constituting a kitchen. 
    Land Development Code mean ordinances or regulations enacted by the City of St. Pete Beach for the regulation of any aspect of development and include, but are not limited to, zoning, signs, drainage and any other regulations controlling the development of land. 
    Laundry means a business rendering a retail service to individual customers for processing of laundry, including the following: 
(1)  Self-service means a business that renders a retail service by renting to customers washing, drying and processing of laundry with the equipment serviced and its use and operation supervised by the management. 
(2)  Dry cleaning means a business that includes the process of chemically cleaning fabrics including laundry (washing and drying) or dyeing services. 
    Liquor store means any business selling general alcoholic beverages, also known as sale of distilled spirits or hard liquor, for off-premises consumption. Liquor store does not include a business selling only beer and/or wine for off-premises consumption or any business that offers the sale of liquor where 25% or less of the gross floor area is dedicated to such use. 
    Loading space means a space with access to a street or alley for the standing, loading, or unloading of motor vehicles delivering or picking up goods and materials. 
    Lot includes tract or parcel and means the least fractional part of subdivided lands having limited fixed boundaries and an assigned number, letter, legal description or other name through which it may identified. (See "Zoning lot.") 
    Lot coverage. See "Impervious surface" and "Impervious surface ratio." 
    Lot, irregular means a lot or parcel of land so located, shaped or oriented to adjacent lots that the application of general measurement methods or yard requirements serves no significant purpose. 
    Lot line. See "Property line." 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, or a lot described by metes and bounds, which has been properly recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Pinellas County. 
    Lot, regular means a lot abutting a public street or approved private street, so located, shaped and oriented to the street and to adjacent lots as to be reasonably adapted to the application of the general requirements and limitations of this ordinance. 
    Lot types mean a descriptive term applied to describe the relationship of a lot to a public or private street, excluding alleys or driveways, providing access to the lot. The various lot types are defined as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, having two or more of its boundary lines contiguous with the rights-of-way. 
(2)  Interior lot means a lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on only one street. 
(3)  Through lot means a lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two streets. Waterfront lots are not considered through lots. Through lots may be referred to as double-frontage lots. 
    Lot width means the average distance between the property lines connecting the front and rear zoning lot lines at each side of the zoning lot, except for zoning lots on the turning circle of a cul-de-sac for which the required yard shall be based upon the stated minimum lot width for the district in which the lot is located. 
    Maintenance means the act of preventing deterioration of a building or structure, or decay of or damage to a building or structure or any part thereof, by restoring the building or structure as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage. 
    Marina means a waterfront facility providing one or more of the following: 
(1)  Docking and/or wet or dry storage of boats for a fee; 
(2)  Sales of marine supplies, parts and fuel; 
(3)  Minor boat service and repair; and 
(4)  Boat sales, rental and/or charter. 
    A marina may also include the following accessory uses: live-aboard facilities as governed by Chapter 94 of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances, restaurants, gift shops, offices, vending machines, and water taxi dockage. 
    Market value means, for the purposes of determining substantial improvement or substantial damage, an acceptable estimate of the value of the structure as determined by a professional property appraiser or using the value of the structure as determined by the most recent available tax roll for the county property appraiser's office and adding 25 percent. 
    Mean high water means the high-water mark established by the U.S. Coastal and Geodetic Survey in its latest coastal survey of the city. 
    Mixed use development means a development that combines any of the following uses, including but not limited to: residential, transient accommodation, commercial, office, and may consist of one or more buildings. 
    Mobile food truck rally means any gathering of more than two (2) Class I, Class II or Class III mobile food trucks in one (1) location on a date certain and shall require a food truck permit. Applications shall be made to the city in accordance with the procedures contained herein. 
    Mobile food truck means a vehicle which is used to vend food and beverage products and is classified as one of the following: 
Class I- Mobile kitchens. In addition to the vending of products allowed for Class II and Class III mobile food trucks, these vehicles may cook, prepare and assemble food items on or in the unit and serve a full menu. Customers may be notified of the vehicle's location by social media or other forms of advertising. 
Class II-Canteen trucks. These vehicles vend fruits, vegetables, hot dogs, pre-cooked foods, pre-packaged foods and pre-packaged drinks. No preparation or assembly of foods or beverages may take place on or in the vehicle, however, the heating of pre-cooked foods is allowed. A cooking apparatus or grill top for the heating of pre-cooked foods is permitted so long as it complies with state regulations. These vehicles are limited to providing catering services to employees at a specific location. 
Class III-Ice cream trucks. These vehicles vend only pre-packaged frozen dairy or frozen water-based food products, soft serve or hand-dipped frozen dairy products or frozen water-based food products and pre-packaged beverages. 
    Mobile service base means a place for food storage, the cleaning of the equipment, the filling of water tanks and proper disposal of waste water and grease and does not include the use of a private home as a mobile service base. 
    Mortuary means a privately owned facility for the purpose of receiving and preparing dead bodies for burial or cremation. 
    Motel. See "Transient accommodation use - Hotels and motels. (2) Motel." 
    Multi-use private dock. See "Dock - Commercial dock - Class B." 
    Navigation means the maneuvering of watercraft with the waters of the county, including ingress to and egress from an upland property. 
    Neighborhood buildings and uses mean non-governmental and non-commercial facilities which serve the needs of the immediate neighborhood residents. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, swimming pools, club houses, park and recreation areas which are owned, operated and maintained by a community or homeowners association, and which are intended solely for the benefit and use of the members of the association. 
    Nightclub. See "Eating and drinking establishment - Nightclub." 
    Nonconforming means a use or structure that was lawful when commenced, but that fails by reason of an amendment or revision to conform to the present requirements of these regulations. 
    Non-transient apartment means a multifamily structure that is intended for permanent year-round residency and is not advertised or held out to the public as available for transient occupancy. 
    Off-premise parking lot. See "Parking lot (off-premise)." 
    Office means a room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government, and generally furnished with desks, tables, files and communication equipment. 
    Open space means any portion of a zoning lot or area of land or water that is open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, including areas maintained in a natural and undisturbed character. 
    Ordinary maintenance means work not requiring a building permit done to prevent deterioration of a building or structure, or decay of or damage to a building or structure or any part thereof, by restoring the building or structure as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage. 
    Outdoor restaurant. See "Eating and drinking establishment - Outdoor restaurant." 
    Outdoor storage means the use of a lot or parcel of land where raw materials, finished goods, vehicles or watercraft, other than those kept in a junkyard, are stored. This definition includes self-service storage facilities which also provide outside storage limited to boats, trailers or other vehicles. 
    Overlay district means a zoning designation specifically delineated on the official zoning map establishing land use requirements that may supercede, or are in addition to, the standards set forth in the underlying zoning district. 
    Parking area mean any public or private land area designed and used for parking motor vehicles, including parking lots, garages, private driveways and allowed or legally designated areas of public streets. 
    Parking lot (commercial) means an off-street parking lot that is not affiliated with a specific other use that provides parking, in whole or majority part, as a commercial enterprise, for a fee on a first come-first-served basis by hourly or monthly contract. 
    Parking lot (off-premise) an off-street parking lot that is not on the same property as the principal use it is designed and intended to serve. 
    Parking structure (commercial) means a structured parking facility with two or more levels that is not affiliated with a specific other use that provides parking, in whole or majority part, as a commercial enterprise, for a fee on a first come-first-served basis by hourly or monthly contract. 
    Parking structure (off-premise) means a structured parking facility with two or more levels that is not on the same property as the principal use it is designed and intended to serve. 
    Pawn shop means an establishment that engages, in whole or in part, in the business of loaning money on the security of pledges of personal property, or deposits or conditional sales of personal property, or the purchase or sale of personal property including metals, such as gold, silver, and copper. 
    Performance standards mean a set of criteria or limits relating to certain characteristics that a particular use or process may not exceed. 
    Permeable parking area means a maintained parking area other than concrete or asphalt constructed in such a way as to allow the absorption of storm water, thus reducing the amount of storm water runoff occurring on site. 
    Places of worship means any church, temple, synagogue, mosque or other similar place where religious worship is conducted for groups of people or other similar activities occur. 
    Playground means an active recreation area with a variety of facilities, including equipment for younger children as well as court and field games. 
    Portable toilet means one or more commercially manufactured or assembled, self-contained toilet facility that is portable and is not designed or intended for connection to a sewer system with a standard connection. 
    Premises means a lot or parcel, or a lot or parcel and the structures and improvements thereon. 
    Principal use means the primary purpose, activity or function for which a parcel or building is used. 
    Printing and copying means a facility which provides printing and duplicating services on a small scale for the business community, using equipment similar to that which might typically be found in some offices. Such facility does not offer typesetting and printing capabilities beyond desktop publishing. 
    Printing (general) means a facility which offers printing capabilities using large scale equipment, which may include typesetting of all kinds, photomechanical and bindery operations. 
    Property means one or more lots or combinations of lots of record in single ownership or which is in separate ownership but is used as a unified entity, such as a shopping center. 
    Property line means those lines stated in the legal description of the applicant's deed. 
    Property owner means any person who owns fee simple title to a given area of land. 
    Public art or public works of art mean the creative application of skill and taste by artists to production of permanent tangible objects according to the aesthetic principles, including but not limited to, paintings, sculptures, site specific installations, engravings, carvings, frescos, mobiles, murals, collages, mosaics, statues and bas-reliefs. Public art or public works of art shall also include the creative application of skill and taste by artists according to aesthetic principals to the architectural embellishment of a building or structure. 
    However, the following shall not be considered "public art or public works of art": 
(1)  Reproductions, or unlimited copies of original art work; 
(2)  Art objects which are mass produced; 
(3)  Works that are decorative, ornamental or functional elements of the architecture or landscape design, except when commissioned from an artist as an integral aspect of a structure or site; 
(4)  Architectural rehabilitation or historical preservation. 
    Public or semi-public use means a use that is intended to serve the entire community, such as public parks and open space, recreation facilities, transportation or public works facilities, churches, schools, government buildings, utility substations and the like, that fit into the primary and secondary uses shown in the R/OS Recreation/Open Space, the INS Institutional, T/U Transportation/Utility or P Preservation land use category description in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Pushcart vending. See section 5.7. 
    Readily visible means visually conspicuous from public view. 
    Rear yard. See "Yard - Rear yard." 
    Recent survey means a drawing prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor in the State of Florida depicting, as it appears at the time of application, all property boundaries including the courses and distances of each, the locations and dimensional characteristics of all existing improvements on the site, the elevation of the site, all easements on or along the property, and the full legal description of the property together with the plat book and page number where such property is recorded. 
    Recycling center means a facility which is provided to the public for the collection of recyclable materials, but does not perform any processing of such materials to render them reusable. 
    Redevelopment means the conversion, relocation, reconstruction, structural alteration, enlargement of any building and/or use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
    Repair, within the context of the dock regulations only, means the replacement of: 
(1)  The piling or support system of a dock; 
(2)  More than 25 percent of the dock surface area. 
    Required yard. See "Yard - Required yard." 
    Residential dwelling unit means any building or portion thereof designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a complete, independent living facility for the exclusive use of one family, including permanent full provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. A dwelling unit shall have no more than one kitchen and shall provide complete internal access to all rooms in the unit. Residential structures are further classified and defined by type as follows: 
Attached single-family means a group of three or more closely placed, interrelated single-family dwelling units which are joined to one another side-to-side by a common party wall or garage, and/or with connecting permanent and architecturally unified structures such as breezeways, carports, or walls, which structures continue the design, pattern and/or materials of the facade from one dwelling unit to another. Connecting structures and outdoor living space may be so designed as to provide access between front and rear yards. Each unit shall have its own outside entrance and not be occupied by more than one family. 
Detached single-family means a freestanding residence, having no direct connection or relationship to an adjacent residence and located on a separate lot, designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. 
Multifamily means a residence designed for non-transient occupancy by three or more families with separate cooking, bathroom and sleeping facilities for each. 
Two-family means a residence designed for occupancy by two families with separate cooking, bathroom and sleeping facilities for each. 
    Residential equivalent use means a residential-like accommodation other than a dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, a group home, nursing home or comparable assisted living facility. No such use shall be required or eligible to employ the residential equivalent standards for density/ intensity for any household that qualifies as a dwelling unit. This use shall not include any type of use authorized by F.S. Ch. 419, Community Residential Homes, which is entitled to be treated as a dwelling unit. 
    Resort condominium. See "Transient accommodation - Resort condominium." 
    Restaurant. See "Eating and drinking establishment - Sit-down restaurant." 
    Retail sales means the sale of goods or commodities in small quantities to the consumer. 
    Retail store or retail shop means any building used, or designed and constructed for display and sale of merchandise at retail or for the rendering of personal services, such as the following, which will serve as illustrations: drugstore, newsstand, grocery store, candy shop, antique store and gift shop, hardware store, household appliance store, furniture store, florist, optician, music and radio store, tailor shop, barber shop and beauty parlor. 
    Right-of-way means a public or private area or strip of land on which an irrevocable right of passage for people or goods has been recorded for the use of vehicles, pedestrians, or both. A public right-of-way is one that is dedicated or deeded, in fee or by easement, to the public for public use and is under the control of a public agency. 
    School (commercial) means a privately owned school which provides instruction and training in the arts, such as drama, dance and music, or which offers instruction and training to students in the use of office machines and equipment, one or more of the trades, real estate operations or financial services. 
    School (private or charter) means a school offering the equivalent educational curriculum of a public school but that is operated by someone other than the Pinellas County School District. 
    School (public) means a school operated by the Pinellas County School District. 
    Secondary front yard. See "Yard - Secondary front yard." 
    Services, commercial/business mean an occupation or service involving the sale, storage, repair, service or rental of machinery, equipment or like merchandise or a facility which serves as the base for construction, plumbing, heating and air conditioning or electrical contractors. Such facilities may include fabrication or manufacture of parts used in the services provided. 
    Services, personal/business mean an occupation or service requiring the use of a manual, mechanical or specialized skill which involves neither the on-premise use of heavy machinery or equipment nor primarily the sale of merchandise or conveyance of a product. 
    Setback means the required minimum horizontal distance between the building line and the related front, secondary front, side, or rear property line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, not including permitted encroachments. 
    Setback line. See "Building line." 
    Shopping center means a group of five or more retail/commercial uses, located in a zoning district where retail sales is permitted as a principal use and having any or all of the following characteristics: 
(1)  The uses are connected by party walls, partitions, canopies, and, similar features; or 
(2)  Some or all of the uses are located in separate buildings which are designed as a single commercial group sharing common parking areas and vehicular travel ways and are connected by walkways and access ways designed to encourage customer interchange between uses, and otherwise present the appearance of a continuous commercial area without regard to ownership; or 
(3)  The uses are under the same management or association for the purpose of enforcing reciprocal agreements controlling management, parking, site coverage, advertising and similar, agreements. 
    Sidewalk cafe. See "Eating and drinking establishment - Sidewalk cafe." 
    Sidewalk sales and display means the temporary (meaning during normal business hours only) outside display and sale of merchandise normally displayed and sold inside the business premises during special sales events, such as sidewalk sales, inventory reduction or liquidation sales, distressed merchandise sales, and seasonal merchandise sales. 
    Side yard. See "Yard - Side yard." 
    Signs. See section 26.2 of Division 26 herein. 
    Single-family dwelling. See "Residential dwelling unit - Detached single-family." 
    Site plan means a plan on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the land and may include, but shall not be limited to the following: topography, vegetation, drainage, landscaping, open space, walkways, ingress and egress, traffic circulation and parking, utility services, structures, buildings, building elevations, signs, lighting, berms, buffers, screening devices, surrounding development, identification of required coastal setback lines, dune systems, and any other information that may be required by the city manager. 
    Sight or visibility triangle means the area of the corner zoning lot closest to the intersection that is kept free of visual impairment to allow full view of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (See also section 6.21.) 
    Social service agency means a non-profit organization whose primary purpose is to enhance the social welfare and improve the living conditions of society. 
    Spa means a hydro massage pool or tub for recreational or therapeutic use, designed for immersion of users and usually having a filter, heater and motor driven blower, and contains water between 24 and 60 inches deep, and is not larger than 64 square feet. 
    Special events. Special events shall be regulated in accordance to Chapter 26 of the Code of Ordinances. 
    Special event permit means the official document authorizing the performance of a special event. 
    Storage (self-service) means a facility which offers multiple small-scale, individually secured, units for the storage of goods other than hazardous materials, under a unified development, for monthly rental to the public, each of which is accessible only by the tenant of the individual unit. Under this definition, a self-service storage facility shall not include the provision of any outside storage. 
    Storage (outdoor). See "Outdoor storage." 
    Street means that portion of a right-of-way or easement that is improved to provide for the movement of motor vehicles. 
    Street-end means a street with a single point of ingress and egress that terminates at the sandy beach along the Gulf of Mexico, Boca Ciega Bay or one of its tributaries, or Blind Pass Channel. 
    Structure means any assembly of materials constructed or erected on, in or over (or any combination thereof) land or water, which requires location on the ground, or is attached to something having a location on the ground. The word "structure" shall be construed as though followed by the words "or parts thereof" unless the context clearly requires a different meaning. The word "structure" shall include buildings, decks, fences, towers, flag poles, signs, and other similar objects. Structure does not include paved areas or vegetative landscaping materials. 
    Subdivision means the division of real property into two or more lots, parcels, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units or any other division of land, or if the establishment of new streets and alleys is involved, any division of such parcel. The term includes re-subdivisions and, when appropriate to the text, relates to the process of subdividing or to the lands or area subdivided. 
    Submerged land means the land area situated below the mean high-water line of a standing body of water, including ocean, estuary, lake, pond, river or stream. For the purpose of this definition, drainage facilities to be created as a function of development and wetlands shall not be considered submerged land. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alteration, addition or other improvements to a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. 
    This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed. This term does not include: 
(1)  Any project for the improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitation or safety code inspection which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Survey. See "Recent survey." 
    Swimming pool means any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water a minimum of 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in ground, above-ground and in-ground swimming pools, and fixed in place wading pools. 
    Temporary use means a use approved pursuant to the procedures and standards of this Code, consistent with the use characteristics of the zoning district in which it is located, for a limited and defined period of time, and which does not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent structure. 
    Theater means a building devoted to showing motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical or other live performances. 
    Through lot. See "Lot types - Through lot." 
    Tie pole means and includes dolphin, batter, sister, or mooring piles which are placed to provide anchorage, mooring, structural support, or space for a ship or boat. 
    Tobacco shop means a retailer whose business exclusively or primarily involves the sale of tobacco products and related goods. 
    Townhouse. See "Residential dwelling unit - Attached single-family." 
    Transient means a person who participates in trade or recreation activities outside the county of his or her permanent residence or who rents or leases transient accommodations. 
    Transient accommodation unit means an individual room or rooms within a transient accommodation use designed to be rented as a single unit for transient occupancy. 
    Transient accommodation use means a facility containing one or more transient accommodation units. Transient accommodation uses shall be further classified as a hotel, motel, or bed and breakfast inn, if the establishment satisfies the following criteria: 
Bed and breakfast inn means a family home structure, with no more than six sleeping rooms, which has been constructed or modified to serve as a transient public lodging establishment, which provides the accommodation and meal services generally offered by a bed and breakfast inn, and which is recognized as a bed and breakfast inn within the community or by the hospitality industry. (See also: Section 6.2 of this Code.) 
Hotels and motels. For the purposes of this ordinance, hotels and motels are differentiated as follows: 
(1)  Hotel means any public lodging establishment meeting the general definition of "transient accommodation use" as described above and containing sleeping room accommodations for 25 or more guests and providing services generally provided by a hotel and recognized as a hotel within the community or by the hospitality industry. 
(2)  Motel means any public lodging establishment meeting the general definition of "transient accommodation use" as described above and which offers rental units with an exit to the outside of each rental unit, daily or weekly rates, off-street parking for each unit, a central office on the property with specified hours of operation, a bathroom or connecting bathroom for each rental unit, and at least six rental units, and which is recognized as a motel within the community or by the hospitality industry. 
Resort condominium means any unit or group of units in a condominium, cooperative, or timeshare plan which is designed or used for transient occupancy. 
Time-share or interval occupancy facility or unit. See "Resort condominium." 
    Transient occupancy means occupancy that is intended to be temporary, or which is offered or advertised as being available for a term of less than one month, more than three times in any consecutive 12-month period. Any occupancy of less than one month shall be deemed a transient occupancy unless such occupancy results from, the early termination of a rental agreement having a term of at least one month, or the termination of a month-to-month tenancy as defined by law. In determining whether a property is used as a transient occupancy, such determination shall be made without regard to the form of ownership of the property or unit, whether the occupant has a direct or indirect ownership interest in the property or unit, and without regard to whether the right of occupancy arises from a rental agreement, other agreement or the payment of consideration. 
    Two-family dwelling. See "Residential dwelling unit - Two-family." 
    Use means the purpose for which land or water or a structure thereon is designed, arranged or intended to be occupied or utilized or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
    Useable open space means the total land area of a multifamily or transient accommodation property, which is open for use by all residents or guests thereof and/or which is used for recreational purposes, excluding land covered or utilized for ingress, egress, dedicated or required yards, structures, streets, off-street parking or vehicular maneuvering areas. 
    Utilities mean distribution or service connection facilities and appurtenances thereto, for gas, electricity, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, communications, heating, fuel, cable television and other similar consumable public commodities or services. 
    Vacant structure means a structure not currently occupied, or a structure to which water service has been disconnected for a period of time exceeding 60 days. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by the appropriate board of authority or city commission from the requirements of the Land Development Code which permits development in a manner otherwise prohibited, subject to the standards set forth in section 3.12. 
    Vehicle means a device or structure, self-propelled or towed, by which persons or property may be transported, propelled, moved or drawn, except by human power. 
    Vehicle, commercial means a vehicle of 24 feet or more in length, ten or more feet in height, or 10,000 pounds or more in weight, or a trailer of 16 feet or more in length, that is designed and licensed for use on the public roadways, and which is used for commercial or business purposes. 
    Vehicle, recreational means a vehicle with or without motor power, which is designed for sport or recreational use, or which is designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis. Recreational vehicles are divided into three categories: motor homes having a gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000 pounds, boats, and accessory recreational vehicles. 
    Vehicle, recreational accessory means non-motorized recreational vehicles designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis, such as vacation trailers and fifth-wheel trailers. A camper is considered an accessory recreational vehicle when it is standing alone. 
    Vehicle for hire means any vehicle engaged in the transport of persons or property, in return for payment, over public roadways which is offered as a public conveyance over regular or irregular routes and with or without specific schedules. 
    Vend means a motorized vehicle, including a trailer or other portable unit, which is attached to a motorized vehicle that is intended for use in vending. 
    Vessel for hire means any watercraft, which is not based in St. Pete Beach, Florida, engaged in the transport of persons or property over the intracoastal waterways and/or the Gulf of Mexico, and which is offered as a conveyance to the public at locations within the city. 
    Veterinarian means a facility for the medical care of dogs and/or cats, but which does not offer boarding for dogs or cats, except as necessary for the medical treatment of the animal. Such facility shall have no outside runs. 
    Waterfront property means a property abutting open water, bays, manmade canals and similar navigable waterways. 
    Yard means an open space that lies between the principal building or buildings and the nearest lot line. The minimum required yard as set forth in this chapter shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be otherwise specifically provided herein. 
Front yard means a space extending the full width of the lot between the principal structure and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. Note that this term defines a space and not a required setback. 
Rear yard means a space extending the full width of the lot between the principal structure and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the rear lot line. Note that this term defines a space and not a required setback. 
Required yard means the area of open space between a lot line and a building line within which no structure shall be located except as provided in this Code. 
Secondary front yard, applicable only to corner lots, means a yard abutting a street that intersects the street by which a front yard is determined. Note that this term defines a space and not a required setback. 
Side yard means a space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal structure and the side lot line and measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. Note that this term defines a space and not a required setback. 
Waterfront yard means a yard required on a waterfront property with a depth measured perpendicular to the centerline of the seawall or mean high-water line where no seawall exists. Where the property line falls landward of the seawall, the waterfront yard shall be measured perpendicular to the lot line. 
    Zoning lot means an area of land under one ownership, or contiguous areas of land under multiple ownership assembled or combined for any development project to calculate density or intensity, of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are required by this division. Such zoning lots shall have frontage on a public street or on an approved private street as set out in section 7.2(h) of this division, and may consist of: 
(1)  A single lot of record; 
(2)  A portion of a lot of record; 
(3)  A combination of complete lots of record or complete lots of record and portions of lots of record or of portions of lots of record; 
(4)  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds. 
    Provided that in no case of division, boundary adjustment, or consolidation shall any residual area of land be created which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance. The grant of an interest, for security or other purpose, in real property for less than an entire zoning lot, or the foreclosure or sale of such interest, shall not be deemed to create a legal zoning lot unless properly approved in accordance with division 25 of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 2004-34, § 1, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 2007-41, § 1, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 2010-31, § 1, 2-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 1(Exh. A), 9-12-12; Ord. No. 2013-25, § 1, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 2014-0010, § 1, 11-5-14; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 1, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, 10-11-16; Ord. No. 2016-24, § 1, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 2017-12, § 1, 11-28-17; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
DIVISION 3 - ADMINISTRATION OF THE LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-07, § 1, adopted Feb. 22, 2005, amended Div. 3, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2005, amended Div. 3, in its entirety. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 3.1. - Schedule of fees and charges. 
(a)  The city commission shall establish a schedule of fees and charges for matters pertaining to the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  The initial fee shall be payable at the time of filing of the application. No application shall be reviewed or processed by the city until such time as the initial fee has been paid in full. 
(c)  Regardless of the findings of the appropriate board of authority and/or city commission, the applicant shall not be eligible for a refund of the fee paid: 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 3.2. - City commission approval required. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided under this Code, the city commission shall make the final determination on all decisions required by this Code regarding amendments to the comprehensive plan, amendments to this Code or the official zoning map, and the issuance of conditional use permits. Applications for conditional uses, site plan review, zoning changes, variances and any other similar applications may be filed simultaneously by the applicant; however, all such applications must be finalized before any permits or licenses are granted. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 3.3. - Appointment of administrative officials; appropriate boards of authority; general duties. 
(a)  Administrative officials. The city manager may appoint and designate agents to administer and enforce this Code. The city manager shall administer and enforce this Code by encouraging compliance with its provisions by abating violations through the use of oral or written notices or by instituting proceedings for prosecution of violators. All other officers and employees of the city, particularly those officers and employees whose major duties involve the inspection of land, premises, structures, or things accessory thereto, shall assist the city manager in the enforcement of this Code. The term "city manager" as used in this Code shall include the agent or agents designated by the city manager. Nothing in this division or other divisions of this Code shall be deemed to prohibit the appointment, selection of designation of, or contracting with, private consultants to perform certain duties relative to this Code by the city commission. 
(b)  Appropriate boards of authority. The city commission, pursuant to Chapter 22 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of St. Pete Beach, shall appoint and designate various appropriate boards of authority with respect to this Code. The city commission shall, at the time of appointment, assign certain duties and responsibilities to the board of authority thereby created; however, the city commission may change the duties of any board of authority as it deems necessary. Such designated boards of authority may include, but are not limited to, the planning board, the board of adjustment and the aesthetic and historic review board. The city commission may from time to time appoint special hearing masters and additional boards or committees to perform specific tasks necessary to fairly administer this Code. 
(c)  General duties. Each appointed administrative official and appropriate board of authority shall be given specific duties and responsibilities when they are appointed. Such duties and responsibilities may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Interpretation and administration of this Code. 
(2)  Inspections of land, premises, structures, or things related thereto. 
(3)  Preparation and production of plans and studies. 
(4)  Providing recommendations on land use and zoning matters to the city commission. 
(5)  Site plan review, and final approval of development plans when such authority is granted by the terms of this Code or by specific direction of the city commission. 
(6)  The authority to permit variances to certain provisions and requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 3.4. - Public notice required. 
(a)  Notice of a public hearing to adopt ordinances or resolutions shall comply with all applicable provisions of the City Charter and the Florida State Statutes. In cases of conflict, the more restrictive provision shall control. Additionally, public hearings for the adoption of any ordinance to amend the Future Land Use or zoning designation of a property or properties, when such amendment is not initiated by the City, shall comply with all provisions established in paragraph (b) following. 
(b)  Prior to holding any other public hearing required under this Land Development Code, notice of the public hearing shall be as follows: 
(1)  All notice, at a minimum, shall contain the time, date, place and subject of the public hearing. 
(2)  A legal notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with the requirements set forth in this Code for each type of application. 
(3)  A notice shall be mailed at least fourteen days prior to the public hearing to owners of property located within 500 feet of any part of the property that is the subject of an application for a Future Land Use change, rezoning or Conditional Use. Notice for all other required public hearings shall be mailed at least fourteen days prior to the public hearing to owners of property located within 300 feet of any part of the property that is the subject of an application unless otherwise regulated herein. Property owners shall be determined from the latest Pinellas County real property tax records available to the city. 
(4)  The city shall post a sign providing notice of the public hearing on the subject property at least seven days prior to the public hearing. 
(5)  Notice of the public hearing shall also be posted at City Hall. 
(6)  In addition to any application fee established by Appendix A Fee Schedule of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances, prior to the mailing of any notice required by this Section, the applicant shall be responsible for payment in full to the city of all costs associated with such mailed notice. This shall include all postage costs as well as required materials. For the purposes of this provision, the City Manager shall establish and make publically available a standard material charge per item mailed. 
(7)  Failure to strictly comply with the foregoing public notice requirements shall not preclude the appropriate board of authority from considering the subject application, nor shall it affect the validity of any resulting decision. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, hearings conducted by the historic preservation board, only, shall not require notice as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, unless said board is conducting a public hearing on a variance from the city's flood regulations. Notice of meetings of the Historic Preservation Board shall be provided as set forth in Division 28 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2006-39, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 3.5. - Development order required. 
    No development shall take place unless the city has issued a development order authorizing such development, unless such development is specifically exempt under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 3.6. - Zoning compliance, concurrency and plans required; record of applications and plans; and subsequent applications. 
(a)  Zoning compliance required. Building permits, other development permits, and certificates of occupancy, as required by other chapters of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances, shall not be issued without determination that applicable requirements of this Code have been met. 
(b)  Concurrency required. Prior to the approval of any building permit, certificate of occupancy, site plan, or other applications related to land development, the availability of public infrastructure and services must be demonstrated, pursuant to the city's concurrency management regulations. These facilities include, but are not limited to, potable water, sanitary sewer, drainage, roads, solid waste, recreation and open space. 
(c)  Plans required. All applications for development permits shall be accompanied by plans prepared in accordance with the administrative guidelines established by the city manager relating to the specific application. 
(d)  Conditions met. All conditions set forth in all city approval processes shall be attached to the building permit. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the city manager inspects the site for compliance with an approved building permit and the requirements of this Code, as applicable. 
(e)  Record of applications and plans. A record of applications and plans shall be maintained by the city manager. If plans are approved as to compliance with the terms of this Code, the city manager shall indicate such approval on copies of the plan retained, on the copy to be returned to the applicant, and on the application for the building permit. 
(f)  Subsequent applications. If any application filed under the provisions of this Code is denied, no subsequent application seeking substantially the same or similar approval shall be filed within six months of the final decision on the original application, unless such application is denied without prejudice by the board hearing the request. Applications which are withdrawn in writing at least 48, hours prior to the public hearing at which they are to be heard shall be considered to have been withdrawn without prejudice and may be resubmitted immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 3.7. - Zoning verification; certificates of occupancy for new or altered uses; record of certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  Zoning verification. The city manager shall, upon request, furnish a letter setting forth the zoning and land use designations applicable to any specific property within the city. 
(b)  Certificate of occupancy required. It shall be unlawful to undertake or permit the use, or change of use, of any structure, premises or land, or part thereof until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued. 
(c)  Exception to certificate of occupancy requirement. No certificate of occupancy shall be required for uses of existing structures, premises or land conforming to the requirements of this Code unless such structure shall be altered in its use or construction, or relocated. 
(d)  Record of certificates of occupancy. The city manager shall maintain records of all certificates of occupancy issued, and may issue duplicate certification in case of loss or destruction of previously issued certificates. 
(e)  Violation of certificate of occupancy requirement. The failure by the owner or occupant of structures, premises or land to obtain a required certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of this Code, punishable by the same penalties as other violations. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 3.8. - Administration and enforcement of performance standards. 
(a)  Intent concerning determinations involved in administration of performance standards. Determinations necessary for administration and enforcement of performance standards range from those which can be made by a reasonable person using normal senses and no equipment to those which require high technical competence and complex equipment. 
(1)  Where determination can reasonably be expected to be made by the city manager, using equipment normally available to the city or obtainable without extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be so made before notice of violation is issued. 
(2)  Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it unreasonable for the city to maintain the personnel or equipment necessary for making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures shall be available for protecting individuals from arbitrary and capricious administration and enforcement of performance standard regulations, and for protecting the general public from unnecessary cost for administration and enforcement. 
(b)  Performance standards relating to emission of smoke, fire and explosive hazards, humidity, heat, glare, or electromagnetic interference. If the city manager finds, after making determinations in the manner set forth in the appropriate portions of section 6.17 of this Code, that there is violation of performance standards relating to emission of smoke, fire and explosive hazards, humidity, heat, glare or electromagnetic interference, the city manager shall take or cause to be taken lawful action as provided in the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances to eliminate such violation. 
(c)  Performance standards relating to measurement of weight of particulate matter, vibration, noise, hazardous or noxious matter, and radiation hazards. If, in the considered judgment of the city manager, there is violation of performance standards as set forth in section 6.17 of this Code, concerning emission of particulate matter, vibration, noise, toxic and noxious matter, odorous matter, or radiation hazards, the city manager shall take or cause to be taken lawful action as provided in the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances to eliminate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 3.9. - Amendments to the comprehensive plan, future land use map, zoning map or this Code. 
(a)  Comprehensive plan and future land use map. The city commission shall provide guidance on issues regarding implementation of the comprehensive plan and future land use map, or amendments thereto, in accordance with Pinellas County and Florida law. 
(1)  Duties and responsibilities. The city commission, with assistance from the designated advisory committee, shall prepare and maintain a comprehensive plan for the city, shall prepare physical, environmental, social and economic studies, shall advise other appointed boards and committees, shall make recommendations on amendments to the comprehensive plan or changes to the future land use map, and may prepare ordinances regarding implementation of the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Expenses. All expenses of the city commission shall be borne by the city. 
(3)  Meetings and records. The meetings of the city commission shall be public meetings and the records of the board shall be public records. 
(4)  City manager to cooperate with city commission. The city manager shall be responsible for the processing of the comprehensive plan amendments in cooperation with the city commission and shall provide staff assistance for the city commission. 
(b)  Amendments to the zoning map. The city commission is hereby authorized to amend the zoning map in response to changing conditions or to changes to the St. Pete Beach Comprehensive Plan. 
(1)  Application requirements. 
a.  Map amendments rezoning individual properties may be initiated by the owner of property involved, a non-owner with the written permission of such property owner, the city commission, the appropriate board of authority, or the city manager. Any such application for a zoning map change shall be accompanied by the information necessary to demonstrate that the proposed rezoning is consistent with the criteria set forth in paragraph (5) below. 
b.  An application may be accompanied by an offer to the city to impose special conditions (proffers) upon the development of the property that is the subject matter of the application. 
c.  At the request of an applicant for a rezoning, a site plan may be processed concurrently with the rezoning application, pursuant to Division 5 of this Code. 
(2)  Staff review and recommendations. The city manager shall review the application for the rezoning, and the comments of all appropriate departments of the city, and shall prepare a written staff analysis of the issues raised by the application. Such analysis shall set forth a recommended zoning district classification, if any, and evaluate the goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan affected by the proposed rezoning. 
(3)  Planning board review. The planning board shall conduct a public hearing to review the proposed rezoning, and shall consider the written staff analysis and the testimony at the public hearing, and make a recommendation upon the proposed rezoning, setting forth its findings in regard to whether the proposed rezoning will satisfy the standards set forth in paragraph (5) below, and its findings in regard to whether the rezoning is consistent with comprehensive plan. The planning board may include in its recommendation any modifications or conditions to the rezoning, and the reasons therefor. 
(4)  City commission review. The city commission shall review the proposed rezoning, the written staff analysis and the recommendation of the appropriate board of authority, and shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the rezoning and site plan, if any, after a public hearing. Action taken by the city commission to approve a rezoning with conditions shall be documented in the form of an ordinance which rezones the subject property and shall state with specificity any conditions imposed by the city commission. 
(5)  Standards for review. In reviewing the application for a rezoning, the staff, the planning board and the city commission shall consider whether the proposed rezoning is consistent with and furthers the goals, policies and action strategies of the comprehensive plan. 
In addition, the planning board and city commission shall consider the following: 
a.  Whether the proposed change would be contrary to the land use plan and would have an adverse effect on the plan. The planning board and city commission shall review the request considering the most intense use permitted in the requested zone district; 
b.  Compatibility with adjacent properties and the existing land use pattern; 
c.  Possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
d.  The population density pattern and increase in demand for public utilities or services, including potable water supply, sanitary sewer capacity, law enforcement or fire suppression; 
e.  Any increase in use of city infrastructure, including stormwater management facilities, streets and roads, water lines, sewer lines or lift stations; 
f.  Whether existing district boundaries are logically drawn in relation to existing conditions on the property proposed for change; 
g.  Whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed amendment necessary; 
h.  Whether the proposed change will adversely affect drainage. 
i.  Whether the proposed change will be a deterrent to the improvement or development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations; 
j.  Whether the proposed change will constitute a grant of special privileges to an individual owner as contrasted with the public welfare; and 
k.  Whether the change suggested is out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or the city. 
(6)  Effect of decision. 
a.  The ordinance which rezones the subject property shall state with specificity any conditions imposed by the city commission, and no building permit pertaining to the rezoned property shall be issued for construction which does not conform to any site plan finally approved by the city commission as part of the rezoning. 
b.  In the event that any conditions require the execution of an appropriate legal document by the applicant, the applicant shall be required to execute same prior to issuance of a building permit. When appropriate, fully executed documents may be attached to the ordinance as exhibits. 
(7)  Changes to rezonings. 
a.  A modification to any previously approved rezoning shall be processed in the same manner as the original application. Revisions to site plans proffered as part of a rezoning application, other than revisions determined to be minor pursuant to this Code, shall require the submission of an amended site plan and city commission adoption of an ordinance amending the initial rezoning ordinance to reflect approval of the amended site plan. 
b.  In the event a site plan approved as a condition of a rezoning application expires, any new site plan shall be submitted to the city and adoption of a new ordinance amending the initial rezoning ordinance to reflect approval of a new site plan shall be required. 
(8)  Expiration of approval. An ordinance rezoning property shall have no expiration date, unless otherwise specified in the approval. 
(c)  Amendments to this Code. Amendments to this Code may be initiated by the city commission, any board appointed by the city commission, or the city manager. An application for a text amendment shall be accompanied by justification necessary to support the amendment. 
    In reviewing the application for a text amendment, the appropriate board of authority and the city commission shall consider whether the proposed amendment is consistent with and furthers the goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan and whether the proposed change will further the purposes of this Code and other city ordinances, regulations and actions designed to implement the comprehensive plan. The appropriate board of authority shall act upon all text amendments as properly presented. Failure to act upon the proposed amendment shall not preclude the city commission from adjudicating the proposal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 3.10. - Vested rights and nonconformities. 
    The purpose of this section is to regulate the continued existence of certain uses and structures established prior to the effective date of this Code that do not conform to these regulations. It is the intent of this Code to permit legally nonconforming uses and structures to continue in existence until they are removed or abandoned. 
    To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Code shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any structure on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of this Code, or amendment thereto, and upon which actual building construction has continued unabated since inception of such construction, pursuant to valid building permits issued therefor. 
(a)  Nonconforming lots. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Code, except as provided below, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any lot of record as of the adoption date of this Code. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for lot width or area, or both, that are generally applicable to the district, provided that the building setbacks and other requirements shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. 
(b)  Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the time of adoption or amendment of this Code which could no longer be built under the terms of this Code by reason of restrictions on lot area, impervious surface, height, or other such characteristics, such structure may continue to be used so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such structure may be enlarged, altered or improved in a manner which increases its non-conformity, except for the conditions set forth for elevating an existing structure in Section (3)A. below. 
(2)  Any nonconforming structure which suffers substantial damage, as defined in this Code, shall only be repaired, restored or reconstructed in a manner which brings the entire structure into compliance with all requirements of this Code and other applicable codes of the city. 
(3)  Should such nonconforming structure be moved, either vertically or horizontally, it shall comply with the following: 
A.  The structure shall be moved, vertically only, such that the lowest floor is elevated no higher than six inches above the base flood elevation, as defined and established in the city's flood damage prevention regulations set forth in Chapter 98 of the Code of Ordinances, except that minimum necessary additional height shall be allowed to provide for the construction of a garage underneath any structure which is so moved. The maximum height of the new construction for the garage shall not exceed nine feet from the existing grade of the lot to the bottom of the existing horizontal structural member of the lowest floor. Under no circumstances shall the resulting structure exceed the maximum height allowed by the zoning district. 
B.  The structure shall be moved, horizontally only, such that no additional non-conformities are created, and no existing non-conformities are increased, by such relocation; and 
C.  The structure shall be located on the property so that there is a setback of at least three feet from the nearest property line on all sides of the structure. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises which were lawfully established prior to the adoption of this Code, but which are not permitted or are otherwise currently prohibited by this Code, may continue to operate at their present location until such time as such use has been discontinued. If the use is discontinued for more than 90 consecutive days or a total of 180 calendar days within a one-year period, subsequent use of the premises shall conform to the district regulations. Continuance of nonconforming uses are subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Uses nonconforming by the type of use are regulated as follows: 
a.  There shall be no increase of a nonconforming use by expansion of the use to adjacent properties, to other structures on the property, or to other portions of a multi-tenant structure within which the nonconforming use is located. No multi-tenant structure may be converted into a single-tenant structure for the purpose of expanding a nonconforming use. 
b.  No structure in which a nonconforming use is located shall be enlarged, altered, improved or relocated to occupy other portions of the lot upon which it is located or to increase the size of the structure. 
c.  When a structure which is occupied by a nonconforming use suffers substantial damage, said structure, if repaired, restored or reconstructed, shall only be occupied, upon completion, by uses which are allowed in the zoning district in which the structure is located. 
(2)  Uses that are nonconforming by reason of development density are regulated as follows: 
a.  The recognized number of units on such property shall be determined by the number shown in the property records on file with the city as of the date of adoption of this section. 
b.  There shall be no increase in the number of units by expansion or alteration of the use. 
c.  Except as provided for elsewhere in this Code, any property, upon which there are one or more buildings having such pre-existing nonconforming number of units shall be brought into conformity with the density requirements of this ordinance when any building is proposed to be substantially improved. 
(d)  Grandfathered nonconforming residential uses. Not withstanding the provisions of paragraph (c)(2) above and paragraph (e) following, nonconforming residential properties having a greater number of units than currently allowed under the provisions of the comprehensive plan and this Code that are lost through a catastrophic event may be reconstructed with the same number of units as they had prior to the loss under the following conditions: 
(1)  For the purposes of this subsection only, transient accommodations shall be considered to be residential properties. 
(2)  The applicant can verify to the satisfaction of the city that the property contained the number of units, square footage and height that are proposed for replacement; 
(3)  The replacement structure(s) shall be no larger in square footage, nor taller than the original structure, except that structure height may be increased by the height of the base flood elevation where necessary to comply with flood hazard mitigation requirements; 
(4)  Provided there are no conflicts with other codes and that no adverse impacts on adjacent properties will be created, the replacement structure(s) may be permitted to be constructed with the same footprint as the original structure(s); 
(5)  The replacement structure(s) shall meet all other local, state and federal requirements in place at the time of replacement; and 
(6)  Permits to rebuild under these provisions shall be obtained within one year of the catastrophic loss unless a general extension of time has been granted by the city commission. 
(e)  Nonconforming accessory structures. No nonconforming accessory structure shall continue after the principal use or structure is terminated by abandonment, damage, or destruction. In addition to the other provisions of this section applicable to nonconforming structures, the following additional conditions shall apply to nonconforming accessory structures: 
(1)  Any nonconforming accessory structure shall be brought into conformity with these regulations whenever a substantial improvement to the structure or the principal structure on the property is proposed and approved. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any accessory structure which is designated and constructed as a garage, the principle purpose of which is the storage of motor vehicles for single-family residential purposes, which is substantially damaged as the result of a catastrophic event as defined in the Code of Ordinances, may be reconstructed in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection (d) hereof. 
(2)  Any nonconforming accessory structure which is destroyed or substantially damaged, shall, upon replacement, conform to all requirements of this Code and other applicable codes of the city. Any part of a nonconforming accessory structure which is destroyed or damaged to less than 50 percent of the value of such accessory structure may be repaired or restored if a permit for the repair or restoration is issued within 12 months of the date of the damage. 
(f)  Repairs and maintenance; maintaining safe condition. Repairs and maintenance of nonconforming structures are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2007-08, § 1, 10-9-07; Ord. No. 2010-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-25-10) 
Sec. 3.11. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3.12. - Variances. 
(a)  Authority and approval criteria. 
(1)  The appropriate board of authority may authorize variances to the land development regulations if the applicant is able to demonstrate the following conditions: 
(a)  The existence of conditions and circumstances that are peculiar to the subject land, structure or building and do not apply generally to neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district which have complied with these regulations without hardship; that the strict application of the provisions of the land development regulations would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of such land, structure or building; and the peculiar conditions and circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; and 
(b)  Neither a nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings, legal or illegal, in the same district, nor a permitted use in adjacent districts shall be considered as grounds for issuance of a variance; and 
(c)  The proposed variance will not have the effect of changing any district boundary on the zoning map, nor constitute the granting of a nonconforming use. Under no circumstances shall a variance permit an increase in development density or permit a use not specifically permitted in the district; and 
(d)  The granting of a variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the land development regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. In granting the variance, the appropriate board of authority may prescribe any conditions and safeguards it deems necessary or desirable as a condition of approval of the variance application; and 
[e]  The appropriate board of authority finds as a reasonable conclusion that hardship would unnecessarily result from a literal enforcement of the provisions of the land development regulations as set forth in the application, and the variance proposed is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, structure and building. 
(2)  When application is made to the city commission for approval of a conditional use permit, any necessary variances shall be considered by the commission at the same time as the conditional use permit request. Such variances may be approved or denied by the city commission without regard to the disposition of the conditional use permit request. 
(3)  Any variance granted hereunder shall expire one (1) year from the date of the development order providing for such variance, unless a building permit for the construction authorized by such variance is obtained within such time and said building permit has not expired prior to the completion of construction in accordance therewith. 
(b)  Limitations on variance authority of appointed boards. Any request for variance to the city's coastal control line shall be made directly to the city commission. No board of authority shall grant a variance from any requirement imposed by the city commission as a condition of rezoning, conditional use approval or any other action of the commission resulting in the granting of specific development rights. 
(c)  Application submission requirements. Each application is due no later than 30 days prior to the public hearing and shall contain the following information, accompanied by the payment of the applicable fee set forth in Appendix A, St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances: 
(1)  A completed application, signed by the property owner. The format of the application shall be determined by the City Manager. 
(2)  Proof of ownership. 
(3)  When the applicant is a representative of the property owner or purchaser under contract, a notarized statement authorizing the representative to act as an agent of the property owner with regard to the application and associated procedures. 
(4)  A property survey containing the legal description, land area, and existing improvements on the site. The survey shall be signed and sealed by a surveyor licensed in the State, and shall have been performed not more than ten (10) years prior to the date of application. The survey shall accurately depict all improvements on the site. If all improvements are not depicted on the survey, the applicant shall conduct a new survey of the property and submit it with the application materials. 
(5)  A site plan illustrating the request, drawn to scale. The sheet size shall not be less than eleven inches by seventeen inches (11 × 17) and shall not be more than thirty-six inches by forty-eight inches (36 × 48). An electronic version may be required. 
(6)  Any stipulation, condition, or proffer the applicant wishes to offer along with the application. 
(7)  Applicants are encouraged and may be required to submit additional information, such as elevations, photos, and/or product information, when appropriate. 
(d)  Determination of completeness of application. The city shall determine whether the application is complete. If the application is complete, the application shall be forwarded for review. If the application is not complete the city shall take no further action on the application until the required information is submitted by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2006-39, § 2, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 2011-21, §1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 3.13. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3.14. - Appeals. 
(a)  An appeal to a hearing officer designated by the city commission may be taken by any person aggrieved by any final decision of an administrative official of the city where it is alleged there is an error in an order, permit, condition, requirement, decision or determination by the administrator in enforcing the Land Development Code. An appeal shall be filed in writing on or before 30 days from the day of the administrative decision. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a final order of the city commission or any appointed board may appeal the order to the circuit court. The appeal shall be filed with the circuit court on or before 30 days following the issuance of the final development order. 
(c)  When an appeal is filed, all proceedings in furtherance of the action affected by the decision being appealed from shall be stayed, unless city manager certifies, after the notice of appeal has been filed with the city, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. 
(d)  If the hearing officer finds that said conditions exists, the hearing officer may deny the stay and allow the administrative order to be executed. 
(e)  The city commission may appoint one or more hearing officers to hear appeals as provided in this section. Such hearing officers shall be attorneys licensed to practice law in all state courts of the State of Florida, and shall have been so licensed for a continuous period of at least five years up to the date of such appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 3.15. - Enforcement. 
    The city manager shall enforce all of the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 3.16. - Violations, penalties and remedies generally. 
(a)  Whenever a violation of this Code occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed in writing with the city manager. 
(b)  Violation of the provisions of this Code, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in a development order, approval of a site plan or the approval of a conditional use, shall be punishable in accordance with Section 1.14 (General penalties) of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances, or in accordance with Article IX of Chapter 22 (Special Master supplemental code enforcement) therein. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action, including, but not limited to, resort to equitable action as is necessary to enforce any such provision, condition or safeguard. 
(c)  In addition to other remedies provided by these regulations and other applicable laws, the city manager shall, when a violation has been determined to exist: 
(1)  Refrain from issuing any subsequent development approvals for the developer until the violation has been corrected; and 
(2)  Inform the violator that no further work under an existing approval may proceed until the violation has been corrected. 
(d)  In the event that any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained in violation of these regulations, or that any building, structure, or land is used in violation of these regulations, the city manager may, in addition to other remedies, institute any appropriate action or proceeding in the circuit court: 
(1)  To prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use of the building, structure, or land; 
(2)  To prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land; 
(3)  To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the premises; or 
(4)  To restrain, correct, or abate the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, § 1, 12-13-05) 
DIVISION 4 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-07, § 2, adopted Feb. 22, 2005, amended Div. 4, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 4 pertained to similar subject matter. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2005, amended Div. 4, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 4.1. - Review of conditional use permit applications. 
(a)  Purpose. Certain uses are conditional rather than uses by right. They are subject to the conditional use regulations because they may, but do not necessarily, have significant adverse effects on the environment, public services, the desired character of an area, or they may create nuisances. A review of these uses is necessary due to the impacts they may have on the surrounding area or neighborhood. The conditional use review provides an opportunity to allow the use when there are minimal impacts, to allow the use but impose mitigation measures to address identified concerns, or to deny the use if the concerns cannot be resolved. 
(b)  Authority. The city commission may approve applications for conditional uses in accordance with the procedures, standards and limitations of this division. 
(c)  Authorized conditional uses. Only those uses which are authorized in each zoning district or those nonconforming uses which are substantially damaged or destroyed, and are permitted to be re-established in accordance with this ordinance may be approved as conditional uses. The designation of a use in a zoning district as a conditional use does not constitute an authorization of such use or an assurance that such use will be approved; rather, each proposed conditional use shall be evaluated by the city commission for compliance with the standards and conditions set forth in this section and for each district. Wherever a conditional use existing on the effective date of these regulations is terminated or destroyed, subsequent conditional use of the property shall be permitted only in conjunction with the approval process specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 4.2. - Applications and administrative review procedures. 
(a)  Simultaneous applications. Applications for conditional uses, site plan review, zoning changes, variances and any other similar applications may be filed simultaneously by the applicant; however, all such applications shall be finalized before any permits or licenses are granted. 
(b)  Application submission requirements. Each application is due no later than 30 days prior to the public hearing accompanied by the payment of the applicable fee set forth in Appendix A, St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A completed application, signed by the property owner. The format of the application shall be determined by the City Manager. 
(2)  Proof of ownership. 
(3)  When the applicant is a representative of the property owner or purchaser under contract, a notarized statement authorizing the representative to act as an agent of the property owner with regard to the application and associated procedures. 
(4)  A property survey containing the legal description, land area, and existing improvements on the site. The survey shall be signed and sealed by a surveyor licensed in the State, and shall have been performed not more than ten (10) years prior to the date of application. The survey shall accurately depict all improvements on the site. If all improvements are not depicted on the survey, the applicant shall conduct a new survey of the property and submit it with the application materials. 
(5)  A site plan illustrating the request, drawn to scale. The sheet size shall not be less than eleven inches by seventeen inches (11 × 17) and shall not be more than thirty-six inches by forty-eight inches (36 × 48). An electronic version may be required. 
(6)  Applicants are encouraged and may be required to submit additional information, such as elevations, photos, and/or product information, when appropriate. 
(c)  Determination of completeness of application. The city shall determine whether the application is complete. If the application is complete, the application shall be forwarded for review. If the application is not complete the city shall take no further action on the application until the required information is submitted by the applicant. 
(d)  Determination of sufficient application. After an application is determined complete, each department involved in the review process shall review the application for sufficiency and shall notify the applicant of any additional information that may be required. 
(1)  Remedy of insufficiencies. If the applicant fails to respond to the specified request for information within the time period established by the notification of deficiency, the application for development or conditional use approval shall be voided. 
(e)  Changes of information. If an applicant submits new data or information at any time after a determination of completeness has been made, the revised application will be subject to the same stages of review as the initial application. Any additional costs associated with the required advertisement of modified applications shall be borne by the applicant and must be paid prior to the hearing at which the application is considered. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2011-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 4.3. - Compliance requirements. 
(a)  The city, as a further condition to approval of an application for a conditional use permit, may require financial guarantees or other such guarantees as may be reasonably necessary to insure compliance with the terms and conditions of its approval. 
(b)  In instances where no additional construction is necessary to implement the conditional use failure to obtain an occupational license for the approved conditional use within six months from the date of approval of the conditional use permit shall invalidate the approval, unless a shorter compliance period is required by the city. 
(c)  Where construction is necessary prior to the operation of the conditional use, failure to obtain a building permit within 12 months of the date of approval of an application for a conditional use permit, shall invalidate the approval. A shorter compliance period may be required by the city commission. 
(1)  An occupational license shall be obtained within 30 days of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the necessary construction. 
(2)  Failure to maintain continual construction, as defined in Division 2 of this ordinance, shall void any building or other development approval granted in connection with the project. If construction activity ceases at any time after the zoning lot has been cleared of vegetation, the owner shall be required to reclaim the site in accordance with section 22.3(g) of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 4.4. - Standards for review. 
(a)  Standards applicable to all conditional uses. When considering an application for approval of a conditional use, the city commission review shall consider the following standards: 
(1)  Whether the conditional use is consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, any adopted special area plan and these regulations; 
(2)  Whether the proposed use will be compatible with the character of the existing area, including existing structures and structures under construction, existing public facilities and public facilities under construction, and residential, commercial and/or service facilities available within the existing area. More specifically: 
a.  Whether the overall appearance and function of the area will be significantly affected consideration shall be given to the existence of other uses in the area, based on the number, size, and location of the uses and the intensity and scale of the proposed and existing uses in the area; 
b.  Whether the application will preserve any city, state or federally designated historic, scenic, archaeological, or cultural resources; 
c.  Whether the application will be compatible with adjacent development, if any, based on characteristics such as size, building style and scale; or whether such incompatibilities are mitigated through such means as screening, landscaping, setbacks, and other design features; and 
d.  Whether the application will have significant adverse impacts on the livability and usability of nearby land due to noise, dust, fumes, smoke, glare from lights, late-night operations, odors, vehicular traffic, truck and other delivery trips, the amount, location, and nature of any outside activities, potential for increased litter, or privacy and safety issues. 
(3)  Whether the transportation system is capable of adequately supporting the proposed use in addition to the existing uses in the area. Evaluation factors include street capacity and level of service, access to arterials, transit availability, on-street parking impacts, if any, site access requirements, neighborhood impacts, and pedestrian safety; 
(4)  Whether the minimum off-street parking area required and the amount of space needed for the loading and unloading of trucks, if applicable, will be provided and will function properly and safely; 
(5)  Whether generally, the public health, safety and welfare will be preserved, and any reasonable conditions necessary for such preservation have been made; 
(6)  Whether the applicant has demonstrated the financial and technical capacity to complete any improvements and mitigation necessitated by the development as proposed and has made adequate legal provision to guarantee the provision such improvements and mitigation; and 
(7)  Whether the proposed use complies with all additional standards imposed on it by the particular provision of these regulations authorizing such use and by all other applicable requirements of the regulations of the City of St. Pete Beach. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 4.5. - Staff review and report. 
    The staff shall review all applications for conditional use approval and provide a written analysis of the issues raised by the application which shall be forwarded to city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 4.6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4.7. - City commission review. 
    Upon receipt of the written staff analysis, the city commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the application for conditional use and may grant, grant with conditions or deny the application. Final action of the city commission shall be by resolution and documented in the form of a development order containing a legal description of the real property to which the conditional use applies, together with the terms of the conditional use and any additional conditions imposed. For conditional use permits required by section 39.6(p) of this Code, the planning board shall hold a public hearing to consider the application and make a recommendation to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 2, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 4.8. - Effect of decision. 
(a)  Approval of a conditional use shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use for which it is issued. 
(b)  Development of the conditional use shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other permits and approvals required by these regulations, the city, county, state and federal agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 4.9. - Attachment of conditions with approval. 
    The city commission may attach such conditions to a conditional use approval as are necessary to carry out the purposes of the comprehensive plan, any adopted special area plan and these regulations, and to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property in the neighborhood, including, but not limited to, specifying the duration of the permit, hours of operation, or requirements for mitigation of environmental impacts. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 4.10. - Changes to previously approved conditional uses. 
(a)  Approval of minor revisions. The city manager is authorized to allow minor revisions to an approved conditional use after staff review and to authorize the issuance of a development order for construction in accordance with the revised conditional use. A minor revision is one which: 
(1)  Does not alter the location of any points of access to the site; 
(2)  Does not change the conditional use; 
(3)  Does not increase the density or intensity of the development to occur on the property; 
(4)  Does not result in a reduction of open space, setback or previously required landscaping; 
(5)  Is consistent with the general intent and purpose of these regulations and the initial determination of consistency of the conditional use with the St. Pete Beach Comprehensive Plan; 
(6)  Does not result in a substantial change to the location of a structure previously approved; 
(7)  Does not result in a material modification or the cancellation of any condition placed upon the conditional use as originally approved; 
(8)  Does not change the internal or external traffic pattern; 
(9)  Does not add additional property to the site; 
(10)  Does not increase the impervious area of the site; and 
(11)  Does not increase the height of the building(s). 
(b)  Other revisions. Any other adjustments or changes not specified in section 4.10(a) above shall be granted only in accordance with procedures for original approval of a conditional use, as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 4.11. - Conditional uses in designated community redevelopment districts. 
    It is the intent of the city that the aesthetic and functional characteristics of new development shall be regulated to insure consistency with the stated objectives of city redevelopment policy and that all new development is undertaken in a manner consistent with the best interests of the community. In instances of development projects which are of significant density or intensity, the complexity of the construction and operation of such projects require a higher than usual level of public security and technical review prior to permitting, and necessitate the articulation of specific requirements on the part of both the developer and the city to ensure that such developments are in harmony with community character and consistent with the policies of the community redevelopment plan. The provisions of this section are intended to supplement the stated requirements of this division and other divisions of the Land Development Code and provide for the incorporation of provisions into conditional use approvals which address issues of public concern. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 4.12. - Criteria for review of conditional use applications. 
(a)  Conditional use applications within the community redevelopment district shall be evaluated upon the extent to which the applicant can demonstrate that the following issues are addressed in a manner consistent with the policies established in the community redevelopment plan for the district and that no unreasonable or disproportionately negative impacts are imposed upon adjacent or nearby properties: 
(1)  Utility infrastructure, including sanitary sewer, reclaimed water, potable water, electric and natural gas services, and data transmission and telecommunications services; 
(2)  Transportation infrastructure, including ingress and egress from public rights-of-way, traffic control devices and signalization, internal vehicle circulation of the site, design and function of parking areas, loading and unloading areas, pedestrian transit infrastructure and amenities, and public sidewalks and roadways; 
(3)  Hydrological features and storm water management infrastructure; 
(4)  Aesthetic and architectural features of the development, including site layout, physical dimensions of structures such as height and massing, design and appearance of building facades, exterior building materials, advertising and directional signage and the provision and maintenance of Gulf and Bay views and vistas; 
(5)  Site landscaping, open space provision and impervious surface limitations; 
(6)  Operational and functional requirements of facilities, including hours of operation, provision of required services or amenities, lighting requirements, noise abatement requirements, residency limitations and facilities maintenance; 
(7)  Fire suppression and facility security; 
(8)  Emergency management and hurricane evacuation provisions; and 
(9)  For temporary lodging uses taller than 50 feet in height or a density greater than 30 units per acre, the following additional issues shall be considered: 
a.  The amount of separation provided between the proposed temporary lodging use and any existing buildings on adjoining properties and resulting impact on sunlight and views; and 
b.  The proximity of any adjacent residential building to the Florida Coastal Construction Control Line and the degree to which the proposed temporary lodging use and/or any accessory use or structure maintains an open view of the waterfront from neighboring properties. 
(b)  Any of the foregoing elements may be omitted from the conditional use application upon agreement of the city commission. 
(c)  Content additional to the foregoing may be included in the application, so long as such content is consistent with the applicable requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 3, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 4.13. - Development agreement requirements. 
(a)  Development agreements may be a required condition of conditional use approval. 
(b)  All development agreements shall comply with the standards and procedures set forth in F.S. §§ 163.3220 through 163.3243. 
(c)  The development agreement shall be in a format prescribed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 4.14. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from decisions made under this section may be taken in accordance with the provisions of section 3.14 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 12-13-05) 
DIVISION 5 - SITE PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-07, § 3, adopted Feb. 22, 2005, amended Div. 5, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 5 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 5.1. - Site plan review. 
    An application for a development permit requesting approval of a site development plan shall be reviewed and approved, approved with conditions, or denied by the city manager. The purpose of a site plan review is to ensure that development will be carried out in compliance with the City Code of Ordinances and any other federal, state and county regulations. In addition, a site plan describing and portraying both existing and proposed conditions of the development is required in order that the approving authority can make an informed decision. 
(1)  Exemption . No site plan shall be required for work for the maintenance or alteration that does not alter the location or gross square footage of any structure, or alter any required parking area of the site, or if the work affects only the interior of the structure or the exterior color or decoration of the structure. 
(a)  Initiation . An application for site plan review shall only be submitted by the owner, or by other persons having a contractual interest in the land, or their authorized agents. 
(b)  Contents of application . The application shall be in a form established by the city manager and provided for public review. The materials required as part of the application are necessary to provide the city with sufficient information to ensure compliance with this section and the requirements of the land development code. Such materials may include, but are not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of record of the land proposed for development. 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the developer, if different from the owner. 
(3)  The name, address, and telephone number of the agent for the application, if applicable. 
(4)  The name, address, and telephone number of all land use, environmental and engineering professionals that assisted in the preparation of the application. 
(5)  The street address and legal description of the land on which the development is proposed to occur, with attached copies of any legal instruments referenced, such as, but not limited to, deeds, plats, easements, covenants, and restrictions. 
(6)  A reference to the zoning district designation and the future land use map designation in the comprehensive plan for the land proposed for development. 
(7)  Identification of all existing rights-of-way, water courses, floodplains, wetlands, and other environmentally sensitive areas on or within 200 feet of the land subject to the development plan. 
(8)  Topography of the site in specified contour intervals. 
(9)  A title block denoting the type of application, tax map sheet, lot, block and subdivision name (if applicable). 
(10)  A location map of the land with reference to surrounding lands, subdivisions, streets, and municipal boundaries. 
(11)  A boundary survey of the land subject to the development plan prepared by a registered land surveyor, showing the location and material of all permanent reference monuments and benchmarks, a metes and bounds description listing dimensions, bearings, curve data, length of tangents, radii, and central angles of all centerline curves of streets, and the size of the land in acres to the nearest tenth of an acre, or in square feet and an ALTA/ACSM land title survey of the property subject to the development plan completed within the last twelve (12) months. 
(12)  A site plan, with north arrow and scale, identifying: 
a.  The proposed land uses, densities, and intensities of use; 
b.  The location of proposed structures, and any existing structures proposed to be retained, showing size, and setbacks; 
c.  Common areas; 
d.  Recreational facilities; 
e.  Ingress and egress to the development, and the internal traffic circulation system and identification of street names; 
f.  Utility location; 
g.  Easements; 
h.  Off-street parking and loading facilities; 
i.  Landscaping and buffering; and 
j.  Signage. 
(13)  If applicable, the preliminary subdivision plat, which includes the subdivision name in bold legible letters under which the location of the plat by government survey lot, section, township, and range shall appear. 
(14)  Location and area of all property to be dedicated for public use or reserved by deed or covenant for use by all land owners in the development of a statement of the conditions of such dedication or reservation. 
(15)  A schedule showing the lot area, width, depth, dimensional standards, building coverage, landscaping and parking of the development plan, and how they comply with the requirements of the Land Development Code. 
(16)  A traffic study prepared by a professional transportation planner or engineer, if required. The necessity for a traffic study shall be determined by an adopted administrative policy assessing the significance of the anticipated impact of the project upon traffic volume, intersection signalization, turning movements, internal vehicle circulation, pedestrian movement, or other significant traffic concerns. 
(17)  Proposed utility infrastructure plans, including sanitary sewer, potable water, a stormwater management plan with supporting data and an electric plan with accurate indication of locations of points of connection to public systems. 
(18)  Spot and finished elevations at all property corners, corners of all structures or dwellings, existing and proposed first floor elevations, and appropriate locations in and around vehicle use areas. 
(19)  Site utility and construction details, including a cross-connection control plan. 
(20)  Roadway and paving cross-sections and profiles. 
(21)  Lighting plan and details. 
(22)  Landscape plan and details. 
(23)  Provisions for solid waste management. 
(24)  Plans for signs, if any. 
(25)  Sight triangles at the intersections of roadways and curb cuts with roadways. 
(26)  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns. 
(27)  Off-street parking and loading plans showing spaces, size and type, aisle widths, curb cuts, drives, driveways, and all ingress and egress areas and dimensions. 
(28)  Preliminary architectural plans and elevations. 
(29)  Demonstration of compliance with concurrency requirements. 
(c)  Determination of sufficiency . The city manager shall determine if the application is sufficient within ten days of its receipt. 
(1)  If the city manager determines the application is not sufficient, a written notice shall be provided to the applicant specifying the application's deficiencies. No further action shall be taken on the application until the deficiencies are remedied. 
(2)  When the application is determined sufficient, the city manager shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the application's sufficiency and that the application is ready for review pursuant to the procedures and standards of this section. 
(d)  Review and decision . Within 30 days of the application being determined sufficient, the city manager shall review the application, and prepare a staff report on whether the application complies with administrative standards, the requirements of this section and other applicable requirements of the City Code of Ordinances. The city manager shall inform the applicant of the application's approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. Upon approval of the site plan, the city manager shall issue a development order for the project. 
(e)  Appeal . An applicant may appeal a decision of the city manager on a site development plan review by filing an appeal with the city manager within ten days of the decision. A hearing officer designated by the city commission shall hear the appeal within 30 days of its filing, and consider only the record before the city manager at the time of the decision. The hearing officer shall reverse the decision of the city manager only if there is substantial and compelling evidence in the record that the application complies with the standards of this section. 
(f)  Minor revisions to site plan . Any request for modification to an approved site plan shall be subject to review and approval in the same manner as a new application, except that the city manager may approve minor modifications, provided that the basic purpose and intent of the ordinances of the city are met. A minor revision is one which: 
(1)  Does not alter the location of any points of access to the site; 
(2)  Does not change the use of the property; 
(3)  Does not increase the density or intensity of the development to occur on the property; 
(4)  Does not result in a reduction or change of open space, setback or previously required landscaping; 
(5)  Is consistent with the general intent and purpose of these regulations and does not have any effect whatsoever on the initial determination of consistency of the site plan with the comprehensive plan; 
(6)  Does not result in a substantial change to the location of a structure previously approved or add structures to the site; 
(7)  Does not result in a material modification or the cancellation of any condition placed upon the site plan as originally approved; 
(8)  Does not change the internal or external traffic pattern; 
(9)  Does not alter the land area of the site; 
(10)  Does not increase the impervious area of the site; and 
(11)  Does not increase the height of the building(s). 
(g)  Amendments to the site development plan . A development plan may be amended only pursuant to the procedures established for its original approval, or as are otherwise set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 3, 2-22-05; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 4, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5.2. - Standards for review. 
    In reaching a decision as to whether or not the site plan, as submitted, should be approved, approved with changes, approved with conditions, or disapproved, the city manager shall consider the extent to which the application is consistent with these regulations conditions imposed by zoning or conditional use approval, generally accepted site design principles, and the extent to which the development furthers the goals and purposes of these regulations. Further, the city manager shall use and be guided by, but not be limited to, the following criteria in evaluating a site plan submission: 
(a)  Whether the proposed development, design and layout are in keeping with the intent and specific standards and criteria prescribed in pertinent sections of this Code, as amended; 
(b)  Whether the proposed development, design and layout are compatible with the Comprehensive plan, as amended; 
(c)  Whether the required information has been furnished in a sufficiently complete and understandable form to allow an accurate description of the proposed use(s) and structure(s) in terms of density, location, area, height, bulk, placement, setbacks, performance characteristics, parking, and traffic circulation; 
(d)  Whether there are ways in which the design and layout of the development, uses and structures can be changed which would enhance the city or lessen the impact of the development on adjoining and nearby properties and on the community; 
(e)  Whether the proposed development, design and layout has made adequate provisions for vehicular access and traffic circulation, both internal and external to the project; 
(f)  Whether the proposed development, design and layout provides for safe and efficient pedestrian circulation; 
(g)  Whether the proposed development, design and layout has made adequate provision for off-site parking and loading and unloading areas; and 
(h)  Whether the proposed development, design and layout has preserved the natural features and characteristics of the land; including but not limited to preservation of existing large trees and similar natural features that would add attractiveness to the property and environs natural drainage systems, natural buffering, and the use of other techniques for the preservation and enhancement of the physical environment. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 3, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 5.3. - Compliance requirements. 
(a)  The city, as a further condition to approval of an application for a site may require financial guarantees or other such guarantees as may be reasonably necessary to insure compliance with the terms and conditions of its approval. 
(b)  Failure to initiate project construction within 12 months of the issuance of a final development order shall invalidate the site plan approval and require re-submission of the plan. Initiation of construction shall be demonstrated by obtaining all required building permits for construction in accordance with the approved site plan. Such site plan approval shall terminate upon the expiration, without lawful reinstatement, of any building permits required for construction in accordance with the approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 3, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 5.4. - Effect of decision. 
    Approval of a final site plan shall authorize the applicant to apply for the issuance of a building permit and/or occupational license, provided that all other requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 3, 2-22-05) 
Sec. 5.5. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from decisions made under this section may be taken in accordance with the provisions of section 3.14 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 3, 2-22-05) 
DIVISION 6 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6.1. - Generally. 
    The regulations contained in this section apply to all zoning districts, unless otherwise stated in the regulation, within the City of St. Pete Beach and shall be considered additional requirements to be met before the final approval for any development order within any zoning district is granted. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 6.2. - Bed and breakfast inns. 
    The following criteria shall apply to bed and breakfast inns: 
(a)  Neither hired receptions nor parties shall be permitted in bed and breakfast inns. 
(b)  Guest rooms may share toilet and bathing facilities; however, in no instance shall the owner and guests have shared bathrooms. 
(c)  The maximum number of rooms for guests shall be as follows: 
Building Size 

(gross floor area) Max. Guest 

Rooms Less than 1,200 sq. ft. 1 1,200-1,800 sq. ft. 2 1,801-2,400 sq. ft. 3 2,401-3,000 sq. ft. 4 3,001-3,600 sq. ft. 6 Over 3,600 sq. ft. 6  
(d)  In addition to the parking required for the residence, one parking space will be provided for each guest room. 
(e)  Cooking shall be for guests and residents only. No cooking facilities shall be allowed in guest bedrooms. 
(f)  One attached sign no larger than six square feet in area shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 6.3. - Community residential homes. 
(a)  Homes of six or fewer residents which otherwise meet the definition of community residential home shall be deemed a single-family unit and a non-commercial residential use. A community residential home, as defined in Division 2, having six or fewer residents, shall be permitted in all zones permitting single-family or multi-family uses, provided that such homes shall not be located within a radius of 1,000 feet of another community residential home with six or fewer residents. 
(b)  A community residential home for more than six residents is allowed in those zones allowing multi-family uses subject to the following: 
(1)  Allowed only as a conditional use in the RM, ROR, RFM and INS districts. 
(2)  Such uses shall not be located within a radius of 1,200 feet of another existing community residential home in a zoning district allowing multi-family uses or abutting a single-family zoning district. 
(3)  Such uses shall meet the applicable licensing criteria established and determined by department of children and family services, including requirements that the home be located to assure the safe care and supervision of all clients in the home. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 6.4. - Hobbies. 
(a)  Hobbies including, but not limited to, boat building or repair, furniture making or repair, automobile repair and rebuilding, and other activities such as these which are not normally carried on extensively in a residential district, shall not be permitted to the extent that they are injurious to the health or welfare of, or are disruptive to the quiet enjoyment of property by nearby residential occupants. Uses, including but not limited to those listed above, which involve the use of power tools or the creation of noise not usual in a residential district shall not be permitted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  While it is permissible to perform hobby activities outdoors on the owner's property during daylight hours, all tools, materials and other items associated with hobby activities shall be placed within an enclosed building for storage overnight. 
(c)  Repair, which term shall, for the purposes of this section, include rebuilding, of a motor vehicle in a residential district shall also be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, a motor vehicle shall have its commonly accepted definition and shall also include boats or other watercraft. 
(2)  Motor vehicles repaired within a residential zoning district must be owned by the owner or occupant of the residential property on which they are being repaired. 
(3)  At the request by a city inspector or police officer, a person making a motor vehicle repair in a residential zoning district shall demonstrate residence at the residential location where the repair is being made. Should the person be unable or unwilling for any reason to demonstrate residency or ownership of the motor vehicle being repaired, the person shall be in violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 6.5. - Home occupations. 
    An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit is permissible in the city, provided: 
(a)  No person shall be employed on the premises other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises. 
(b)  The use of the dwelling for a home occupation shall clearly be incidental and secondary to its use for residential purposes. No more than one room within the dwelling unit shall be used to conduct the home occupation, provided the area of that room does not exceed 26 percent of the total living area of the dwelling unit. No more than five percent of that room shall be used for storage of commodities related to the home occupation. No display or storage of merchandise or use of land in connection with the occupation is permitted. 
(c)  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises as a result of such occupation or occupations, and no signs shall be permitted except those signs that may be required by other ordinance or law. 
(d)  No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building or attached/detached garage. 
(e)  No mechanical equipment shall be used or stored on the premises except such that is normally used for domestic or household purposes, nor shall it create noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odors detectable to the normal senses outside of the dwelling unit. 
(f)  No retail or wholesale sales shall be permitted on the premises. 
(g)  No traffic shall be generated by the home occupation. 
(h)  A home occupation shall not be construed to include, among other uses, personal services such as massage, cosmetology, barber shops, beauty parlors, tea rooms, food processing for sale, kennels, dog grooming, real estate office, law office, radio and television repair, furniture refinishing, cabinet making, boat building, auto servicing or rebuilding or repair for others, metal fabrication or cutting, or a use employing welding or cutting torches. 
(i)  Not more than one home occupation-related vehicle regardless of the number of home occupations is permitted. Said vehicle shall not be of an overall length exceeding 20 feet nor more than seven feet in overall height and must be parked off any public street right-of-way. All exterior storage of cargo, equipment or other material on the vehicle shall be shielded from view at all times when such vehicle is located on a residential lot. 
(j)  A home occupation that is solely used for the purpose of receiving telephone calls, mail and keeping business records in connection with any profession or occupation shall be known as an "address of convenience." 
(k)  The city manager shall determine whether the home occupation meets the established criteria. An unfavorable determination may be appealed in accordance with section 3.14 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 6.6. - Temporary lodging uses. 
    Unless otherwise regulated or restricted in this Land Development Code, Temporary Lodging uses may include secondary uses that are customary guest amenities recognized by the hotel industry. Such uses are retail stores, business centers where guests can use computers, fax machines, printers and copiers, etc., conference and meeting room facilities, fitness facilities, day spas, and restaurants with or without a bar or cocktail lounge. Such secondary uses, in total, may be no larger than 20% of the gross floor area of the temporary lodging use before being considered a mixed use, which would then be regulated by the floor area ratio standards in each zoning district or the future land use designation in the Comprehensive Plan, whichever is more restrictive. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-05, § 1, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 2010-31, § 3, 2-22-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-31, § 3, adopted February 22, 2011, changed the title of section 6.6 from "Mixed uses (residential and transient accommodations with other uses) to "Temporary lodging uses." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 6.7 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 2005, repealed § 6.7, which pertained to pushcart vending. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 6.8. - Garage sales. 
(a)  A limited number of garage sales are allowed as an activity in all zoning districts permitting single-family, two-family and multi-family residences. In all such districts, three garage sales at any one residence in any one calendar year shall be allowed under this Code. Any one garage sale shall be limited to the daylight hours of three consecutive days, and not more than one garage sale shall be held at any one residence in any 90-day period. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "garage sale" means any public sale or offering for sale to the public of three or more items of personal property by a person or a family or other household unit residing on the premises on which the sale is conducted, when the personal property has been acquired, possessed and used by that family or household for personal as opposed to business or commercial use, when such sale is to be conducted at the present residence of such family or household unit, and is open to the general public. "Garage sale" shall include sales commonly referred to as patio sales, driveway sales, yard sales, porch sales and other such sales. "Garage sale" shall not include the sale or offering for sale of goods of more than one family or household. 
(c)  One sign of no more than four square feet may be displayed on the property of the residence where the garage sale is being conducted pursuant to this section. Such sign shall be displayed only during the times of the sale. In no case shall the sign be placed on any property other than the property of the residence upon which the garage sale is to take place. 
(d)  Garage sales allowed by this section shall be conducted in compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations not in conflict herewith, but no occupational license shall be required for a garage sale. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 6.9. - Outdoor sales or outdoor display of merchandise. 
(a)  Outdoor sales or outdoor display of merchandise within the public right of way shall be permitted only under the temporary use permit procedure outlined in Section 6.11 herein. Events that are sponsored by the city and/or held within city parks or on city- owned property other than within the right of way are exempt from these requirements. In addition to any special provisions set forth in the permitting process, the following regulations, except where in conflict with the conditions of the permit, shall apply to outdoor sales or outdoor display of merchandise within the public right of way: 
(1)  Permits for outdoor sales and/or display of merchandise shall be issued to an individual business or a group of businesses for a maximum of 3 consecutive days. 
(2)  Outdoor storage is specifically prohibited in connection with any outdoor sale and/or display of merchandise. Merchandise must be removed from the public right of way between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. 
(3)  Outdoor sales or outdoor display of merchandise shall be clearly related to the principal use of the site and shall be wholly conducted upon the site. 
(4)  Outdoor sales or outdoor display of merchandise shall not be allowed at any time the principal permitted use of the site is not open for business and shall not be allowed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(5)  A minimum of one unobstructed pedestrian path at least five feet wide shall be maintained, parallel to the abutting building(s) at all times; 
(6)  Unobstructed passage shall be provided to building entrances including at least a two-foot clearance on each side of any entrance, fire hydrants, or other street fixtures located within the display area; 
(7)  Furniture and equipment shall neither be permanently anchored to the sidewalk in the right-of-way nor shall they be attached or affixed to any tree, post, sign or other structure in any way; 
(8)  Access for a fire rescue vehicle and equipment shall be maintained in accordance with Section 98-26 of the City's Code of Ordinances; 
(9)  The owner or operator shall acquire and keep in full force and effect, at its own expense, the insurance in the following amounts and types: 
a.  Commercial general liability in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. The city must be named as an additional insured on this policy and an endorsement must be issued as part of the policy evidencing compliance with this requirement. 
b.  Workers' compensation and employers' liability as required by the State of Florida. 
c.  The city shall receive at least 30 days written notice prior to any cancellation, non-renewal or material change in the coverage provided. 
d.  Any person operating a sidewalk sale shall provide to the city an original certificate of insurance as evidence that the above requirements have been met prior to the initiation of the merchandise display. 
(10)  Failure to comply with all the requirements in this section shall cause a suspension or revocation of the temporary use permit. 
(b)  Outdoor display of merchandise on private property shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Outdoor display of merchandise shall be a permitted accessory use to a retail business in non-residential and mixed-use zoning districts. Outdoor display of merchandise is not permitted for any non-conforming use within any residential zoning district. 
(2)  A minimum of one unobstructed pedestrian path at least five feet wide shall be maintained, parallel to the abutting building(s) at all times; 
(3)  Unobstructed passage shall be provided to building entrances including at least a two-foot clearance on each side of any entrance, fire hydrants, etc. 
(4)  Access for a fire rescue vehicle and equipment shall be maintained in accordance with Section 98-26 of the City's Code of Ordinances; 
(5)  The merchandise displayed shall be related to the principal use of the property. 
(6)  Outdoor display of merchandise is prohibited at any time the establishment is not open for business and is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(7)  No merchandise display shall obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic or located within in a visibility triangle. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
Sec. 6.10. - Attached single-family residential developments. 
    Common open space within an attached single-family development shall be so distributed as to provide readily available amenities and visual relief to the entire development. Attached single-family residential developments shall be further regulated as follows: 
(a)  Attached single-family residential developments shall not increase the number of dwelling units per acre and shall provide adequate green space areas to ensure that a minimum of 30 percent of the total site area is free of impervious surfaces. 
(b)  Each dwelling unit shall have an individual ground floor entrance. 
(c)  All structures having a front, side or rear yard relationship with a project site shall meet the minimum yard requirements as are required within the applicable zoning district. Not less than ten feet shall be required between all detached structures, except for detached single-family cluster developments which may have lesser distance between structures, according to the district regulations. 
(d)  No more than ten attached dwelling units shall be contiguous. No contiguous group of attached dwelling units shall exceed 240 feet in length. 
(e)  The applicant shall provide such covenants, restrictions, financial guarantees and other legal assurances, in a form acceptable to the city, as the city manager deems necessary to guarantee conformity to the achievement of the plan and required maintenance of the open space. 
(f)  The applicant shall provide legal assurances deemed adequate by the city attorney to assure that, in the event that the city should assume maintenance of any facilities or land within the development, the city shall have legal enforceable liens against all land and each residential unit within the development to assure recovery of its expenses. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 6.11. - Temporary uses. 
    Temporary uses of zoning lots may be permitted under the provisions of this section in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth herein. 
(a)  Application submission requirements. All applications shall be submitted to the city manager or the manager's designee in a form specified by the city, accompanied by the payment of the applicable fee set forth in Appendix A, St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances, as follows; 
(1)  All applications shall contain the following minimum information: 
• Property owner's name, address and phone number 
• Property address and parcel identification number 
• Future Land Use Plan category and Zoning district 
• Current use of the property 
• Proposed nature, size, and location of the proposed temporary use 
• Parcel map locating existing use and proposed temporary use 
• Length of time during which proposed temporary use will be in place 
• Hours of the day the use will be utilized, if applicable 
(2)  Applicants may be required to submit additional information after the initial submission commensurate with the type and characteristics of the proposed use and the issues it raises. 
(b)  Determination of completeness of application. The city shall determine whether the application is complete within ten (10) days and the applicant notified. If the application is complete, the application shall be forwarded for review to the Technical Review Committee. If the application is not complete, the city shall take no further action on the application until the required information is submitted by the applicant. 
(1)  If the applicant fails to respond to the specified request for information within fifteen (15) days of the date of notification of deficiency, the application shall be voided. 
(2)  If an applicant submits new data or information at any time after a determination of completeness has been made, the revised application may be subject to an additional application review fee and will be subject to the same stages of review as the initial application. 
(c)  Review guidelines. The guidelines by which an application for temporary use will be reviewed shall include, as a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The use shall be consistent with the purpose, location and use characteristics of the plan category and zoning district in which it is proposed to be established. 
(2)  The specific nature, size, location and hours of access or utilization shall be determined to be compatible with and not to interfere with the public right-of-way or adjoining properties. 
(3)  The input and interest of any adjoining property owner that may be affected by the proposed temporary use. 
(4)  The provisions for access/egress to and from the public right-of-way, and for public safety vehicles, shall not be impeded. 
(5)  Any site alterations or improvements shall be consistent with the applicable provisions of the Code, and any required replacement or restoration of landscaping, fencing, paving, etc., upon termination of the use shall be identified and required. 
(6)  Due to unique circumstances of the proposed temporary use, the city may attach such additional conditions to a temporary use permit as are necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the public interest, or upon other property in the neighborhood. 
(d)  Specific conditions. The following standards shall govern the establishment and renewal of any temporary use: 
(1)  The time period for a temporary use permit shall be limited to a maximum period of ninety (90) days, subject to one (1) extension that may be authorized by the city manager up to an additional period of thirty (30) days. 
(2)  The period of time established for the temporary use permit may be issued and limited to less than ninety (90) days if determined to be warranted in the initial review and approval process. 
(3)  No temporary use permit shall be approved for the same property for any one or combination of multiple time periods that exceed ninety (90) days [plus any additional period of thirty (30) days that may have been approved] within any twelve (12) month period of time. 
(4)  The city shall retain the right to revoke the temporary use permit and require immediate removal of the temporary use if it fails to comply with any of the conditions of the permit, or creates a public safety hazard or nuisance. 
(e)  Permit review and issuance process. Upon submission of an application for a temporary use the following process shall be followed: 
(1)  Upon determination that an application is complete, mailed notice of the application and the opportunity to provide input will be provided to the owners of property immediately adjoining the property that is the subject of the application. 
(2)  The city's Technical Review Committee will review the application within ten (10) days and make a recommendation to the city manager to approve, approve with noted conditions, or deny the application. 
(3)  The city manager shall, within five (5) days of receiving the Technical Review Committee's recommendation act to approve, approve with noted conditions, or deny the permit. 
(4)  The city manager's decision shall be final. Any appeal shall be filed with a hearing officer designated by the city commission in accordance with section 3.14(a) of the Land Development Code. 
(f)  Coordination with other sections of the Code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to conflict with, duplicate, supersede, or eliminate the requirements to comply with the following sections of the city's Land Development Code or Code of Ordinances: 
(1)  Land Development Code, section 6.12 - Commercial accessory and temporary equipment, structures, portable buildings and trailers, dumpsters and commercial tents. 
(2)  Code of Ordinances, Part II, Chapter 26, Article II - Special Event Permit and the corresponding Guide to Special Events. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2014-0010, § 2, 11-5-14) 
Sec. 6.12. - Commercial accessory and temporary equipment, structures, portable buildings and trailers, dumpsters and commercial tents. 
(a)  Commercial accessory structures may be allowed as follows: 
(1)  Commercial accessory structures shall be limited to storage uses only. 
(2)  The accessory structure shall be no larger than 150 square feet. 
(3)  The structure will either be designed and constructed in the same architectural style as the principal structure, or it shall be screened from public view by the same type enclosure that is required for the dumpster. 
(4)  No more than one accessory structure shall be placed or erected on a zoning lot. 
(5)  An accessory structure may occupy one required parking space for a period not to exceed 30 days, once per calendar year. 
(6)  No accessory structure shall be located closer to the public right-of-way than the structure to which it is accessory. 
(b)  Commercial equipment may be allowed as follows: 
(1)  All commercial equipment shall be located within an enclosure or otherwise screened from public view. Equipment shall be limited to tools, machinery, or enclosed storage containers. 
(2)  Commercial equipment, except for properly enclosed waste or refuse containers, shall not be located within any yard that abuts a public street without the specific approval of the appropriate board of authority. 
(3)  Vending machines may be located in front of a business premises, provided the location is not on a public right-of-way, does not otherwise impede pedestrian access and circulation, and the total area devoted to vending machines shall not exceed 18 square feet. However, vending machines that are visible from the public right-of-way shall be screened from public view. 
(c)  Construction trailers or portable buildings may be allowed as follows: 
(1)  Construction trailers may only be placed on a construction site operating under a valid building permit. A permit for a construction trailer shall be obtained from the city prior to placing the trailer on the site. A construction trailer may only be used as an office for the contractor(s) on the site and for storage of equipment and construction material for the site. 
(2)  Trailers or other portable buildings to be used for storage on a business premises may be permitted by the city for a period of time not to exceed 120 days; provided that such trailers or temporary buildings shall be located on the property in such a manner as to not be visible from the public rights-of-way. This provision shall not apply to trucks or trailers parked on a premises for the purposes of making a delivery to the business; provided that such delivery vehicles shall not remain on the property for more than two consecutive days. 
(d)  Dumpsters, commercial waste or refuse containers shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  All new or replacement dumpsters shall have lids that shall be remain closed except for the deposit of waste materials in the dumpster. This provision shall not apply to dumpsters larger than eight-yard capacity. 
(2)  All dumpsters, commercial waste and refuse containers, except those that are specifically approved for temporary location and use, shall be located on the same property with the use it serves and fully enclosed as follows: 
a.  All dumpsters, commercial waste and refuse containers shall be located as far from public streets and adjacent property as is practical, and dumpsters shall be located on a properly constructed concrete pad. 
b.  All dumpsters, commercial waste and refuse containers shall be located within a proper opaque enclosure of sufficient height to fully screen the dumpster, commercial waste or refuse container. 
(3)  Dumpster enclosures shall require a building permit and shall be constructed to meet all applicable building standards. 
(4)  Where certain circumstances, special conditions may prevent the location and enclosure of a dumpster in accord with paragraph (2) above, the city may grant use of the city right-of-way if it finds that any one of the following conditions would result from locating the dumpster in strict compliance with the regulations: 
a.  On-site location of the dumpster would decrease the number of existing parking spaces below that required under the district regulations. 
b.  On-site location of the dumpster would prevent or materially impair reasonable ingress and egress to the property. 
c.  Access by the dumpster service contractor for pickup and dumping into a loader/packer type garbage truck would be materially impaired. 
(5)  Temporary dumpsters for construction projects shall be located as approved at the time a building permit is issued, and temporary dumpsters permitted for temporary uses shall be located in accordance with the approved site plan for the temporary use permit. 
(e)  Residential/commercial sales, management and leasing offices may be permitted in a new residential development in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The office may be permitted as an accessory use on the same lot, but shall not be used except by the company developing the site and in connection with the development within which it is located. A building permit is required. 
(2)  The office, if located within a temporary structure, may not be used as an office for more than 12 months, and thereafter shall be removed. 
(3)  At least three off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the office and shall be maintained so long as the office is used as such. 
(4)  In a multi-family development, a management and/or leasing office may be maintained within one of the residential buildings, or within a permanent accessory building which was approved as part of the original site plan; provided, that such office, if located within an accessory building, shall not be the principal use of the accessory building, and said accessory building shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structures in the development. 
(f)  Tents be may erected and maintained by a business within the RFM or CG-1 zoning districts, provided: 
(1)  No tent shall be erected within any public right-of-way or within 75 feet of the back edge of a curb, public sidewalk or roadway, whichever is most restrictive. 
(2)  Tents shall also be required to meet the side and rear required yards of the zoning district in which the tent is located; 
(3)  Tents shall not be located on a parking lot or pedestrian walkway in such a manner that the normal flow of traffic on the site cannot be maintained nor shall any tent render useless more than ten percent of the parking required for the business; 
(4)  Tents shall be maintained so as not be constitute a nuisance or hazard; 
(5)  Tents used for public assembly or cooking or within which any combustible material will be used or stored must meet all requirements of the Florida Fire Prevention Code and be approved by the fire marshal prior to their use. 
(6)  Tents which are placed upon any public beach must be approved through the city's special event permitting process and be approved by the fire marshal prior to their use. 
(g)  Portable toilets shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Nothing in this chapter shall alter the regulations or use of portable toilets in relation to any construction project as set by Florida Statutes or Pinellas County. 
(2)  The use of portable toilets shall be strictly prohibited, except during emergency interruption of sewer service or in conjunction with a special event, building, temporary use or conditional use permit, subject to approval. 
(3)  The location of portable toilets shall be approved at the time of issuance of the above-stated permits. 
(4)  Portable toilets associated with a building permit shall be in accordance with the regulations pertaining to "chemical toilets" and "portable toilets" set forth in section 98-70 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  Portable toilets shall be kept clean at all times and shall not emit an odor which is noticeable from adjacent properties. 
(6)  Portable toilets shall be removed from the premises immediately following the close of the development permit, special event, or emergency interruption. 
(7)  Portable toilets shall be located as far from the public right-of-way as possible or otherwise shielded from view by fencing or landscaping. 
(8)  Any portable toilet currently either located on a site or in a manner which is in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be removed within ten (10) days of the effective date of this ordinance. 
(9)  Violation of this chapter shall be declared to constitute a public nuisance and shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(h)  Beach concession standards. Minor structures that currently exist as of the date of the adoption of this ordinance may be maintained by a transient lodging business that has beach frontage along the Gulf of Mexico, in accordance with the following, after approval by the technical review committee (TRC); otherwise, a conditional use permit must be obtained in accordance with Division 4 of the Land Development Code in addition to a department of environmental protection permit for minor structures. 
(1)  Concession huts. 
a.  Concession huts shall be for the rental of beach equipment, and/or watersports. 
b.  One concession hut structure is permitted per transient lodging facility or one for every 200 linear feet of sand beach, or fraction thereof, as measured along the property line adjacent to the sand beach. Huts may be arranged on the sand beach as desired by the property owner. 
c.  Concession huts shall maintain a minimum side setback of 20' or 10% of the lot width, whichever is less. A minimum separation of 200' between concession huts must be maintained. For lots with a width less than 200', one hut shall be allowed and shall be located within the center one-third of the lot. 
d.  Concession huts shall have a maximum floor area of one-hundred (100) square feet, excluding any platform, with exterior dimensions not to exceed nine feet (9'-0") in height from the sand to the eave line (i.e., the intersection of the roof and the exterior walls). 
e.  Any architectural projections above the eave line may not exceed twelve feet (12'-0") in height from the sand (i.e., roof and roof related architectural elements). All roofing elements shall be appropriate to and consistent with the unique beach environment and/or evocative of the upland architecture, and shall be subject to the review and approval of TRC staff. All building construction materials and finishes shall be appropriate to and consistent with the unique beach environment, subject to the administrative review and approval. Accessory electrical apparatuses may extend above the roof line up to 36" additionally. 
f.  All concession huts shall be designed to preserve vistas and shall be fully open from forty-six (46") inches above the grade to a minimum eight feet (8'-0") above the sand, with the exception of structural columns or posts. One side of a concession hut may be completely solid to accommodate battery operated equipment and life saving devices and apparatuses. Electrical service is prohibited within a concession hut. 
g.  Any security side panels that may be used as shade devices and shall be fully supported from the structure itself and shall not contain independent vertical support columns that extend directly to the sand or perimeter platform walkway. 
h.  A detached perimeter platform shall be prohibited as an addition to surround the concession hut. 
i.  All concession huts shall be designed so as to facilitate their immediate removal from the beach upon demand by the city or in the event of an emergency condition. 
j.  Huts shall be located a minimum of 100' landward from the mean high water. 
k.  Signage shall be limited to a total of 60 sf for all signage attached to the huts. Signage maybe divided between all sides with no one sign exceeding 20 sf. All pamphlets or advertisement shall be secured within the hut to prevent litter on the beach. 
l.  Exterior surface colors and finishes shall be appropriate to the design of the structure. The review and approval of design of the hut is considered an administrative approval. 
m.  Towel bins, not to exceed 42" in height, may be permitted adjacent to the concession huts for the containment of disposed towels. Such bins shall be of a durable material and be able to be removed from the beach to the upland business if necessary. 
(2)  Storage boxes. 
a.  Storage boxes are considered "beach furniture" and are exempt from permitting criteria if they comply with the following: 
b.  Placement of storage boxes are constructed as to not disturb marked marine turtle nests, known nest locations or any other marine nesting habitat or endangered species that is officially designated as such and should generally be located as to not impede pedestrian mobility along the beach. 
c.  Storage boxes shall be equipped to be fully mobile via trailer or other towing mechanism incorporated internally, for immediate removal from the beach upon demand by the city, or in cases of mandatory emergency evacuation. Skids are prohibited from use with all beach concession huts. 
d.  Plans for concession huts and storage boxes shall include accurate dimensions and scale. 
e.  Storage boxes shall be designed for the horizontal storage of chaise lounge pads, umbrellas, sun canopies, daybeds, and similar items and shall not exceed a maximum size of 250 cubic feet, not to exceed 6' in height above the sand. 
f.  Storage boxes shall be simply designed, free of adornment and embellishment, and detailed in a manner appropriate to the unique beach environment inclusive of construction materials and finishes and shall be painted to match the concession hut without an accent trim color, and shall be subject to the review and approval of the technical review committee. 
g.  No signage shall be permitted on storage facilities, except a discreetly displayed plaque measuring a maximum four inches by six inches (4" x 6"), identifying the concessionaire's name, address and telephone number. 
h.  A maximum of two storage boxes shall be permitted per concession hut and must be located to the east of the hut. 
(3)  Driving on the beach. Any concessionaire that requires the ability to drive on the sandy beach in conjunction with the operation of the business on the sand beach shall be required to obtain a driving on the beach permit annually and required to adhere to the following: 
a.  All recipients of a driving on the beach permit will receive a decal to display on the vehicle at all times while on the beach. 
b.  A letter of authorization is required from each of the private property owner affected. 
c.  All vehicles must remain at least ten feet (10') at all times from people, vegetation, dunes and any marine wildlife areas that have been officially designated as such by a boundary marker. 
d.  A 10 mph speed limit must be adhered to all times. 
e.  Driving on the beach shall be prohibited during the marine turtle nesting season until after daily marine turtle nest survey, protection, and monitoring program is conducted throughout the driving area. The marine turtle survey, protection, and monitoring program shall be conducted only by individuals possessing appropriate expertise in the protocol being followed and a valid F.A.C. Rule 68E-1 permit issued by the Florida Fish & Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC). 
f.  A liability bond is required to insure that no damage is done to the beach area involved, the amount of which is to be determined according to the activities involved. Proof of insurance is required by the city manager in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) bodily injury and five-hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) property damage from the sponsoring organization. 
(4)  General restrictions. 
a.  Signage on umbrellas or cabanas shall be prohibited, excluding the transient lodging logo or the like. 
b.  Children's sand play areas may be incorporated into the overall beach concession hut area and shall have a maximum area of 36' square feet and shall have no elements that are taller than 30" above the sand beach, with the exception of shade umbrellas. 
c.  In no instance shall serving trays, coolers, boxes, or other devices or objects remain stacked or stored outside of a storage facility and visible from any vantage point on the beach, at any time. 
d.  All mechanical equipment used to prepare watersports gear shall be concealed to the greatest extent possible in accordance with the guidelines for shielding located in division 22 of the LDC and not exposed or remain on vehicular trailers. 
e.  The State of Florida Department of Environmental Protection Reserves the right to review and permit all structures, including concession huts and storage boxes, pursuant to section 161.56 of the Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2004-33, § 1, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 2016-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10-25-16; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2, 10-11-16; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 6.13. - Residential accessory structures. 
    Accessory residential structures may be permitted only on zoning lots having one or more existing residential dwelling units and shall be regulated as follows: 
(a)  Garage, private residential, as defined, fall into one of two types, either attached to or detached from the principal residential structure. Under the terms of this section, the term "garage" shall also include carports. For the purposes of this Code, a garage shall be deemed to be attached only when it shares at least 75 percent of the length of one wall in common with the principal structure to which it is an accessory. 
(1)  Attached garage. An attached garage shall be subject to the same required yard and height requirements as the principal structure. 
(2)  Detached garage. Detached garages shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Required yards: 
 Front yard: 20 feet  Secondary front yard: As required for the principal structure  Side yards: As required for the principal structure  Rear yard: Ten feet if accessible from an alley; otherwise 20 feet  
b.  Maximum height: 12 feet above the crown of any street abutting the property. 
c.  In no case shall a detached garage have any sleeping room, kitchen facilities or plumbing 
(b)  Residential storage buildings. Residential storage buildings may be permitted as an accessory on a residential property. Only one such residential storage building is allowed, and the residential storage building shall be further regulated as follows: 
(1)  The residential storage building shall be used exclusively for storage of household items, and no mechanical equipment shall be operated within or attached to such building. 
(2)  The placement of a residential storage building shall require a building permit, meet all applicable building codes, and shall be properly anchored. 
(3)  All storm water runoff shall be directed and maintained on the property upon which the building is located. 
(4)  The residential storage building shall be located a minimum of 60 feet from the front property line and 20 feet from the secondary front yard, provided no residential storage building shall be permitted within the required yard for a waterfront yard. 
(5)  Residential storage buildings shall be subject to the following dimensional and required yard requirements. 
a.  Maximum size: 80 square feet in area. 
b.  Maximum height: Eight feet in height as measured from grade to the highest point on the structure. 
c.  Location: May be located along any side or rear property line, except in secondary front yards and waterfront yards as provided in paragraph (4) above; and must be separated at least six feet from any other accessory structure. 
(c)  Special accessory structures. Special accessory structures include, but are not limited to, swimming pools, pool enclosures, decks, patio covers, gazebos, fountains, garden trellises and children's playground equipment. Tree houses are specifically excluded as special accessory structures. 
(1)  Swimming pools and spas may be permitted by the city and shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Pool setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the water. 
b.  Swimming pools, spas and their accessory decks that will exceed two feet above grade shall meet all yard requirements for the district within which they are located. Other swimming pools and spas shall be regulated by paragraph c. below. 
c.  Required yards: Front, secondary front and side yards shall be as required within the district for a principal structure 
The required rear yard shall be nine feet; however, on a waterfront property when the pool is proposed closer than 20 feet to the seawall, the application shall be accompanied by plans and specifications prepared and sealed by a registered engineer showing how the seawall will be protected. 
(2)  Screened pool enclosures may be permitted by the city and shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Pool enclosures for swimming pools, spas and their accessory decks that will have a finished floor elevation in excess of two feet above grade shall meet all yard requirements for the district within which they are located. Other pool enclosures shall be regulated as follows: 
b.  Required yards: Front and side yards shall be as required within the district for a principal structure. The minimum rear yard shall be eight feet. 
c.  Maximum height: Pool enclosures within the setbacks required for principal structures may be constructed to the height allowed for the principal structure. For other pool enclosures, the maximum permitted height shall be 14 feet to the highest point of the enclosure 
(3)  Decks and patios with a finished floor elevation no higher than two feet above grade, other than those associated with swimming pools as regulated in paragraph (1) preceding, shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Required yards: Shall not encroach into any required front, secondary front or side yard and shall not encroach more than ten feet into any required rear yard 
(4)  Deck and/or patio covers consisting of the covering material and the minimum support mechanism or structure necessary to ensure its wind loading stability may be permitted by the city; provided that no such patio cover shall be permitted to be initially constructed or later enclosed in such a manner that it could be construed as living space. Structural elements of such patio covers shall not be permitted to exceed the dimensions of the patio more than six inches in any direction. Up to a one-foot overhang may be permitted. 
a.  Required yards: Shall not encroach into any required front, secondary front or side yard and shall not encroach more than five feet into any required rear yard. 
(5)  Gazebos may be permitted by the city under the following conditions: 
a.  Maximum size: 64 square feet in area. 
b.  Maximum height: 12 feet above grade to the highest point of the roof. 
c.  Required yards: Shall not encroach into any required front, secondary front or side yard and shall not encroach more than 15 feet into any required rear yard, except no gazebo shall be permitted to encroach into a required waterfront yard 
(6)  Fountains and waterfalls may be permitted by the city as a decorative element of and shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Maximum height: Five feet above grade. 
b.  Required yards: Shall not encroach into any required yard more than 15 feet. 
(7)  Garden trellises shall be allowed without a permit, provided such trellis meets the following requirements: 
a.  Maximum height: Eight feet 
b.  Maximum width: Five feet, including walk through opening. 
c.  Maximum dimension front to back: 35 inches. 
d.  Shall not encroach onto public sidewalks, streets or alleys. 
(8)  Children's playground equipment shall be allowed without a permit, provided such equipment is located within the rear yard. 
a.  Children's playground equipment shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
(9)  Other special accessory structures which cannot be located in accordance with the requirements of the preceding may be permitted after review in accordance with Division 5 of this Code. 
(d)  Satellite and amateur radio antennas. The City of St. Pete Beach recognizes that satellite and amateur radio antennas should be regulated in order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. The city recognizes that these antennas pose special problems because of their unique size, orientation requirements, construction and design considerations that set them apart from roof-mounted antennas. The city, therefore, finds it necessary to set the following requirements in order to mitigate potential adverse construction and aesthetic impacts. Where any provision of this section is found to be in conflict with Chapter 131 of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances, Chapter 131 shall prevail. 
Small satellite receiving antennas, properly installed and associated with digital satellite television, or "DIRECTV," as an alternative to cable television shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, provided such satellite receiving antennas are no larger than 24 inches in diameter. 
(1)  Otherwise, in all zoning districts, the following regulations apply: 
a.  Satellite and amateur radio antennas shall be considered accessory structures and shall be located in the rear yard and meet the following requirements: 
Maximum height:  70 feet from grade 
Required yards:  The entire antenna shall meet the minimum side yard requirements for the district in which it is located and be at least 15 feet from the rear property line. 
b.  The antenna shall meet all manufacturer's specifications. 
c.  The antennas shall be non-reflective and their color shall blend in with the surroundings. 
d.  The antenna shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the requirements of the building code and electrical code. A building permit shall be required prior to construction. 
e.  No advertising or signage of any type is permitted on an antenna. 
(e)  Portable storage units (PSU), as defined, shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  A PSU shall not exceed eight feet in width, 16 feet in length and nine feet in height. 
(2)  A PSU shall be placed either on a driveway, approved parking area or in the buildable portion of the lot and shall not be placed in a public right-of-way except as allowed in subsection (3). 
(3)  When physical limitations of the property prevent locating the PSU within the areas designated in subsection (2), the police department may approve the placement of the PSU in a public right-of-way as follows: 
a.  The PSU may only be placed within an area approved for parking; 
b.  The public right-of-way shall be adjacent to the property using the PSU; 
c.  The PSU shall have safety reflectors on all sides of the container facing oncoming traffic; 
d.  The PSU shall be removed within 72 hours of placement or the city may remove it at the PSU owner's expense; 
e.  Placement of the PSU shall not create any unsafe condition; and 
f.  The police department shall be authorized to place any other restriction deemed necessary to avoid creating a threat to the safety of persons or property. 
(4)  PSUs shall not exceed the following duration of stay. An "event" shall mean the delivery and pickup of the PSU. Events shall be nonconsecutive. 
a.  Residential use: A maximum of seven calendar days per event with a maximum of four events per dwelling unit per calendar year. 
b.  Nonresidential use: A maximum of seven calendar days per event, with a maximum of four events per calendar year per each nonresidential unit on a property. Longer term storage of up to one 30-day event per calendar year shall be allowed for a nonresidential unit, provided the PSU is placed in a designated parking area on the property, and the parking area is located so that it has the least visibility from adjoining street rights-of-way. Placement of a PSU for longer term storage only shall require submittal and approval of a site plan by the city. 
(5)  The PSU shall have clearly posted on the exterior of the unit, the name, current phone number and address of the company providing the PSU, and the date the PSU was placed at the site. 
(6)  The PSU shall be locked and secured by the owner or tenant of the unit or property at all times when loading or unloading is not taking place. Storage of hazardous materials is prohibited. 
(7)  If the National Weather Advisory Service or other qualified weather advisory service identifies weather conditions which are predicted to include winds of 75 MPH or greater, every PSU shall be removed from all properties and placed in approved storage locations at least 24 hours prior to the predicted onset of such winds or as soon as reasonably practical if less notice is provided. Removal of a PSU under the provisions of this subsection shall not be considered an "event." 
(f)  The use of portable toilets shall be strictly prohibited, except in conjunction with an active building permit, and 
(1)  Shall be regulated in accordance with section 98-70 of the Code of Ordinances; and 
(2)  Shall be removed from the premises immediately following the close of the building permit. 
(3)  Violation of this chapter shall be declared to constitute a public nuisance and shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 3, 10-11-16; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 6.14. - Encroachment of certain specified ancillary residential equipment into required yards. 
    Ancillary residential equipment, such as but not limited to air conditioning compressors, swimming pool and spa filters and pumps, etc. shall be allowed to encroach into any required yards up to four feet, provided that any such equipment located in front of the residence shall be adequately shielded from the adjoining property by either a solid enclosure or solid fence or wall and no resulting setback shall be less than 3 feet from any property line. Equipment that is not at grade shall not encroach into any required front or side yard setback. New elevated equipment on any new or substantially improved structures shall not encroach into any required yard setback. This shall apply to any equipment installed for new or substantially improved structures or to such items being installed for existing structures the first time. Change-outs of existing equipment shall be exempt as long as they do not encroach into any required yard. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 6.15. - Fences and walls. 
    Fences and walls are permitted, provided fences and walls shall not exceed four feet in height in required front yards and eight feet in height elsewhere. Secondary front yards shall also be considered as front yards for the purposes of this section; provided, however, fences and walls in waterfront yards shall not exceed four feet in height. See also section 6.21 for visibility requirements at street intersections. 
(a)  The height of a fence or a wall shall be determined from grade to the average top elevation of the fence or wall. Landscape berms, in conjunction with fences, shall be included in height determinations. 
(b)  No fence shall impede or divert the flow of water through any drainage way without the approval of the city. 
(c)  In general, the design of fences shall be in keeping with neighborhood appearance. Fences shall be constructed of commonly used materials such as chain link, masonry, vinyl-, wrought iron, or wood. All fences except chain-link fences shall have upper and lower rails between posts. A chain-link fence shall have a top rail. Such materials as corrugated or sheet metal or any scrap or offensive material shall not be permitted. In addition, fences shall not contain any substance such as broken glass, spikes, barbs, nails, electronically charged wiring or similar materials designed to inflict pain or injury to any person or animal. 
(d)  Temporary fencing during construction is permitted and regulated in Section 98 of the Code of Ordinances. Once a building permit is closed or becomes inactive, the temporary construction fencing shall be removed. The parcel may remain without a fence or a permanent fence can be erected pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 6.16. - Lights. 
    All exterior lights from all residential and commercial buildings or other structures and uses shall be shielded and no direct source of illumination shall be visible beyond the lot line of the structure or use involved. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 6.17. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Application of standards. Performance standards shall be imposed under the following conditions: 
(1)  Any use established or changed to another use, and any building, structure, or tract of land developed, constructed, or used for any permitted or principal or accessory use shall comply with all of the performance standards. 
(2)  If any existing use or building or other structure is extended, enlarged, or reconstructed, the performance standards herein shall apply with respect to such extended, enlarged or reconstructed portion or portions of such use or building or other structures. 
(b)  Performance standards regulating noise. See Chapter 46, Article IV, of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Performance standards regulating vibration. See applicable city, county, state and federal codes. 
(d)  Performance standards regulating smoke and other particulate matter. See Chapter 46 of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances and applicable County, State and federal codes. 
(e)  Performance standards regulating odorous matter. See Chapter 46 of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances and applicable county, state and federal codes. 
(f)  Performance standards regulating hazardous or noxious matter: 
(1)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section: 
Hazardous matter means any solid, liquid or gaseous material, including, but not limited to, gases, vapors, dusts, fumes, mists or combinations thereof possessing properties which are inherently harmful and likely to destroy life or impair health or capable of causing injury to the well-being of persons or damage property. 
Noxious matter means any solid, liquid or gaseous material, including, but not limited to, gases, vapors, dusts, fumes, mists or combinations thereof, the emission of which is detrimental to or endangers the public health, safety, comfort, and other aspects of the general welfare, or causes damage to property. 
(2)  Control of hazardous matter. No person shall cause, let, permit, suffer or allow the emission of hazardous matter, from any source whatsoever, except in compliance with the provisions of 40 CFR Part 61. 
(3)  Control of noxious matter. Any use which produces any noxious matter shall control the emission of such matter so that no concentration of such matter, at or beyond the property line, shall be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort and other aspects of the general welfare, or cause damage to property. 
(4)  Method of identification and measurement. Identification and measurement shall be accomplished in accordance with methods approved and published by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation. 
(g)  Performance standards regulating radiation hazards. Such regulation is governed by Section 10D-56, Control of Radiation Hazards, Florida Administrative Code, administered by the Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 6.18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2004-3, § 1, adopted March 9, 2004, repealed § 6.18, which pertained to preservation areas. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 6.19. - Public and semi-public uses. 
    Public and semi-public facilities are allowable in all districts as conditional uses; however, such uses shall not exceed the acreage threshold of three acres. Any such use, alone or when added to an existing contiguous like use(s), which exceeds the three acre threshold shall require an amendment to the future land use map and a zoning change. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 6.20. - Utilities. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, it is not intended to regulate or restrict the location of utility lines, poles and related facilities, except plants or substations, nor to regulate or restrict the location of necessary drainage facilities which are part of the community drainage system. Other public utilities facilities may be permitted as conditional uses in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 6.21. - Visibility at intersections. 
    Except as provided herein, no structure or portion of any structure, including earthen berms, shall be placed or erected, no motor vehicle, trailer or equipment shall be allowed to park, stand, stop or be stored, and no vegetation taller than 24 inches in height shall be permitted to be located within the areas described below: 
(a)  Street intersections. Within 20 feet of the back of curb or pavement edge where no curb exists. (b)  Alleys. Within ten feet of the back of curb or pavement edge where no curb exists on the street with which the alley intersects. (c)  Driveways. Within ten feet of the back of curb or pavement edge where no curb exists on the street with which the driveway intersects.  
    The following illustration depicts how the visibility triangle is determined. Essentially, depending upon which of the above three intersection types is involved, the appropriate measurement is taken as shown in the drawing, and the two points most distant from the theoretical intersection of the two roadway lines are connected by a diagonal line. The shaded area on the drawing represents the determined visibility triangle. 

    Trees may be planted, with a minimum separation of 20 feet, within the above described areas provided that they are maintained as needed to ensure that no branch of the tree is nearer the ground than eight feet. In certain circumstances, the city may require greater separation for reasons of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 6.22. - Yard and measurement requirements. 
(a)  Required yards. Examples of yards are shown in the illustration on the next page. 
(b)  Encroachment of open balconies and stairs. Open balconies may be permitted to encroach into required front or rear yards a distance of three feet. Open stairs, without independent roof or overhang systems, may be permitted to encroach into any required yard a distance of three feet provided that no resulting setback shall be less than 2 feet from any property line. 
(c)  Encroachment of ornamental building components. Every part of a required front, rear and side yard shall be open from grade to the sky, unobstructed by any structure except for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features, and chimneys; provided, however, that none of the projections mentioned in this subsection shall extend into a required yard more than 12 inches. 
(d)  Encroachment of eaves. Roof eave projections with gutters shall extend no more than two feet into any required side yard. 
(e)  Front yard averaging. Prior to the adoption of this Code some existing residential structures were built with lesser front yards than are required by the district regulations herein. When new single-family or two-family residential construction is proposed on a lot fronting on a block where a majority of the existing structures have lesser front yards than are required by the district regulations, the minimum required front yard shall be the average of the yards established by the existing structures. However, no such new structure shall be permitted to have less than a ten-foot front yard under this provision. For the purposes of this section, a block is defined as a group of lots fronting along the same side of the street as the subject lot lying between the two nearest intersecting streets or waterways or combination thereof. If front yard averaging is used, paragraphs (b) and (c) do not apply. 
(f)  Determination of front yard on corner lots. On corner lots, the front yard shall be determined as the yard abutting the street on which each lot of record or lots of record involved have their lesser dimension. The other yard abutting the intersecting street shall be determined to be a secondary front yard. 

(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, adopted Feb. 27, 2018, amended § 6.22, and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Yards and measurement of required yards" to "Yard and measurement requirements," as set out herein. 
Sec. 6.23. - Docks. 
    It is the intent of the city, together with the Pinellas County Water and Navigation Control Authority, to regulate the construction of residential and commercial dock facilities in order to minimize the adverse impacts of such activities upon the natural resources of the City of St. Pete Beach, Pinellas County and the State of Florida. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to build, construct, repair or alter any dock or part thereof in the city without conforming to this section. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to raze, alter, move, repair or build upon any dock or any part thereof except according to this section. 
(b)  Specifications and materials. All docks, boat lifts, tie poles and attendant structures shall be constructed in accordance with and in conformity to this section and the requirements of the Pinellas County Water and Navigation Control Authority. All materials used in the construction of such structure shall likewise conform to the requirements of any city, county, state and federal agency having jurisdiction. 
(c)  General requirements. 
(1)  No dock or wharf, pier or other structure contemplated by this section shall be enclosed or covered by any means, either permanent or temporary. 
(2)  The height of a docking facility (except openwork, railings, pilings, flag or signal poles and boat davits) shall not exceed 12 inches in height from the seawall or natural grade level to which it abuts, except when state or federal regulations require additional height. 
(3)  All dock lighting shall comply with section 6.16. 
(4)  Permits for docks shall be issued only for properties upon which a principal structure exists or upon which a building permit for the principal structures has been issued and the structure is substantially completed. 
(5)  No building shall be permitted to be constructed over the waters of the county. 
(6)  No dock structure or tie pole shall be allowed to project in the navigable portion of a waterway more than 25 percent of the width of the waterway. 
(7)  No dock shall extend outward into the water from the seawall, mean or ordinary high water line more than 300 feet. 
(8)  No portion of a docking facility shall encroach closer than 150 feet to the centerline of the Intracoastal Waterway. 
(9)  Docks may be provided with electric or water utilities, provided no residential dock shall be served by separately metered utility service. 
(10)  Submittal of all application information required by the Pinellas County Water and Navigation Control Authority Regulations, as appropriate. 
(11)  Minimum construction specifications as required by the Pinellas County Water and Navigation Control Authority. 
(12)  All application for docks shall be completed pursuant to paragraphs (10) and (11) above and shall be submitted to the city for approval prior to submission to the Pinellas County Water and Navigation Control Authority for permit. 
(d)  Additional requirements for residential docks. In addition to the preceding general requirements, residential docks shall adhere to the following: 
(1)  No residential dock shall be designed or constructed to accommodate more than two boats for permanent mooring. No residential zoning lot shall have more than one dock. For the purpose of this section, personal watercraft (wave runners or jet skis) lifts shall not be considered a boat slip. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the preceding, a residential dock for the joint use by two or more adjacent waterfront property owners may be permitted where the physical characteristics of the waterfront make it impractical to build individual docks. 
(3)  No residential dock, davits, boatlifts or tie poles shall extend from the mean high water line or seawall of the appurtenant upland property to a length greater than one-half the width of the zoning lot at the waterfront. This requirement may be varied administratively provided that signed statements of "no objection" from both adjacent waterfront property owners have been submitted. 
(4)  Residential dock, davits, boatlifts or tie poles shall be located within the center one-half of the width of the appurtenant upland property at the waterfront. For the purpose of this regulation, side lot lines of a lot shall be deemed to extend into the adjacent water body perpendicular to the shoreline which they intersect. This requirement may be varied administratively provided that a signed statement of "no objection" from the property owner encroached upon has been submitted with the permit application. 
(e)  Additional requirements for commercial docks. A commercial dock shall be permitted only as a conditional use. In addition to the requirements of Division 4, the following standards shall be met prior to the issuance of any development order for any commercial docking facility by the city: 
(1)  The applicant shall demonstrate that the waterfront use is in compliance with this Code or can be brought into compliance to accommodate both the current use and the proposed dock, as it relates to parking, drainage, utilities and other facilities necessitated by the development. This provision shall also apply to a property which is already developed with docking facilities and where the owner wishes to add ancillary facilities; 
(2)  All commercial dock installations must be consistent with the zoning of the adjacent upland property; 
(3)  Commercial docking facilities constructed in the waters of the county shall be constructed so that the width of such facilities shall not exceed 75 percent of the width of the property at the waterfront and shall be further constructed so that the length of the facility shall not extend from the mean high water line or seawall of the property further than 75 percent of the width of the property at the waterfront; 
(4)  All docking facilities must be so located that no portion of the proposed facility is closer to either adjacent extended property line than ten percent of the property width at the waterfront; 
(5)  Commercial docks abutting adjacent waterfront residential property must be set back a minimum of one-third of the applicant's waterfront property width from the adjacent waterfront residential property. This requirement may be waived administratively provided that signed statements of "no objection" from the affected property owners has been submitted; 
(6)  Would have a detrimental effect on the use of such waters for navigation, transportation, recreational or other public purposes and public conveniences; 
(7)  Would have a material adverse effect upon the natural beauty and recreational advantages of the city; 
(8)  Would have a material adverse effect upon the conservation of wildlife, marine life, and other natural resources, including beaches and shores, so as to be contrary to the public interest; 
(9)  Would have a material adverse effect upon the uplands surrounding or necessarily affected by such plan or development; or 
(10)  Would have a material adverse effect on the safety, health and welfare of the general public. 
(f)  Dock repairs. 
(1)  All dock repairs, including repairs to or replacement of permitted boat lifts, shall require a permit from the city, unless otherwise provided in this subsection. 
(2)  Replacement of deck boards, only, on a residential dock shall not require the issuance of a permit from the city. All deck boards shall meet the minimum construction criteria as required by the Pinellas County Water and Navigation Control Authority. 
(3)  Residential dock owners shall be permitted to repair or replace residential docks in the same size and configuration as the original permitted dock. A copy of the original county permits and drawings shall be submitted with the permit application. If original county permits cannot be provided, then the application will be reviewed as if it were a new dock permit request. This provision shall supersede requirements for nonconforming structures provided for elsewhere in the Code. 
(g)  Disrepair or dilapidated docks. If any dock falls into a state of disrepair and becomes a dangerous structure, creating risks to the safety and well-being of the community or individual members thereof, the entire structure shall either be removed or repaired so as to conform to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2007-41, §§ 2, 3, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 2011-18, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Sec. 6.24. - Outdoor dining and outdoor drinking areas. 
    A full or limited service restaurant may establish an outdoor dining area and a bar/lounge may establish an outdoor drinking area pursuant to the requirements of this section or as outlined within each zoning district. If an outdoor drinking and/or dining area is required to obtain conditional use approval as outlined in the zoning districts herein, it shall be pursuant to the review and approval procedures provided under Division 4 of this Code. If public consumption of alcohol is proposed to occur on any public street, sidewalk or private sand beach area in connection with the outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area, approval by the city commission is required pursuant to Chapter 6 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  All outdoor dining and outdoor drinking areas located on private property shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  A landscape buffer and opaque wall or fence constructed at the maximum height allowed by this Code shall be required along the lot line of any yard containing an outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area when the lot line of said yard adjoins a property that is occupied by a residential use to effectively screen and mitigate external impacts as determined through the conditional use permitting process. 
b.  Outside food and beverage consumption shall not extend beyond the permitted area. 
c.  No outdoor food preparation is permitted. 
d.  Suitable protective barriers shall be installed when an outdoor dining area or outdoor drinking area is located adjacent to a vehicular use area as determined by the building official. 
e.  Upon the issuance of a tropical storm or hurricane warning, all tables, chairs and other equipment shall be securely stored inside. 
(2)  In addition to the above requirements, the following requirements shall be met for outdoor dining or outdoor drinking areas located within city-owned public right(s)-of-way: 
a.  Outdoor dining or outdoor drinking areas shall only be authorized when adjoining sidewalk has a continuous minimum width of eight feet unless the Technical Review Committee determines that the area can be reasonably accommodated by a narrower sidewalk width. 
b.  A minimum four feet of contiguous and unobstructed corridor space must be maintained at all times to ensure a clear pedestrian passageway. The pedestrian passageway shall be a straight line, parallel to the building face and curb line, for the entire length of the outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area. 
c.  The outdoor dining or drinking area shall not extend beyond the sidewalk frontage of the associated business establishment unless otherwise approved by the city commission. 
d.  All furnishings shall be of good design and made of quality materials and be maintained in a clean and attractive appearance and shall be in good repair at all times. 
e.  In addition to suitable protective barriers being installed, the interior perimeter around the outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area may be delineated using nonpermanent fixtures such as planters, decorative chains or other fixtures no less than thirty (30) inches and no greater than forty-two (42) inches in height as may be approved by the building official. 
f.  City commission approval is required for public consumption of alcoholic beverages within public rights-of-way pursuant to Chapter 6 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Required Permit. A Conditional use permit application shall be made to the city. The permit application, in addition to the conditional use application requirements provided under Division 4 of this Code, shall specifically include the following information: 
(1)  Survey. 
(2)  Site plan depicting the proposed outdoor dining area or outdoor drinking area drawn to scale. The plan shall include the following information: 
a.  Total square footage of the proposed outdoor dining area or outdoor drinking area. 
b.  Number and placement of all seating/table arrangements and other elements. 
c.  Distances between each seating/table arrangement, providing pedestrian clearance as required by the Florida Building Code and Florida Life Safety Code. 
d.  All points of egress. 
e.  Locations of signs prohibiting the removal of alcohol from the premises. 
f.  For tenants as applicants, a letter of authorization from the property owner. 
(3)  Occupant load of principal business. 
(4)  Number of existing men's and women's bathrooms and fixtures. 
(5)  Copy of applicant's liquor license(s). 
(c)  Insurance and indemnification. For outdoor dining or outdoor drinking areas using public right(s)-of-way, the following is required: 
(1)  By the use of any permit granted under this section, the operator agrees to indemnify, defend, save and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all claims, liability, lawsuits, damages and causes of action which may arise out of the use of the public right(s)-of-way. The operator shall enter into a written agreement with the city to evidence this indemnification. Such agreement must have the written approval of the city attorney prior to issuance of a permit. 
(2)  The operator shall show evidence of: 
a.  Comprehensive general liability insurance on an "occurrence" basis in an amount not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit bodily injury liability and property damage liability. The city is to be specifically included as additional insured on the policy. 
b.  Workers Compensation insurance applicable to its employees, if any, for statutory coverage limits in compliance with Florida laws, including employers' liability which meets all state and federal laws. 
(3)  The operator shall provide the city with the certificate(s) of insurance evidencing required coverages. Current certified copies of such required coverages shall be provided to the city when specifically requested in writing. 
(4)  All policies of insurance must be endorsed to provide the city with 30 days of notice of cancellation or restriction. 
(d)  Revocation of permit. The city may revoke a permit for an outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area if it is found that: 
(1)  Any necessary business or health permit has been suspended or revoked; or 
(2)  Changing conditions of pedestrian or vehicular traffic cause congestion necessitating removal of the outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area when located within public right(s)-of-way. Such decision shall be based on the findings of the Technical Review Committee that the existing conditions represent a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public and cannot be resolved through modification to the outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area layout; or 
(3)  The operator fails to comply with one or more requirements of the conditional use permit. 
(e)  Removal or relocation of outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area and all related furnishings for right(s)-of-way repairs, emergency situations, or matters of public safety. 
(1)  As necessitated by right(s)-of-way repairs, the city may require the temporary removal of outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area and all related furnishings. The operator shall be responsible for removing all furnishings at least 24 hours prior to the date identified in writing by the city. The city shall not be responsible for any costs associated with the removal or the return and installation of such furnishings. 
(2)  The city may cause the immediate removal or relocation of all or any part of the outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area occupying public right(s)-of-way in emergency situations. The city, its officers, agents and employees shall not be responsible for any damages or loss of furnishings used in association with an outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area relocated during emergency situations and shall not be responsible for any costs associated with the removal or the return and installation of any such furnishings. 
(3)  The city shall have the authority to secure or remove any furnishing(s) associated with the outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area occupying public right(s)-of-way if necessary in the interest of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 2, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 5, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-21, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 2015, amended § 6.24, and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Outdoor seating for existing restaurants" to "Outdoor dining and outdoor drinking areas," as set out herein. 
Sec. 6.25. - Mobile food establishment. 
    It is a violation to vend any product from a mobile food truck at any location except in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(a)  Vehicle requirements. A mobile food truck shall not be used for vending a product unless the vehicle has been designed and constructed specifically for such purpose. The mobile food truck shall be licensed in accordance with the rules and regulations of any local, state and federal agency having jurisdiction over the mobile food truck or products sold therein. 
(b)  Insurance requirements. 
(1)  Operating in rights-of-way. The permittee, owner or operator shall at all times maintain any insurance which the city determines to be necessary, which may include but is not limited to, general liability insurance, commercial automobile liability insurance, worker's compensation insurance, and environmental liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Florida, in the amounts established by the city which shall be reasonable, based on industry standards and the risk determined to exist. The insurance policy shall be in occurrence form and the City of St. Pete Beach shall be named as an additional insured on the certificate of insurance. The permittee, owner or operator shall furnish the city with a certificate of insurance which shall be accepted by the city only after approval by the city commission. The permittee, owner or operator shall notify the city within three (3) business days of any changes in the insurance coverage. Upon the cancellation or lapse of any policy of insurance as required by this section, the permit shall be immediately revoked unless, prior to the expiration or cancellation date of the insurance policy, another insurance policy meeting all the requirements of the city is obtained and a new certificate of insurance is provided to the city. 
(2)  Operating in all other locations, not in rights-of-way. A mobile food truck shall obtain at a minimum, the insurance as required by any local, state or federal laws and regulations. 
(3)  City issued permit (as defined herein). In addition to the insurance requirements set forth in this section, a mobile food truck shall obtain any additional insurance which may be required to obtain a city issued permit (as defined herein). 
(c)  Open flame cooking. Open flame cooking is prohibited; except that such activity may take place if permitted by the city fire marshal. 
(d)  Noise limitations. Amplified music shall be prohibited; any other sounds from any mobile food truck shall comply with the noise requirements of the city. 
(e)  Waste collection. The operator shall provide a waste receptacle for public use within 100 feet of the truck. The area shall be kept neat and orderly at all times and garbage or trash shall be removed daily. 
(f)  Improved surface. Food trucks shall only operate from and be located on an improved surface at least 5 feet off the public right-of-way. 
(g)  Signage. All signage must comply with the sign section of the Land Development Code. In no case shall "A-frame" signs be permitted. 
(h)  Alcohol sales. Mobile food trucks are prohibited from selling alcoholic beverages, except as may be specifically allowed by a city issued permit in conjunction with a special event. 
(i)  Business tax receipt. A mobile food establishment permit is issued concurrent with the business tax receipt (BTR) confirmation. If an applicant is a resident of the City of St. Pete Beach, they will be required to obtain a BTR from the city. 
(j)  Restroom facility. Class I mobile food trucks operating at a site for a duration of more than three (3) hours shall have a written agreement, available upon request by the city, which confirms that employees have access to a flushable restroom within 150 feet of the vending location during the hours of operation. 
(k)  Grease disposal. Class I mobile food trucks shall have a current written agreement for the proper disposal of grease, available upon request by the city. 
(l)  Location. The vending of products from a Class I mobile food truck on public rights-of-way shall be prohibited unless in conjunction with a special event permit. The vending of products from a Class I mobile food truck on private lands shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Private property. The vending of products from a Class I mobile food truck on private property, in conjunction with an established business is permitted only as a conditional use in zoning districts of the city as outlined herein. 
(2)  Vacant property. Operation of a Class I mobile food truck is prohibited on vacant and unimproved property. 
(3)  Permission. A Class I mobile food truck shall have the written permission of the owner of the property on which it is located. Such written permission shall accompany application for the mobile food truck permit. 
(4)  Frequency. Except as may be allowed as part of a special event permit, mobile food trucks are permitted on each property, a maximum of no more than three (3) days per calendar week. Class I mobile food trucks may operate at different locations as allowed herein. 
(5)  Maximum number of mobile food trucks. No more than two (2) mobile food trucks shall operate on any property at any one (1) time, except as may be allowed by a special event permit. 
(6)  Parking. Mobile food trucks shall not be required to provide additional parking on the principal business site. If a mobile food truck parks in a principal business required off-street provided space(s), then the principal business shall provide evidence, in the form of a site plan indicating that on-street parking exists within 800 feet of the establishment. 
(7)  Access. A Class I mobile food truck shall not be placed in any location that impedes the ingress or egress or building entrances or emergency exits. 
(8)  Hours of operation. Class I mobile food trucks shall be permitted to operate after 7:00 a.m. and before 10 p.m. The request for extended hours must be reviewed and approved by the city subject to the criteria contained in the application. 
(9)  Power. Power for all Class I mobile food trucks will be evaluated on a case by case basis during the conditional use process but in no case shall a generator be used within 200 feet of a residential district. 
(m)  CUP expiration. The conditional use permit shall automatically expire if the principal business does not hold a valid business tax receipt from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, § 1, 11-28-17) 
DIVISION 7 - INTRODUCTION TO DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 7.1. - Zoning districts established. 
    In order to carry out the purpose and intent of this Code, the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
Residential Districts 
RU-1 Residential District 
RU-2 Residential District 
RLM-1 Residential District 
RLM-2 Residential District 
RM Residential District 
Mixed Use Districts 
ROR Residential/Office/Retail District 
RFM Resort Facilities Medium District 
Commercial Districts 
CG-1 Commercial District 
CG-2 Commercial District 
Special Purpose Districts 
INS Institutional District 
R/OS Recreation Open Space District 
TU Transportation/Utility District 
P Preservation District (see Division 27) 
Overlay Districts 
PAG Pass-a-Grille Overlay District 
RFO Resort Facilities Overlay District 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2004-3, § 2, 3-9-04) 
Sec. 7.2. - Official zoning map and general regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the official zoning map is to set forth the boundaries of the zoning districts established in this Code. 
(b)  Official zoning map. The location and boundaries of the districts established by this Code are described on the official zoning map of the city, which together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Code as if they were fully described herein. 
(c)  Maintenance of map. The official zoning map, as amended from time to time in accordance with the provisions of section 3.9(b) shall be kept on file and made available for public reference in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Application of regulations within boundaries. Except as otherwise specifically provided, a district symbol or name shown within district boundaries on the official zoning map indicates that district regulations pertaining to the district extend throughout the area surrounded by the boundary line. 
(e)  Interpretation of boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines as they exist on the ground, except where variation of actual location from mapped location would change the zoning status of a zoning lot, in which case the boundary shall be interpreted in such a manner as to avoid changing the zoning status of any zoning lot. Should a street or alley be vacated or closed, the boundary line shall be construed as remaining in its location, except where ownership of the vacated street or alley is divided other than at the center, in which case the boundary line shall be construed as moving with the ownership. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines, public property lines, and the like shall be construed as following such lines; provided that, where such boundaries are adjacent to a street or alley and the zoning status of the street or alley is not indicated, the boundaries shall be construed as running to the middle of the street or alley. Should a street or alley be vacated or closed, interpretation shall be as provided in paragraph (1) of this section. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines or centerlines of other bodies of water or indicated as following official bulkhead lines shall be construed as following such shorelines, centerlines or official bulkhead lines. In the case of a change in shoreline or of the course or extent of bodies of water, the boundaries shall be construed as moving with the change. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following physical features other than those mentioned above shall be construed as following such physical features, except where variation of actual location from mapped location would change the zoning status of a zoning lot. In such case, the boundary shall be interpreted to avoid changing the zoning status of any zoning lot. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in paragraphs (1) through (5) of this section shall be construed as being parallel to or extensions of such features. 
(7)  Where a district boundary divides the area of a zoning lot unequally and the zoning lot is less than one acre in area, the district classification and regulation of the larger portion shall apply to the remaining smaller portion of the lot. 
(8)  If any further uncertainty exists, the appropriate board of authority shall interpret the intent of the map as to location of such boundaries. 
(f)  Exclusive nature of this Code. 
(1)  Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, this Code shall be deemed exclusive in nature, and only those uses specified shall be permitted in the various zoning districts. If a use is not specified in a zoning district, it shall be prohibited in that district. In the event that a use is not permitted in any zoning district, it may only be permitted after appropriate amendment to the text of this Code. 
(2)  Further, when any defined use, condition or activity is permitted in a district subject to restrictions, such use, condition, or activity is prohibited if it is being conducted in violation of those restrictions. 
(g)  Interpretation when more than one regulation or standard applies. When more than one regulation or standard applies to any use, structure, activity or undertaking subject to any provision of this Code, the most restrictive or stringent regulation or standard shall govern. 
(h)  Access. 
(1)  Every building hereafter erected or relocated shall be on a zoning lot that abuts a public street. Except, residential flag zoning lots may gain their access via a private driveway easement. All structures shall be so located on zoning lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking. No dwelling shall be erected on a zoning lot or portion of a zoning lot that does not abut on at least one public street, private driveway easement, or approved private street for at least 20 feet. 
(2)  No land which is residentially zoned shall be used for driveway, walkway or access purposes to any land which is non-residentially zoned or used for any purpose not permitted in a residential district, except for ingress and egress to an existing use which does not abut on a street. 
(i)  Corner zoning lots. In the case of corner zoning lots in residential districts, a front yard of the required depth shall be provided on one frontage and a required secondary front yard shall be provided on the other. 
(j)  Reduction of lot area. No zoning lot, lot of record, parcel, or yard existing on the effective date of this Code, shall thereafter be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this Code, except by reason of a portion being acquired for public use in any manner, including dedication, condemnation, purchase and other similar situations. Zoning lots or yards created after the effective date of this Code shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Code. 
(k)  Height limitations. The height limitations contained in the regulations pertaining to specific districts do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, personal television antennae, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, elevator shaft enclosures, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. In addition, the height limitations, except as provided in the PAG Pass-a-Grille Overlay District, shall not apply to non-habitable architectural features extending no more than ten feet above the eave line of a roof. Provided, however, that the heights of the above-cited structures or appurtenances thereto shall not exceed any height limitations prescribed by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(l)  Required yard or open space. No part of a required yard or other required open space or off-street parking or off-street loading space provided in connection with one structure or use shall be included as meeting the requirements of any other structure or use, except where specific provision is made in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 7.3. - Use of two or more zoning lots, lots of record or parcels to satisfy zoning requirements. 
(a)  Two or more contiguous lots of record, parcels, or zoning lots under the same ownership may be used to satisfy zoning requirements (such as zoning lot size, required yards, parking, etc.) only after either a consolidation or boundary adjustment plat has been approved and recorded eliminating the common, internal lot line(s), provided that this provision shall not operate to conflict with subsection (b) below. 
(b)  For shopping centers, office parks, mixed-use condominiums and other mixed-use projects, condominium/hotel projects, and recreational club/condominium projects developed as a single project, but which include zoning lots under separate ownership subsequent to, or in conjunction with the development of the project, the design standards for parking, setbacks, zoning lot coverage, open space, etc. may be satisfied by all of the property included within the project. In such event, permanent easements shall be noted on the approved site plan, and covenants recorded in the public records providing for the joint use and maintenance of such items as parking, utilities, open space, etc. Such easements and covenants shall be approved as to form by the city attorney and shall not be changed without prior approval by the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 7.4. - Establishment of minimum building finished floor elevations. 
    The minimum finished floor elevation for all new or relocated structures, and any structure being restored, renovated or improved such that the new construction is subject to the substantial improvement rules shall be at an elevation to be determined by the city based upon the applicable local, state and federal flood hazard mitigation requirements. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 7.5. - Regulations pertaining to specific zoning districts. 
    The regulations and requirements for each zoning district listed in section 7.1 are enumerated in Divisions 8 through 21. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 7.6. - Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities, prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibition . Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities are prohibited and shall not be located within the boundaries of the city. The city shall not accept, process or approve any request or application for a development order, building permit or other approval pertaining to or associated with a proposed medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facility. 
(b)  Definition . The term "medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facility" shall mean any facility where medical marijuana or any product derived therefrom is dispensed. 
(c)  Interpretation . This section and the terms used herein shall be interpreted in accordance with Florida Statutes and the Florida Administrative Code. The intent of this section is to ban medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities from being located within the boundaries of the city as authorized by Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 2, 6-12-18) 
DIVISION 8 - RU-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 8.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The RU-1 Residential District is intended for single-family residential areas designated within the RU Residential Urban land use category on the future land use maps. Certain other structures and uses required to serve governmental, religious and non-commercial recreational needs of such areas may be permitted, subject to restrictions and requirements intended to preserve the character of such district. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 8.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the RU-1 Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Residential dwellings -Detached single-family only. Such dwellings shall not be used for transient occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 2, 8-24-04) 
Sec. 8.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in section 6.13 of this Code, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures, do not involve the conduct of a business, and are not of a nature prohibited under section 8.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Residential docks, including tie poles, in conformance with the provisions of section 6.23 and other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county or state. 
(d)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 8.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the RU-1 Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Recreational-Public parks and/or recreational facilities. 
(b)  Schools, public. 
(c)  Utility substations and/or rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 8.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the RU-1 Residential District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the RU-1 Residential District. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 8.6. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
    The maximum residential density permitted in the RU-1 Residential District shall not exceed 7.5 units per acre. The minimum lot area and width requirements in the RU-1 Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(1)  Lot area: 7,000 square feet. 
(2)  Lot width: 70 feet. 
(b)  All other uses. The lot area and width requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Lot area: 7,000 square feet. 
(2)  Lot width: 70 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 8.7. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    The minimum yard requirements for principal structures in the RU-1 Residential District are as required in this section. 
(a)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: 20 feet. 
(3)  Side yards: The lesser of ten percent of the lot width or seven feet. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(b)  All other uses. The yard requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: 20 feet. 
(3)  Side yards: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 8.8. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height for all structures shall be 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 8.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 8.10. - Landscaping required. 
    All uses shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of division 22 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 8.11. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: 0.40. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 8.12. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    The lot area used in the calculation of the maximum impervious surface ratio shall exclude any portion of the property lying Gulfward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for residential uses: 0.70. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for non-residential uses: 0.65. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
DIVISION 9 - RU-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 9.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The RU-2 Residential District is intended for single-family residential areas designated within the RU Residential Urban land use category on the future land use maps. Certain other structures and uses required to serve governmental, religious and non-commercial recreational needs of such areas may be permitted, subject to restrictions and requirements intended to preserve the character of such district. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 9.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the RU-2 Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Residential dwellings -Detached single-family only. Such dwellings shall not be used for transient occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 3, 8-24-04) 
Sec. 9.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in section 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures, do not involve the conduct of a business, and are not of a nature prohibited under section 9.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Residential docks, including tie poles, in conformance with the provisions of section 6.23 and other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county or state. 
(d)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11, Supplemental Regulations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 9.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the RU-2 Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Recreational-Public parks and/or recreational facilities. 
(b)  Schools, public. 
(c)  Utility substations and/or rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 9.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the RU-2 Residential District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the RU-2 Residential District. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 9.6. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
    The maximum residential density permitted in the RU-2 Residential District shall not exceed seven and one-half units per acre. The minimum lot area and width requirements in the RU-2 Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(1)  Lot area: 6,000 square feet. 
(2)  Lot width: 60 feet. 
(b)  All other uses. The lot area and width requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Lot area: 6,000 square feet. 
(2)  Lot width: 60 feet 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 9.7. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    The minimum yard requirements for principal structures in the RU-2 Residential District are as required in this section. 
(a)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: Ten feet. 
(3)  Side yards: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(b)  All other uses. The yard requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: Ten feet. 
(3)  Side yards: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 9.8. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height for all structures shall be 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 9.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 9.10. - Landscaping required. 
    All uses shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of division 22 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 9.11. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: 0.40. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 9.12. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    The lot area used in the calculation of the maximum impervious surface ratio shall exclude any portion of the property lying Gulfward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for residential uses: 0.70. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for non-residential uses: 0.65. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
DIVISION 10 - RLM-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 10.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The RLM-1 Residential District is intended for single-family residential areas designated within the RLM Residential Low Medium land use category on the future land use maps. Certain other structures and uses required to serve governmental, religious and non-commercial recreational needs of such areas may be permitted, subject to restrictions and requirements intended to preserve the character of such district. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 10.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the RLM-1 Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Residential dwellings -Detached single-family only. Such dwellings shall not be used for transient occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 4, 8-24-04) 
Sec. 10.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in section 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures, do not involve the conduct of a business, and are not of a nature prohibited under section 10.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Residential docks, including tie poles, in conformance with the provisions of section 6.23 and other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county or state. 
(d)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 10.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the RLM-1 Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Recreational-Public parks and/or recreational facilities. 
(b)  Schools, public. 
(c)  Utility substations and/or rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 10.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the RLM-1 Residential District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the RLM-1 Residential District. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 10.6. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
    The maximum residential density in the RLM-1 Residential District shall not exceed ten units per acre. The minimum lot area and width requirements in the RLM-1 Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(1)  Lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(b)  All other uses. The lot area and width requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 10.7. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    The minimum yard requirements for principal structures in the RLM-1 Residential District are as required in this section. 
(a)  Residential dwellings-Detached single-family dwellings. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: Ten feet. 
(3)  Side yards: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(b)  All other uses. The yard requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: Ten feet. 
(3)  Side yards: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 10.8. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height for all structures shall be 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 10.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 10.10. - Landscaping required. 
    All uses shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of division 22 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 10.11. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: 0.40. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 10.12. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    The lot area used in the calculation of the maximum impervious surface ratio shall exclude any portion of the property lying Gulfward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for residential uses: 0.70. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for non-residential uses: 0.75. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
DIVISION 11 - RLM-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 11.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The RLM-2 Residential District is intended for mixed residential areas designated within the RLM Residential Low Medium land use category on the future land use maps. Certain other structures and uses required to serve governmental, religious and non-commercial recreational needs of such areas may be permitted, subject to restrictions and requirements intended to preserve the character of such district. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 11.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the RLM-2 Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Residential dwellings -Detached single-family, multifamily and two-family. Such dwellings shall not be used for transient occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 5, 8-24-04) 
Sec. 11.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in section 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures, do not involve the conduct of a business, and are not of a nature prohibited under section 11.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Residential and Class B commercial docks, including tie poles, in conformance with the provisions of section 6.23 and other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county or state. 
(d)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11, Supplemental Regulations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 1(Exh. A), 2-26-13) 
Sec. 11.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the RLM-2 Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Recreational-Public parks and/or recreational facilities. 
(b)  Schools, public. 
(c)  Utility substations and/or rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 11.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the RLM-2 Residential District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the RLM-2 Residential District. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 11.6. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
    The maximum residential density permitted in the RLM-2 Residential District shall not exceed ten units per acre. The minimum lot area and width requirements in the RLM-2 Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(1)  Lot area: 4,400 square feet. 
(2)  Lot width: 40 feet. 
(b)  Multifamily and two-family dwellings. 
(1)  Lot area: 4,356 square feet for each dwelling unit. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(c)  All other uses. The lot area and width requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Lot area: 4,400 square feet. 
(2)  Lot width: 40 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 11.7. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    The minimum yard requirements for principal structures in the RLM-2 Residential District are as required in this section. 
(a)  Residential dwellings. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: Ten feet. 
(3)  Side yards: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(b)  All other uses. The yard requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: Ten feet. 
(3)  Side yards: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 11.8. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height for all structures shall be 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 11.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 11.10. - Landscaping required. 
    All uses shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of division 22 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 11.11. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: 0.40. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 11.12. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    The lot area used in the calculation of the maximum impervious surface ratio shall exclude any portion of the property lying Gulfward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for residential uses: 0.70. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for non-residential uses: 0.75. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
DIVISION 12 - RM RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 12.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The RM Residential District is intended for residential areas designated within the RM Residential Medium land use category on the future land use maps. Certain other structures and uses required to serve governmental, religious and non-commercial recreational needs of such areas may be permitted, subject to restrictions and requirements intended to preserve the character of such district. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 12.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the RM Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Residential dwellings -Attached and detached single-family, multifamily and two-family. Such dwellings may be used for transient occupancy, so long as any transient occupancy of less than 30 days does not occur more than three times in any 12-month period on any parcel. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 6, 8-24-04) 
Sec. 12.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures, do not involve the conduct of a business, and are not of a nature prohibited under section 12.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Residential and Class B commercial docks, including tie poles, in conformance with the provisions of section 6.23 and other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county or state. 
(d)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 1(Exh. A), 2-26-13) 
Sec. 12.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the RM Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Assisted living facilities. 
(b)  Daycare center/kindergarten. 
(c)  Recreational-Public parks and/or recreational facilities. 
(d)  Schools, public or private. 
(e)  Utility substations and/or rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 1(Exh. A), 2-26-13) 
Sec. 12.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the RM Residential District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the RM Residential District. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 12.6. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
    The maximum residential density permitted in the RM Residential District shall not exceed 15 units per acre. The minimum lot area and width requirements in the RM Residential District are as follows: 
(a)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(1)  Lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(b)  Attached single-family, multifamily and two-family. 
(1)  Lot area: 2,904 square feet for each dwelling unit. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(c)  All other uses. The lot area and width requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 12.7. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    The minimum yard requirements for principal structures in the RM Residential District are as required in this section. No structures shall be permitted seaward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
(a)  Residential dwellings. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: Ten feet. 
(3)  Side yard: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(5)  A minimum of 30 percent of the total required yard areas shall be maintained as green space. 
(b)  All other uses. The yard requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary side yard: Ten feet. 
(3)  Side yard: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 12.8. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height for all structures shall be 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 12.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 12.10. - Landscaping required. 
    All uses shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of division 22 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 12.11. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: 0.50. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 12.12. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    The lot area used in the calculation of the maximum impervious surface ratio shall exclude any portion of the property lying Gulfward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for residential uses: 0.70. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for non-residential uses: 0.75. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 12.13. - Other standards. 
    Residential equivalent uses shall not exceed an equivalent of 2.0 to 3.0 beds per permitted dwelling unit at 15 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08) 
DIVISION 13 - ROR RESIDENTIAL/OFFICE/RETAIL DISTRICT 

Sec. 13.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The ROR Residential/Office/Retail District is intended for mixed use areas designated within the ROR Residential/Office/Retail land use category on the future land use maps. Certain other structures and uses required to serve governmental, religious and non-commercial recreational needs of such areas may be permitted, subject to restrictions and requirements intended to preserve the character of such district. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 13.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the ROR Residential/Office/Retail District are as follows: 
(a)  Clubs, community service. 
(b)  Eating and drinking establishments-Sit-down restaurant only. 
(c)  Financial institutions without drive-through service. 
(d)  Laundries, self-service. 
(e)  Offices. 
(f)  Printing and copying services. 
(g)  Residential dwellings-Attached single-family, detached single-family, multifamily and two-family. 
(h)  Retail sales. 
(i)  Social service agencies. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 13.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited under section 13.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Residential docks, including tie poles, in conformance with the provisions of section 6.23 and other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county or state. 
(d)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 13.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the ROR Residential/Office/Retail District are as follows: 
(a)  Assisted living facilities. 
(b)  Places of worship. 
(c)  Commercial developments with a gross square footage of greater than 25,000. 
(d)  Communications facilities. 
(e)  Daycare centers/kindergartens. 
(f)  Docks, commercial-Class C only. 
(g)  Eating and drinking establishment-Bar (cocktail lounge, saloon); restaurant, outdoor. 
(h)  Laundries, dry cleaning. 
(i)  Parking lots, off-premises. 
(j)  Recreational-Public parks and/or recreational facilities. 
(k)  Schools, public or private. 
(l)  Schools, commercial. 
(m)  Services, personal/business. 
(n)  Transient accommodations-Bed and breakfast inns and motels only. 
(o)  Utility substations and/or rights-of-way. 
(p)  Veterinarians. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2004-34, § 2, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 13.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the ROR Residential/Office/Retail District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the ROR Residential/Office/ Retail District. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 13.6. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
    The maximum residential or transient accommodation densities permitted in the ROR Residential/Office/Retail District shall not exceed 15 units per acre. The minimum lot area and width requirements in the ROR Residential/Office/Retail District are as follows: 
(a)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(1)  Lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(b)  Attached single-family, multifamily and two-family dwellings and transient accommodation facilities. 
(1)  Lot area: 2,904 square feet for each dwelling unit or transient accommodation unit, pursuant to section 6.6 of this Code. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(c)  All other uses. The lot area and width requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards: however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Lot area: 5,000 square feet, pursuant to section 6.6 of this Code. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 13.7. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    The minimum yard requirements for principal structures in the ROR Residential/Office/Retail District are as required in this section. No structures shall be permitted seaward of the city's coastal construction setback line. 
(a)  Residential dwellings and transient accommodation uses. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: Ten feet. 
(3)  Side yard: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(5)  A minimum of 30 percent of the total required yard areas shall be maintained as green space. 
(b)  All other uses. The yard requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: Ten feet. 
(3)  Side yard: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 13.8. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height for all structures shall be 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 13.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 13.10. - Landscaping required. 
    All uses shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of division 22 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 13.11. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: 0.40. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 13.12. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    The lot area used in the calculation of the maximum impervious surface ratio shall exclude any portion of the property lying Gulfward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for residential and transient accommodation uses: 0.70. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for non-residential uses: 0.85. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 13.13. - Other standards. 
    Residential equivalent uses shall not exceed an equivalent of 2.0 to 3.0 beds per permitted dwelling unit at 15 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08) 
DIVISION 14 - RFM RESORT FACILITIES MEDIUM DISTRICT 

Sec. 14.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The RFM Resort Facilities Medium District is intended for areas designated within the RFM Resort Facilities Medium land use category on the Future Land Use Maps. Certain other structures and uses required to serve governmental, religious and non-commercial recreational needs of such areas may be permitted, subject to restrictions and requirements intended to preserve the character of such district. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 14.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the RFM Resort Facilities Medium District are as follows: 
(a)  Clinics. 
(b)  Clubs, community service. 
(c)  Clubs, private. 
(d)  Eating and drinking establishments-Bar (cocktail lounge, saloon) or sit-down restaurant. 
(e)  Financial institutions without drive-through service. 
(f)  Kennels without outdoor runs. 
(g)  Laundries, self-service. 
(h)  Offices. 
(i)  Printing and copying services. 
(j)  Residential dwellings-Multifamily only. 
(k)  Retail sales. 
(l)  Services, personal/business. 
(m)  Social service agencies. 
(n)  Transient accommodations-Bed and breakfast inn, hotel or motel, or resort condominium. 
(o)  Veterinarians. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 14.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited under section 14.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Docks, including tie poles, in conformance with the provisions of section 6.23 and other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county or state. 
(d)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11, Supplemental Regulations, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 14.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the RFM Resort Facilities Medium District are as follows: 
(a)  Assisted living facilities. 
(b)  Places of worship. 
(c)  Commercial developments with a gross square footage of greater than 25,000. 
(d)  Commercial water sports, non-motorized vessels of 16 feet or less in length only. 
(e)  Communications facilities. 
(f)  Daycare centers/kindergartens. 
(g)  Docks, commercial-Classes A, B and C. 
(h)  Eating and drinking establishment-fast food, beach bar and outdoor restaurant. 
(i)  Financial institutions with drive-through service. 
(j)  Laundry, dry cleaning. 
(k)  Parking lots, commercial and/or off-premises. 
(l)  Recreational-Commercial recreation; public parks and/or recreational facilities. 
(m)  Recycling centers. 
(n)  Schools-Public, private and/or commercial. 
(o)  Utility substations and/or rights-of-way. 
(p)  Vessel for hire businesses. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 2004-34, § 3, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, 5-10-09; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 14.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the RFM Resort Facilities Medium District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the RFM Resort Facilities Medium District. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 14.6. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
    The maximum residential density permitted in the RFM Resort Facilities Medium District shall not exceed 15 units per acre. The maximum transient accommodation density permitted shall not exceed 30 transient units. The minimum lot area and width requirements in the RFM Resort Facilities Medium District are as follows: 
(a)  Multi-family dwellings. 
(1)  Lot area: 2,904 square feet for each dwelling unit, pursuant to section 6.6 of this Code. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(b)  Transient accommodations. 
Hotels and motels : 
(1)  Lot area: 1,452 square feet for each hotel or motel unit, plus the required lot area determined under the requirements of section 14.11 for portions of the development allocated to retail sales, office space, restaurants, meeting or conference rooms, fitness facilities and other support facilities pursuant to section 6.6 of this Code. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
Bed and breakfast inns : See section 6.2 of this Code. 
Resort condominiums : 
(1)  Lot area: 1,452 square feet for each resort condominium unit, plus the required lot area determined under the requirements of section 14.11 for portions of the development allocated to retail sales, office space, restaurants, meeting or conference rooms, fitness facilities and other support facilities pursuant to section 6.6 of this Code. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(c)  All other uses . The lot area and width requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Lot area: 5,000 square feet, pursuant to section 6.6 of this Code. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 14.7. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    The minimum yard requirements for principal structures in the RFM Resort Facilities Medium District are as required in this section. No structures shall be permitted seaward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
(a)  Multi-family dwellings. 
(1)  Front yard: 50 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: 25 feet. 
(3)  Side yard: Ten percent of the lot width; minimum ten feet. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(5)  A minimum of 30 percent of the total required yard areas shall be maintained as green space. 
(b)  Transient accommodations facilities. 
(1)  Front yard: 50 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: 25 feet. 
(3)  Side yard: Ten percent of the lot width; minimum ten feet. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(5)  A minimum of 30 percent of the total required yard areas shall be maintained as green space. 
(c)  All other uses. The yard requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Front yard: 50 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: 25 feet. 
(3)  Side yard: Ten percent of the lot width; minimum ten feet. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 14.8. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height for all structures shall be 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 14.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 14.10. - Landscaping required. 
    All uses shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of division 22 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 14.11. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: 0.65. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 14.12. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    The lot area used in the calculation of the maximum impervious surface ratio shall exclude any portion of the property lying Gulfward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for residential and transient accommodation uses: 0.70. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for non-residential uses: 0.85. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 14.13. - Other standards. 
    Residential equivalent uses shall not exceed an equivalent of 2.0 to 3.0 beds per permitted dwelling unit at 15 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08) 
DIVISION 15 - CG-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 15.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The CG-1 Commercial District is intended for areas, except the area known as the "Corey Business District," designated within the CG Commercial General land use category on the future land use maps. Certain other structures and uses required to serve governmental and non-commercial recreational needs of such areas may be permitted, subject to restrictions and requirements intended to preserve the character of such district. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 15.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the CG-1 Commercial District are as follows: 
(a)  Automotive retail services. 
(b)  Clinics. 
(c)  Clubs, community service. 
(d)  Clubs, private. 
(e)  Eating and drinking establishments-Bar (cocktail lounge, saloon) and sit-down restaurant. 
(f)  Financial institutions without drive-through service. 
(g)  Kennels without outdoor runs. 
(h)  Laundries, self-service. 
(i)  Mortuaries. 
(j)  Offices. 
(k)  Printing and copying services. 
(l)  Retail sales. 
(m)  Services, personal/business. 
(n)  Social service agencies. 
(o)  Transient accommodations-Hotels, motels and resort condominiums only. 
(p)  Veterinarians. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 15.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited under section 15.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 15.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the CG-1 Commercial District are as follows: 
(a)  Assisted living facilities. 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishments-See also Chapter 10, St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Automotive rental agencies. 
(d)  Automotive sales lots. 
(e)  Automotive services and repairs. 
(f)  Automotive service stations. 
(g)  Boat sales and repair facilities. 
(h)  Car wash facilities. 
(i)  Commercial boat docking facilities. 
(j)  Commercial developments with a gross square footage of greater than 25,000. 
(k)  Commercial water sports, non-motorized vessels of 16 feet or less in length only. 
(l)  Communication facilities. 
(m)  Docks, commercial-Classes A, B, C, and D. 
(n)  Eating and drinking establishment-fast food restaurant, nightclub or outdoor restaurant. 
(o)  Financial institutions with drive-through services. 
(p)  Kennels with outdoor runs. 
(q)  Laundries, dry cleaning. 
(r)  Marinas. 
(s)  Parking lots, commercial and/or off-premises. 
(t)  Printing, general. 
(u)  Recreational-Commercial recreation; public parks and/or recreational facilities. 
(v)  Recycling centers. 
(w)  Schools, public or private and/or commercial. 
(x)  Services, commercial/business. 
(y)  Storage facilities with outdoor storage. 
(z)  Storage, self-service. 
(aa)  Theatres. 
(bb)  Utility substations and/or rights-of-way. 
(cc)  Vehicle for hire businesses. 
(dd)  Vessel for hire businesses. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, 5-10-09; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 15.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the CG-1 Commercial District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the CG-1 Commercial District. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 15.6. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
    The maximum transient accommodation density permitted shall not exceed 30 transient units. The minimum lot area and width requirements in the CG-1 Commercial District are as follows: 
(a)  Transient accommodations. 
Hotels and motels: 
(1)  Lot area: 1,452 square feet for each transient accommodation unit, plus the required lot area determined under the requirements of section 15.11 for portions of the development allocated to retail sales, office space, restaurants, meeting or conference rooms, fitness facilities and other support facilities pursuant to section 6.6 of this Code. 
(2)  Lot width: 100 feet. 
Resort condominiums: 
(1)  Maximum size: Each unit within a resort condominium shall be no larger than 600 square feet in area. Units larger than 600 square feet shall be counted as one unit for each 600 square feet therein or portion thereof. 
(2)  Lot area: 1,452 square feet for each resort condominium unit, plus the required lot area determined under the requirements of section 15.11 for portions of the development allocated to retail sales, office space, restaurants, meeting or conference rooms, fitness facilities and other support facilities pursuant to section 6.6 of this Code. 
(3)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(b)  All other uses. As determined by the appropriate board of authority. 
(1)  Lot area: 5,000 square feet, pursuant to section 6.6 of this Code. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 15.7. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    The minimum yard requirements for principal structures in the CG-1 Commercial District are as follows: 
(a)  Transient accommodations uses. 
(1)  Front yard: 25 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: 15 feet-applicable to property lines defining the zoning lot only. 
(3)  Side yard: Ten percent of the lot width-applicable to property lines defining the zoning lot only. 
(4)  Rear yard: 25 feet. 
(5)  A minimum of 30 percent of the total required yard areas shall be maintained as green space. 
(b)  All other uses. The yard requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Front yard: 25 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: 25 feet. 
(3)  Side yard: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 25 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 15.8. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height for all structures shall be 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 15.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 15.10. - Landscaping required. 
    All uses shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of division 22 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 15.11. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: 0.55. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 15.12. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    The lot area used in the calculation of the maximum impervious surface ratio shall exclude any portion of the property lying Gulfward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for residential and transient accommodation uses: 0.70. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for non-residential uses: 0.90. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 15.13. - Other standards. 
    Assisted living facility - Residential equivalent uses shall not exceed an equivalent of 2.0 to 3.0 beds per dwelling unit at 24 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08) 
DIVISION 16 - CG-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 16.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The CG-2 Commercial District is intended for the Corey Avenue Business District designated within the CG Commercial General land use category on the future land use maps. certain other structures and uses required to serve governmental, religious and non-commercial recreational needs of such areas may be permitted, subject to restrictions and requirements intended to preserve the character of such district. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 16.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the CG-2 Commercial District are as follows: 
(a)  Commercial kitchen. 
(b)  Eating and drinking establishments, limited-service restaurant, subject to Section 6.24 of this Code as may be applicable. 
(c)  Financial institutions without drive-through service. 
(d)  Offices. 
(e)  Printing and copying services. 
(f)  Retail sales. 
(g)  Services, personal/business. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 3, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 16.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures, do not involve the conduct of a business, and are not of a nature prohibited under section 16.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 16.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the CG-2 Commercial District are as follows: 
(a)  Adult entertainment establishments-See also Chapter 10, St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Automotive service stations. 
(c)  Commercial boat docking facilities. 
(d)  Commercial developments with a gross square footage of greater than 25,000. 
(e)  Commercial water sports, non-motorized vessels of 16 feet or less in length only. 
(f)  Communications facilities. 
(g)  Commercial docks-Classes A, B and C only. 
(h)  Eating and drinking establishments restaurant with drive-through service, take-out only restaurant, bar/lounge, subject to section 6.24 of this Code as may be applicable. 
(i)  Mortuaries. 
(j)  Parking lots-Commercial and/or off-premises. 
(k)  Recreational-Commercial recreation; public parks and/or recreational facilities. 
(l)  School, commercial. 
(m)  Theaters. 
(n)  Utility substations and/or rights-of-way. 
(o)  Vessel for hire businesses. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, 5-10-09; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 4, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 16.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the CG-2 Commercial District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the CG-2 Commercial District. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 16.6. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
    The minimum lot area and width requirements in the CG-2 Commercial District are as follows: 
(a)  Lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
(b)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 16.7. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    Minimum yard requirements shall be determined by the site plan process pursuant to Division 5. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 16.8. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height for all structures shall be 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 16.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 16.10. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: 0.55. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 16.11. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    The lot area used in the calculation of the maximum impervious surface ratio shall exclude any portion of the property lying Gulfward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for residential uses: 0.70. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for non-residential uses: 0.90. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
DIVISION 17 - INS INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, adopted Feb. 28, 2006, amended Div. 17, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 17 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Table of Amendments. 

Sec. 17.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The INS Institutional District is intended for the establishment of private institutional uses and public facilities in those areas designated within the INS Institutional land use category on the Future Land Use Map. Such uses may include ancillary commercial and residential uses, such as gift shops and residence halls, which are clearly subordinate to the principle use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 17.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
(a)  Places of worship with fewer than 100 seats in the main sanctuary. 
(b)  Utility substations and/or rights-of-way. 
(c)  Public facilities, including public parks and other public recreational uses. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 17.3. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the INS Institutional District are as follows: 
(a)  Places of worship with 100 seats or more in the main sanctuary. 
(b)  Residential structures as an ancillary use to the institution. 
(c)  Commercial docks - Classes B and C only. 
(d)  Clubs, private and community service. 
(e)  Schools, public, private or charter. 
(f)  Social service agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 12, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 4, 10-11-16) 
Sec. 17.4. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the INS Institutional District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the INS Institutional District. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 17.5. - Other standards. 
(a)  Performance standards. In order to minimize effects on the surrounding residential area the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  All vehicular use areas, play areas, recreation areas, ball fields or similar recreation areas shall be effectively screened from contiguous residential properties. 
(2)  The performance standards required by section 6.17 of this Code shall also apply. 
(b)  Locational criteria. In keeping with the purpose and intent of this district, it may be appropriate to locate this district in or near residential areas so as to serve the community needs for religious, civic, limited educational or similar limited institutional functions. In reviewing requests to locate this district, the potential impacts of traffic, noise, neighborhood disruption, operational characteristics and similar potentially adverse effects on the surrounding neighborhood shall be considered. Where it is found that the uses permitted by this district may cause these adverse effects and where the restriction and performance standards of the district would not reasonably protect the neighborhood from such effects, this district shall not be approved. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 17.6. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
(a)  The minimum lot area and width requirements in the INS Institutional District are as follows: 
(1)  Lot area: One acre for a place of worship or school; 25,000 square feet for any other use. 
(2)  Lot width: 100 feet. 
(b)  Ancillary residential uses shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  Notwithstanding the following provisions, any place of worship shall be allowed a minimum of one residential unit, so long as minimum yard requirements can be met. Such a single unit shall not require the approval specified by section 17.3 of this division. Occupancy of such units shall be limited to officials of the associated place of worship. 
(2)  Residential density shall be supported by no more than 50 percent of the total land area of the site zoned as INS. This provision shall apply even in the event that the FAR of the principle institutional use requires less than 50 percent of site area. 
(3)  Allowable ancillary residential density shall be 12.5 units per acre for places of worship and seven and one-half units per acre for all other uses. 
(4)  Structures supporting ancillary residential uses shall be set back at least 50 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 17.7. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    Required setbacks shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yard: 25 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: 15 feet. 
(3)  Side yards: Ten feet or ten percent of the lot width, whichever is greater, to a maximum of 20 feet. 
(4)  Rear yard: 15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 17.8. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height for all structures shall be 30 feet, except for places of worship, which shall be allowed a maximum height of 50 feet. Purely aesthetic architectural features of places of worship, such as steeples, minarets, religious symbols and flag poles shall not count against the building height limits. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 17.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 17.10. - Landscaping required. 
    All uses shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of division 22 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 17.11. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: 0.65. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 17.12. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR): 0.80. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-28-06) 
DIVISION 18 - R/OS RECREATION/OPEN SPACE DISTRICT 

Sec. 18.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The R/OS Recreation/Open Space District is intended for those areas designated within the R/OS Recreation/Open Space land use category on the future land use maps. The R/OS Recreation/Open Space District primarily serves the park areas; however, this district is also applied to certain street-ends throughout the City of St. Pete Beach. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.2. - Prohibition of development on the beaches. 
    Under no circumstances shall any development other than dune walkovers be permitted on the public-owned beaches. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.3. - Permitted principal uses and structures within the parks. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the R/OS Recreation/Open Space District are as follows. 
(a)  Recreational-Public parks and/or recreational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.4. - Permitted accessory uses and structures within the parks. 
(a)  Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures, do not involve the conduct of a business, and are not of a nature prohibited under section 18.5. 
(b)  Temporary structures and operations in connection with, and on the site of, building or land preparation developments, including grading, paving, installation of utilities, construction, erection of field offices, and structures for equipment storage and building materials, provided a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued therefor. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.5. - Allowable conditional uses within the parks. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the R/OS Recreation/Open Space District are as follows: 
(a)  Commercial docks-Class C only. 
(b)  Parking lots-Public-owned only. 
(c)  Utility substations and/or rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.6. - Prohibited uses and structures within the parks. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the R/OS Recreation/Open Space District. 
    Any use which the appropriate board of authority, upon appeal, and after investigating similar uses elsewhere, shall determine to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways, by reason of odor, smoke, noise, glare, fumes, gas, fire, explosion or emission of particulate matter or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the R/OS Recreation/Open Space District. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.7. - Maximum floor area ratio within the parks. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for any use: 0.25. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.8. - Maximum impervious surface ratio within the parks. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for any use: 0.60. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.9. - ROS/SE -1 Recreation Open Space/Street-end-1 District. 
    Within the city, there are street-ends that terminate at the Gulf of Mexico beach and are used by the public and abutting owners for pedestrian access to the waterfront, motor vehicle access to abutting properties or parking. Within the recreation and open space element of the St. Pete Beach 2010 Comprehensive Plan these street-ends are designated as beach accesses for the public; however, these street-ends were not dedicated as parks in the subdivision plats in which they were set aside for public use. These street-ends or portions thereof currently serve, and will continue to serve the public and abutting owners as pedestrian access to the beach and vehicular access to the abutting properties. The recreational facilities maps within the recreation and open space element of the comprehensive plan is general and does not show the exact areas set aside as beach access, and it is the purpose of this division to set forth the city's policy for the use of the street-ends designated ROS/SE-1. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.10. - Street-ends designated ROS/SE-1. 
    The following street-ends have been designated ROS/SE-1 Recreation Open Space/Street-end 1: 
26th Avenue west from Sunset Way to the beach; 
27th Avenue west from the western-most alley in Block D, North Pass-a-Grille, Section A, to the beach; 
28th Avenue west from the western-most alley in Block D, North Pass-a-Grille, Section A, to the beach; 
29th Avenue west from Sunset Way to the beach; 
30th Avenue west from Sunset Way to the beach; 
36th Avenue west from El Centro to the beach; 
37th Avenue west from El Centro to the beach. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.11. - Policy for street-ends designated ROS/SE-1. 
(a)  Street-ends designated ROS/SE-1 shall be used for public access to the beach, for vehicular access to the abutting properties, and any other use deemed appropriate by the city which is not incompatible with the public's access to the beach. 
(b)  If a street-end designated ROS/SE-1 is unimproved or landscaped and does not currently provide vehicular access to an abutting property, the city may, upon the request of an abutting owner, approve a plan that provides for minimum street-end paving and encroachment into the unimproved or landscaped open space in order to allow access to the abutting property, provided: 
(1)  No designated street-end or part thereof shall be used or improved in any way that would be incompatible with its use for public beach access; and 
(2)  Vehicular access to the abutting property will be approved in accordance with the illustration contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.12. - ROS/SE-2 Recreation Open Space/Street-end-2 District. 
    Within the city, there are street-ends, as defined in Division 2, that terminate at Boca Ciega Bay on the east side of the city or at Blind Pass Channel on the west side of the city and are used by the public and abutting owners for vehicle access or parking. Within the recreation and open space element of the St. Pete Beach 2010 Comprehensive Plan these street-ends are designated as municipal parks or scenic parks; however, these street-ends were not dedicated as parks in the subdivision plats in which they were set aside for public use. These street-ends or portions thereof currently serve, and will continue to serve the public and abutting owners as vehicular access to abutting properties and as a place to enjoy the scenery provided by the water views. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.13. - Street-ends designated ROS/SE-2. 
    The following street-ends have been designated ROS/SE-2 Recreation Open Space/Street-end 2: 
14th Avenue east from Pass-a-Grille Way to the Intracoastal Waterway; 
15th Avenue east from Pass-a-Grille Way to the Intracoastal Waterway; 
16th Avenue east from Pass-a-Grille Way to the Intracoastal Waterway; 
17th Avenue east from Pass-a-Grille Way to the Intracoastal Waterway; 
18th Avenue east from Pass-a-Grille Way to the Intracoastal Waterway; 
22nd Avenue east from Pass-a-Grille Way to the Intracoastal Waterway; 
27th Avenue east from Pass-a-Grille Way to the Intracoastal Waterway; 
28th Avenue east from Pass-a-Grille Way to the Intracoastal Waterway; 
29th Avenue east from Pass-a-Grille Way to the Intracoastal Waterway; 
76th Avenue west 100 feet; 
77th Avenue west 56 feet; 
78th Avenue east from Boca Ciega Drive to the Intracoastal Waterway; 
79th Avenue east from Coquina Way to Blind Pass Channel; 
Coquina Way east 15 feet to Blind Pass Channel; 
80th Avenue east from Boca Ciega Drive to the Intracoastal Waterway; 
83rd Avenue east from Boca Ciega Drive to the Intracoastal Waterway. 

Vehicular Access Illustration 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.14. - Policy for street-ends designated ROS/SE-2. 
(a)  Street-ends designated ROS/SE-2 shall be used and available for the public to enjoy the scenic water views provided by the Bay or Blind Pass, and such use may include, but not be limited to, public parking, where it is made available by the city. 
(b)  The street-ends shall also be available for use by the abutting property for access, and for any other use deemed appropriate by the city which is not incompatible with the objective of providing this open space for scenic water view. 
(c)  If a street-end designated ROS/SE-2 is unimproved or landscaped and does not currently provide vehicular access to an abutting property, the city may, upon the request of an abutting owner, approve a plan that provides for minimum street-end paving and encroachment into the unimproved or landscaped open space in order to allow access to the abutting property, provided: 
(1)  No designated street-end or part thereof shall be used or improved in any way that would be incompatible with its use for public enjoyment of the scenic water views; and 
(2)  The vehicular access to the abutting property will be approved in accordance with the illustration contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.15. - ROS/SE-3 Recreation Open Space/Street-end-3 District. 
    Within the city, there are street-ends, as defined in Division 2, that terminate at the Gulf of Mexico beach, Boca Ciega Bay or Blind Pass Channel and where it is desirable that the street-end be used only for recreation open space and not for vehicular access or parking. However, these street-ends were not dedicated as parks in the subdivision plats in which they were set aside for public use. Because these street-ends are not required to serve abutting owners who have adequate vehicular access to their property from other public rights-of-way, the abutting owners may convey their title interest in the underlying street-end to the city and waive any right to vehicular access from the street-end. As consideration for the conveyance of the fee title to the underlying street-end, the city will modify specific land use requirements for the development of the abutting property under the terms of this division. The modified land use requirements specified herein, are intended to motivate property owners who abut such street-ends to convey the fee title interest in the underlying street-end to the city enabling the city to increase the recreation open space available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.16. - Criteria for designating street-ends ROS/SE-3 in the future. 
    Street-ends or partial street-ends that qualify for ROS/SE-3 designation shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)  The abutting property owner has agreed to waive any right to vehicular access over the street-end and conveyed the fee title to the underlying street-end to the city and offered the appropriate documentation to effect such conveyance; and 
(b)  The city has agreed on the deed restrictions in the deed of conveyance. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.17. - Street-ends designated ROS/SE-3. 
    The following street-ends have been designated ROS/SE-3 Recreation Open Space/Street-end 3: 
23rd Avenue west from Sunset Way to the beach. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.18. - Use of street-ends designated ROS/SE-3. 
(a)  Street-ends or partial street-ends designated ROS/SE-3 that terminate at the Gulf of Mexico shall be used for public beach access. 
(b)  Street-ends or partial street-ends designated ROS/SE-3 that terminate at Boca Ciega Bay or at Blind Pass Channel shall be used and available for the public to enjoy the scenic water views, and such use may include, but not be limited to, public parking, where it is made available by the city, benches, tables, or a shelter canopy. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 18.19. - Regulations pertaining to properties abutting street-ends designated ROS/SE-3. 
    At the time the street-end abutting owner conveys the fee title to the underlying street-end, the city manager shall issue a certificate of compliance which shall be recorded in the property file on the property. The development rights granted hereunder shall run with the land. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, residential development or use of properties abutting street-ends designated ROS/SE-3 shall comply with the district requirements applicable to the property. Special regulations specific to such properties are as follows: 
(a)  The maximum land coverage by structure, as stated in the district regulations, shall not be applicable; however, the development shall provide a minimum of 30 percent of the lot area as green space. Such green space shall be in addition to any part of the lot or property west of the St. Pete Beach Coastal Construction Line. 
(b)  The minimum side yard setback from the property line abutting an ROS/SE-3 street-end that terminates at the Gulf of Mexico beach shall be two feet. 
(c)  The minimum side yard setback from the property line abutting an ROS/SE-3 street-end that terminates at Boca Ciega Bay or Blind Pass Channel shall be two feet. 
(d)  One bay window not to exceed 20 feet in width shall be allowed to project up to two feet into the side yard setback adjacent to the ROS/SE-3 street-end, but in no case shall such window project over the property line. Such bay window shall not be permitted to extend below the required finished floor elevation of the structure. 
(e)  Fences up to six feet in height shall be permitted along the entire property line adjacent to the ROS/SE-3 district except within the front yard. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
DIVISION 19 - TU TRANSPORTATION/UTILITY DISTRICT 

Sec. 19.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The TU Transportation/Utility District is intended for those areas designated within the TU Transportation/Utility land use category on the future land use maps. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 19.2. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the TU Transportation/Utility District are as follows: 
(a)  Public infrastructure facilities. 
(b)  Utility substations and rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 19.3. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the TU Transportation/Utility District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the TU Transportation/Utility District. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 19.4. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
    The minimum lot area and width requirements in the TU Transportation/Utility District shall be determined under the conditional use and site plan approval process pursuant to Divisions 4 and 5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 19.5. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    The minimum yard requirements in the TU Transportation/Utility District are as determined under the conditional use approval process pursuant of Division 4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 19.6. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height for all structures shall be 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 19.7. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    As determined under the conditional use approval process pursuant of Division 4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 19.8. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: 0.70. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 19.9. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    The lot area used in the calculation of the maximum impervious surface ratio shall exclude any portion of the property lying Gulfward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for non-residential uses: 0.90. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
DIVISION 20 - PAG PASS-A-GRILLE OVERLAY DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 28, 2017, repealed Div. 20, §§ 20.1-20.14, and reenacted a new Div. 20, §§ 20.1-20.24, as set out herein. Former Div. 20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, adopted May 1, 2003; Ord. No. 2004-18, §§ 7, 8, adopted Aug. 24, 2004; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, adopted Aug. 26, 08; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1(Att. A), adopted April 27, 2010; and Ord. No. 2011-03, § 3, adopted May 24, 2011. 

Sec. 20.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The City recognizes that the Pass-a-Grille Area was developed prior to the development of suburban zoning regulations. The (PAG) Pass-a-Grille Overlay District is intended to allow for structures that are considered contributing to the National Register Historic District to be considered conforming regarding base flood elevations and uses of property within the Pass-a-Grille area situated south of 32nd Avenue, in order to ensure that structures and uses will be compatible with the character of existing development, including the area within the designated Pass-a-Grille Historic District. Also, to recognize that the existing parcel size's, uses and overall character of the PAG shall be permitted to continue as viable uses while allowing for improvements to existing structures, additions and new development that is consistent with the existing mass and scale within the district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.02. - Definitions. 
(a)  Accessory structure envelope means provisions for the setbacks and maximum building footprints permitted for accessory structures. 
(b)  Balance means the relationship among the elements of a building on either side of an imaginary centerline through the middle of a building. Buildings are either symmetrically or asymmetrically balanced. 
(c)  Balanced, asymmetrically means the shape(s) and design of a building may not match exactly, but instead have equal visual weight they are still visually balanced. 
(d)  Balanced, symmetrically means the shapes on one side of the centerline match the shapes on the other side. The two halves are visually equally. 
(e)  Building height : Provisions for permitted heights in feet (ft). The maximum height for first floor residential development shall be fourteen (14) feet and twenty (20) feet for non-residential. The maximum height for second story and higher shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet. Each building lot typology provides the range of height appropriate for the building type. No new or substantially improved building within the PAG Overlay District and having the underlying zoning designation of THD, RU-2 Residential, RLM-2 Residential, or RM Residential shall be constructed not to exceed twenty-eight (28) feet in height to the midpoint of a sloped roof or top of the parapet of a flat or low sloped roof, and measured from the base flood elevation determined under the most restrictive applicable standard for the building site, further provided that the overall roof height shall not exceed thirty-two (32) feet. Base flood elevation requirements are outlined in section 98-33 of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
(f)  Building envelope : Provisions for the minimum and maximum setbacks permitted by front, side, and rear yards. There is a minimum and maximum setback for each lot type. The maximum and minimum frontage refers to the proportion of the lot width along which the primary building façade must be within the minimum and maximum front setback. 
(g)  Compatible design means architectural design and construction that will fit harmoniously into the district based on scale, materials, and quality of construction with adjacent buildings and structures. 
(h)  Lot requirements : Provisions for minimum and maximums, lot depth, lot size and the permitted lot coverage. 
(i)  Mass, primary : largest shape of a building. 
(j)  Mass, secondary : additional shapes that form the façade of the building 
(k)  Parking provisions : The amount of parking shall be determined by Division 23 of the Land Development Code. Parking provisions provide zones where parking is permitted. The parking zone refers to any uncovered parking area located on the parcel. Driveways are permitted in any zone provided the frontage requirements have been met as required by building type. The diagram illustrates a primary and secondary street. Primary streets are streets that are addressed to the parcel of land. Secondary streets may or may not have access to the parcel. Zones are defined and illustrated by the lot area between the principal building frontage and: 
(1) ;hg;Zone 1: the right-of-way of any primary street. (2) ;hg;Zone 2: any common interior lot line. (3) ;hg;Zone 3: any rear lot line. (4) ;hg;Zone 4: the right-of-way of any secondary street.  
(l)  Private frontages , refers to the area that is attached or integrated into the primary building. 
(m)  Proportion means the relationships of one part of a façade to the whole. A house that is correctly proportionate establishes a visual relationship between all parts of its exterior. The voids, primary, and secondary masses should all be proportional to one another in order maintain architectural harmony. 
(n)  Proximity means that objects that are close together should complement each other. 
(o)  Rhythm means the use of repetitive elements in order to establish architectural harmony. It is based off of three main principles: the principle of Proximity, the principle of Similarity, and the principle of Continuation. These principles are part of a larger set known as Gestalt Principles. 
(p)  Similarity means how our eyes are easily able to group objects together that share common textures, colors, or features 
(q)  Voids means windows, doors, or other openings that create negative space allowing for breaks within a primary or secondary mass. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.03. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the PAG Overlay District are as follows: 
(a)  All uses permitted in the underlying zoning district; and 
(b)  Transient occupancy in single-family or multi-family dwellings, so long as any such transient occupancy of less than thirty (30) days does not occur more than three times in any 12-month period on any parcel. 
(c)  Uses that are in existence, upon date of adoption, shall be permitted as limited uses within an existing structure. Additions, improvements and renovations will be permitted, if the building meets the standards set forth in this division of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.04. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures, and are not of a nature prohibited under section 20.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Residential docks, including tie poles, shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 6.23 and other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county or state. 
(d)  Temporary structures shall follow the provisions of section 6.11. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.05. - Allowable conditional use. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the PAG Overlay District are as follows: 
(a)  All permitted conditional uses allowed for in the underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.06. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein or within the underlying zoning district are hereby prohibited in the PAG Overlay District. 
    Any use which the City Commission, upon appeal, and after investigating similar uses elsewhere, shall determine to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the PAG Overlay District or to those who pass by on public roadways, by reason of odor, smoke, noise, glare, fumes, gas, fire, explosion or emission of particulate matter or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the PAG area, is hereby prohibited in the PAG Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.07. - Density, intensity and assembly of parcels. 
(a)  The maximum residential density permitted in the PAG Overlay District shall not exceed the number of units per acre permitted by the underlying Future Land Use map for undeveloped parcels of land. 
(b)  The existing residential density, exceeding one density unit, of an existing residential structure shall be permitted to rebuild on the existing parcel of land, with the same density as the existing structure(s) has, if the building was constructed prior to (insert adoption date) and can meet the lot requirements, by building type, in section 20.15 of this Division. In addition, any new construction cannot exceed the existing developed square footage and must match the existing form and mass as defined in section 20.22 herein. 
(c)  The existing hotel/motel units shall be permitted to rebuild on the existing parcel of land, with the same number of units that already exist as a rental/leasable room within the existing built hotel if the building was constructed prior to (insert adoption date) and can meet the lot requirements of a Boutique Hotel Building Type as provided in section 20.15 of this Division. 
(d)  No more than two lots of record may be combined to accommodate additions to existing structures. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.08. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: Underlying Zoning District requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.09. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    If a parcel opts for new construction or addition to a single family home using the underlying zoning district standards, the ISR shall be determined by the underlying zoning district. The ratio's listed below are subject to any of the building types, defined in section 20.15 that are used. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for residential and transient accommodation uses: 0.70. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for non-residential uses: Underlying Zoning District requirements or existing building footprint. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.10. - Reduced setbacks for contributing structures granted a certificate of appropriateness. 
    Proposed additions to contributing structures may be eligible for a reduction in setback requirements if the proposed plans have been reviewed, approved, and issued a certificate of appropriateness by the Historic Preservation Board pursuant to Division 28. The purpose of this regulation is to ensure the design is compatible design with neighboring structures. 
    Design review shall be based on the requirements set forth in the underlying zoning district and the PAG Overlay District herein and for consistency with the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation. If the Historic Preservation Board finds that an addition is consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and that the addition would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a contributing structure, and approves a certificate of appropriateness for the plans, then the applicant can request a reduction to any and all of the setbacks, provided the setbacks are consistent within the same block of the proposed addition by providing the historical setback data for the street block (both faces) the parcel is on and the historical setbacks along that particular street that will be evaluated by the Historic Board. The following setbacks shall be considered: 
Setback Front yard 10 feet Secondary front yard 5 feet Side yard 10 percent of the lot width (each) Rear yard 10 feet  
    The addition must still meet impervious surface, floor area, height, herein and the landscaping, and buffering standards as identified in this division. The reductions in setbacks do not abrogate the responsibility of the designer or homeowner to incorporate these requirements into the plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.11. - Minimum building type requirements. 
    Lots of record within the PAG Overlay District shall be deemed conforming despite the width and size regulations in the building types, so long as the lots are not further subdivided, and the condition existed prior to the adoption of the Division. No more than two lots of record may be combined to accommodate additions to existing structures. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.12. - Subdivision of lots. 
    Lots within the PAG Overlay District shall not be subdivided to a size smaller than the platted lot of record and/or building lot types in this division. Existing structures that are listed as contributing structures in the most recent Historic Resources Survey or that are locally designated historic structures are exempt from the setbacks imposed by this division; however, additions and accessory structures shall comply with the standards in section 20.15, by building type. All other structures shall also comply with the setbacks and required yards imposed by the building types in this Division, section 20.15. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.13. - Residential development option for single-family homes. 
    Any parcel within the PAG Overlay District with a Residential Zoning District designation of RU-2, RLM-2, or RM may develop a single family residential house using the underlying residential zoning standards for additions or new construction: If an applicant uses the underlying residential zoning district standards, for new construction or additions the following standards shall be met: 
(a)  Underlying Zoning Districts minimum lot requirements, 
(b)  Underlying Zoning Districts Minimum yard requirements, 
(c)  Underlying Zoning Districts Maximum floor area ratio standards; and 
(d)  Height shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet in height to the midpoint of a sloped roof or top of the parapet of a flat or low sloped roof, and measured from the base flood elevation determined under the most restrictive applicable standard the building side, further provided that the overall roof height shall not exceed thirty-two (32) feet. 
    Any other applicable standards within this division, not expressly stated in this section, shall apply to new development and redevelopment as outlined in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.14. - Vacant parcels. 
    The following procedures shall be followed 
(a)  For parcels of land within a residential zoning district and: 
Any parcel of land that is vacant, at the time of adoption, shall only be permitted either: 
(1)  A residential building type found in section 20.15 that is consistent with the underlying uses permitted in the Zoning District and section 20.07. The parcel of land shall meet the lot width and lot depth as identified, by building type found in section 20.15, to determine the appropriate standards to apply to that parcel, or 
(2)  Provisions listed in section 20.13 of this division. 
(b)  Parcels of land within non-residential land use districts: 
Any parcel of land that is vacant, at the time of adoption of the PAG Overlay District, shall be permitted any of the non-residential building types found in section 20.15 that are consistent with the existing lot width/depth of the parcel of land. 
(c)  Assembly or parcel splits shall only be permitted through the City Commission, to determine the compatibility and respect for the existing character of the PAG Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.15. - Permitted building types. 
    Building types are permitted by the following criteria: 
(a)  Existing Parcel Size, and 
(b)  Existing Density, Units and Rooms 
An applicant must provide a survey of the parcel to verify the actual parcel size (lot width/lot depth) or use the City's parcel data information. If the applicant believes the lot width and depth are different that the City's records, the applicant will be required to have a survey of the lot for verification. 
HOUSE-LARGE A building lot located and designed to accommodate a detached building with large side, rear and front yards.  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) 60 -  B - Lot Depth (ft) 100 -  C - Lot Size (sf) 6,000 -  D - Lot Coverage (%) - 60 BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 10 15     Secondary Street Setback 7 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 7 -  G - Rear Setback (ft) 15 -     Garage Adjacent to Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 50 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 10 -  J - Side Setback (ft) 25 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) - 80  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 800 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principle Building (ft) - 28-32' as defined in Sec. 20.17  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 28' PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2,3, and 4 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)  Select a minimum of 1 PF listed P, S, CY  
(1) a lot that is adjacent to the bay or beach is permitted to exceed the maximum setback requirements. 
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
HOUSE-MEDIUM A building lot located and designed to accommodate a detached building with small side yards and a large front yard.  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) 40 55  B - Lot Depth (ft) 100 -  C - Lot Size (sf) 4,000 -  D - Lot Coverage (%) - 70 BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 10 15     Secondary Street Setback 5 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 5 -  G - Rear Setback (ft) 15 -     Garage Adjacent to Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 50 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 30  J - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 800 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principal Building (ft) - '28-32' as defined in Sec. 20.17  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 28' PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2,3, and 4 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)   Select a minimum of 1 PF listed P, S, CY  
(1) a lot that is adjacent to the bay or beach is permitted to exceed the maximum setback requirements. 
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
HOUSE-SMALL A building lot located and designed to accommodate a small detached building with small side and front yards. A maximum of one dwelling unit is permitted.  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) 32 40  B - Lot Depth (ft) 50 120  C - Lot Size (sf) 1,600 4,800  D - Lot Coverage (%) - 90 BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 5 10     Secondary Street Setback (ft) 5 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 3 -  G - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -     Garage Adjacent to Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 50 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 30  J - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 400 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principal Building (ft) - '28-32' as defined in Sec. 20.17  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 28' PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2,3,4 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)  Select a minimum of 1 PF listed P, S, CY  
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
APARTMENT HOUSE A building lot located and designed to accommodate a detached building which resembles a large house but which contains multiple dwellings above and beside each other. A maximum of 4 units are permitted in this building lot. (The units have to be existing prior to redevelopment as stated in section 20.07 Density, intensity and assembly of parcels).  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) 40 55  B - Lot Depth (ft) 80 -  C - Lot Size (sf) 3,200 -  D - Lot Coverage (%) - 70 BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 10 15     Secondary Street Setback (ft) 5 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 5 -  G - Rear Setback (ft) 15 -     Garage Adjacent to Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 60 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 30  J - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 800 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principal Building (ft) - '28-32' as defined in Sec. 20.17  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 2 PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2, 3 and 4 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)  Select a minimum of 1 PF listed P, S, CY  
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
APARTMENT 
BUILDING-SMALL A building lot located and designed to accommodate multiple dwellings above or beside each other in a building that occupies most of its building lot width and is placed close to the sidewalk. (The units have to be existing prior to redevelopment as stated in section 20.07 Density, intensity and assembly of parcels).  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) 60 90  B - Lot Depth (ft) 100 120  C - Lot Size (sf) 6,000 10,800  D - Lot Coverage (%) - 75 BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 15 20     Secondary Street Setback (ft) 7 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 7 -  G - Rear Setback (ft) 20 -     Garage Adjacent to Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 60 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 30  J - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 800 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principal Building (ft) - '28-32' as defined in Sec. 20.17  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 28' PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2 and 3 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)  Select a minimum of 1 PF. P, F, S, CY  
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
APARTMENT 
BUILDING-MEDIUM A building lot located and designed to accommodate multiple dwellings above or beside each other in a building that occupies most of its building lot width and is placed close to the sidewalk. (The units have to be existing prior to redevelopment as stated in section 20.07 Density, intensity and assembly of parcels).  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) 90 200  B - Lot Depth (ft) 120 120  C - Lot Size (sf) 10,800 24,000  D - Lot Coverage (%) - 75 BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 15 25     Secondary Street Setback (ft) 10 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  G - Rear Setback (ft) 15 -     Garage Adjacent to Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 60 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 30  J - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 800 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principal Building (ft) - '28-32' as defined in Sec. 20.17  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 28' PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2 and 3 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)  Select a minimum of 1 PF listed CY, P, F, S  
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
COURTYARD 
APARTMENT A building lot located and designed to accommodate multiple dwellings arranged around and fronting on a central garden or courtyard that may be partially or wholly open to a street and/or alleyway. (The units have to be existing prior to redevelopment as stated in section 20.07 Density, intensity and assembly of parcels).  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) 50 200  B - Lot Depth (ft) 80 120  C - Lot Size (sf) 4,000 24,000  D - Lot Coverage (%) - 80 BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 10 15     Secondary Street Setback (ft) 5 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 5  G - Rear Setback (ft) 20 -     Garage Adjacent to Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 60 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 30  J - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 800 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principal Building (ft) - '28-32' as defined in Sec. 20.17  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 28' PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2 and 3 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)  Select a minimum of 1 PF listed F  
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
COMMERCIAL / 
MIXED-USE - SMALL A building lot located and designed to accommodate a multi story building with commercial, office and/or multiple dwellings in any story that is designed for smaller lot sizes.  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) 20 60  B - Lot Depth (ft) 80 120  C - Lot Size (sf) 1,600 7,200  D - Lot Coverage (%) - 80 BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 10 15     Secondary Street Setback (ft) 5 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 0 -  G - Rear Setback (ft) 15 -     Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 60 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 30  J - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 600 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principal Building (ft) - underlying 
zoning 
district  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 25 PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2 and 3 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)  Select a minimum of 1 PF listed C  
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
COMMERCIAL / 
MIXED-USE - MEDIUM A building lot located and designed to accommodate a multi story building with commercial, office and/or multiple dwellings in any story that is designed for average lot sizes.  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) 60 150  B - Lot Depth (ft) - 350  C - Lot Size (sf) - 52,500  D - Lot Coverage (%) - 90 BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 10 15     Secondary Street Setback (ft) 5 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 0 -  G - Rear Setback (ft) 20 -     Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 60 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 30 -  J - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 800 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principal Building (ft) - underlying 
zoning 
district  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 25 PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2 and 3 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)  Select a minimum of 1 PF listed C  
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
BOUTIQUE HOTEL A building lot located and designed to accommodate lodging. The number of rooms will be confirmed by existing operating hotel rooms. (The units have to be existing prior to redevelopment as stated in section 20.07 Density, intensity and assembly of parcels).  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) 40 105  B - Lot Depth (ft) 90 125  C - Lot Size (sf) - 13,125  D - Lot Coverage (%) - 80 BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 15 20     Secondary Street Setback (ft) 10 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  G - Rear Setback (ft) 15 -     Garage Adjacent to Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 60 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 30 -  J - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 800 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principal Building (ft)(1) - '28-32' as defined in Sec. 20.17  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 28' PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2,3, and 4 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)  Select a minimum of 1 PF listed C, P, F, CY, S  
(1) may exceed the height up to 35' as outlined by the code if the property is along Gulf Way and that portion of the building that exceeds the 32' in height shall be set back an additional one foot from the front setback line for every foot in height increase. 
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
SINGLE STORY 
COMMERCIAL 
BUILDING-SMALL A building lot located and designed to accommodate single use office and retail.  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) 30 50  B - Lot Depth (ft) 80 120  C - Lot Size (sf) 4,000 6,000  D - Lot Coverage (%) - 80 BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 10 15     Secondary Street Setback (ft) 5 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 0 -  G - Rear Setback (ft) 20 -     Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 60 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 30  J - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 800 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principal Building (ft) - underlying zoning district  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 25 PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2,3, and 4 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)  Select a minimum of 1 PF listed C, G, A  
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
SINGLE STORY 
COMMERCIAL 
BUILDING-MEDIUM A building lot located and designed to accommodate single use office and retail.  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) 60 150  B - Lot Depth (ft) - 350  C - Lot Size (sf) - 52,500  D - Lot Coverage (%) - 90 BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 10 15     Secondary Street Setback (ft) 5 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 0 -  G - Rear Setback (ft) 20 -     Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 60 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 30  J - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 800 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principal Building (ft) - underlying zoning district  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 25 PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2 and 3 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)  Select a minimum of 1 PF listed C  
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
INSTITUTION 
BUILDING A building lot located and designed to accommodate a building containing public or civic uses such as community services, day care, education, government, places of worship, or social services. This typology is only for permitted and exiting institutional buildings.  
LOT REQUIREMENTS MIN MAX  A - Lot Width (ft) - -  B - Lot Depth (ft) - -  C - Lot Size (sf) - -  D - Lot Coverage (%) - - BUILDING ENVELOPE MIN MAX  E - Street Setback (ft) 10 25     Secondary Street Setback (ft) 10 -  F - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  G - Rear Setback (ft) 15 -     Alley 5 -  H - Frontage Buildout (%) 50 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE MIN MAX  I - Street Setback (ft) 30  J - Side Setback (ft) 10 -  K - Rear Setback (ft) 10 -  L - Building Footprint (sf) - 800 BUILDING HEIGHT  M - Principal Building (ft) - 35  N - Accessory Structure(s) (ft) - 28' PARKING PROVISIONS  Location Zone 2,3, and 4 PRIVATE FRONTAGES (PF)  Select a minimum of 1 PF listed no requirement  
LOT REQUIREMENTS AND BUILDING ENVELOPE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ENVELOPE BUILDING HEIGHT PARKING LOCATION  
PORCH The façade is setback from the front lot line per applicable street setback requirements. The façade includes an attached front porch structure. A wide variety of porch designs are possible.  
FRONTAGE ZONE (FZ) MIN MAX  Porch structure requirements:  A - Width (clear) (ft) 10 -  B - Depth (clear) (ft) 5 -  C - Height (clear) (ft) 7 - INTERFACE ZONE (IZ)  Landscape with path (3' wide min) from sidewalk to structure  
FRONTAGE ZONE AND INTERFACE ZONE DIMENSIONS  
STOOP The façade is set back from the front lot line per applicable street setback requirements. The façade includes an attached entry stoop (an elevated landing with stairs) that is placed at or near the front lot line. The ground floor is elevated to provide privacy. The stoop may include a roof, however it is not required.  
FRONTAGE ZONE (FZ) MIN MAX  Stoop structure requirements:  A - Width (clear) (ft) 5 10  B - Depth (clear) (ft) 3 8  C - Height (stoop) (in) 18 24  D - Height (clear) (ft) 7 - INTERFACE ZONE (IZ)  Landscape with path (3' wide min) from sidewalk to structure  
FRONTAGE ZONE DIMENSIONS  
FORECOURT The façade is set back from the front lot line per applicable street setback requirements. A portion of the façade is recessed to form an uncovered court. The court is suitable for outdoor dining, gardens, vehicle drop-offs, formal entries etc. A fence or wall may be used to define the private space of the court. The court may be elevated behind a retaining wall at or near the front lot line with entry steps to the court. The forecourt area may not have a permanent roof structure. Cafe's, seating area's may provide shade, umbrella's or any temporary shelter(s) that provide shade.  
FRONTAGE ZONE (FZ) MIN MAX  Courtyard requirements:  A - Width (clear) (ft) 12 -  B - Depth (clear) (ft) 12 50 INTERFACE ZONE (IZ)  ;hg;Landscape with path (6' wide min) from sidewalk to structure OTHER REQUIREMENTS  None  
FRONTAGE ZONE AND INTERFACE ZONE DIMENSIONS  
COMMON YARD The façade is set back from the front lot line per applicable street setback requirements. The common yard may include a two to four foot in height decorative fence that shall be constructed of wood, shell, or concrete material. The frontyard is required to have a minimum of 1 canopy tree, shrubs, and ground cover.  
FRONTAGE ZONE (FZ) MIN MAX  Stoop structure requirements:  A - Landscape grass and or ground cover  B - Shrubs, ground cover 10 
(3 gallon) -  C - Tree (canopy tree) 1 -  D - Fence Height (feet) 2' 4'  
FRONTAGE ZONE DIMENSIONS  
COMMERCIAL The façade is setback from the front lot line per applicable street setback requirements, typically at or near the front lot line with the entrance at sidewalk grade. The façade may include an awning, shed roof, or gallery (a lightweight colonnade with no habitable building space above it) that covers the sidewalk and may extend into the right-of-way. The facade has a substantial amount of glazing at the sidewalk level. Recessed entrances are acceptable.  
FRONTAGE ZONE (FZ) MIN MAX  Building facade requirements:  A - Distance between openings (ft) 10 20  B - Door recess (ft) - 5  C - Ground floor transparency (%) 60 -  D - Height to bottom of window (ft) - 2.5 INTERFACE ZONE  Extended sidewalk from right-of-way edge to structure OPTIONAL ELEMENTS MIN MAX  AWNING or GALLERY  E - Setback from curb (ft) 2 -  F - ;hg;Depth (clear) (ft) * (Gallery min 8') 4 10  G - Height (clear) (ft) 8 - OTHER REQUIREMENTS  None  
FRONTAGE ZONE AND INTERFACE ZONE DIMENSIONS  
BUILDING HEIGHT Pass-A-Grille is located in a flood zone and has special requirements that shall be met in section 98-33 of the City's Code of Ordinances for base flood elevations (BFE). The graphic below provides overall guidance on the design of floors, the measuring of the finished floor.  
MIN MAX  Building facade requirements:  A - ;hg;Base Flood Elevation (BFE) refer to Sec. 98-33  B - Finished Grade (FG) Determined 
by the 
BFE & 
FG  C - Height of Floors (liveable) 8 14  D - ;hg;Total Height (Measurement from the BFE) - -     Residential * - 28-32 *     Commercial (non-residential) - Refer to 
Underlying 
Zoning 
District 
. * Not to exceed 28 feet in height to the midpoint of a sloped roof or top of the parapet of a flat or low sloped roof, and measured from the base flood elevation determined under the most restrictive applicable standard for the building site, further provided that the overall roof height shall not exceed 32 feet.  
HEIGHT  
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.16. - Private frontage. 
    The building types in section 20.15 provide the acceptable private frontages (i.e. porches, stoops, etc.) for that building type. If there are multiple frontages provided in the table, the applicant may choose what private frontage to provide per building. A minimum of one frontage will be required for new construction when listed on the chart, by Building Type. The private frontage area may count towards the calculation of the frontage build out requirement under the "Building Envelope" category, by building type, in section 20.15. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.17. - Building height. 
    Each building lot typology in section 20.15 provides the range of height appropriate for the building type. No new or substantially improved building within the PAG Overlay District and having the underlying zoning designation of THD, RU-2 Residential, RLM-2 Residential, or RM Residential shall be constructed not to exceed twenty-eight (28) feet in height to the midpoint of a sloped roof or top of the parapet of a flat or low sloped roof, and measured from the base flood elevation determined under the most restrictive applicable standard for the building site, further provided that the overall roof height shall not exceed thirty-two(32) feet. Base flood elevation requirements are outlined in section 98-33 of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
MIN MAX  Building facade requirements:  A - ;hg;Base Flood Elevation (BFE) refer to Sec. 98-33  B - Finished Grade (FG) Determined 
by the 
BFE & 
FG  C - Height of Floors (liveable) 8 14  D - ;hg;Total Height (Measurement from the BFE) - -     Residential * - 28-32 *     Commercial (non-residential) - Refer to 
Underlying 
Zoning 
District * Not to exceed 28 feet in height to the midpoint of a sloped roof or top of the parapet of a flat or low sloped roof, and measured from the base flood elevation determined under the most restrictive applicable standard for the building site, further provided that the overall roof height shall not exceed 32 feet.  
HEIGHT  
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.18. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Residential : Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(b)  Nonresidential : may reduce the number of spaces, if on-street parking is available, then an applicant can count any on-street parking within 500 feet of the parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.19. - Alleyways. 
(a)  The PAG Overlay District has existing alleyways that shall be maintained as an alleyway. 
(b)  Under no circumstance shall an existing alley be reduced in the width and length. 
(c)  Parking is permitted adjacent to an alleyway or where the City has identified, through signage, that vehicles may park within the alleyway. Under no circumstance shall a parked vehicle impede the vehicular movement. 
(d)  Alleyways shall not be permanently closed or vacated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.20. - Landscaping standards. 
(a)  Streetscape standards . When the City requires improvements to the "Public Frontage" Zone which includes: Furnishing zones, pedestrian zones and a shy zone, the following standards shall apply. 
(1)  Furnishing Zone that is a minimum of six feet in depth and may include street lights, benches and canopy trees . A furnishing zone shall include one of the following: Tree Grate Standards. One canopy tree per 30 feet in lineal building shall be provided the entire length of the parcel the building is fronting. 
(2)  Planter Beds . A minimum width of 6 feet with a maximum length of 25 feet that contains 1 canopy tree per bed and 100 percent ground cover. 
(3)  Pedestrian Zone . 8-10 feet of unobstructed sidewalk 
(4)  Shy zone . Comprised of 12 inches to 2 feet that includes the area from the edge of the building to the edge of the pedestrian zone. 

(b)  Landscape Buffers may be required between any uses within the PAG Overlay District. 
(c)  Front Buffers for all residential building types, excluding the Apartment Building, shall provide the following: 
(1)  Front fence or landscape buffer shall be provided and include the following: 
a.  An opaque hedge, height not to exceed 3 feet when fully matured and/or 
b.  Knee wall and/or fence . Permitted materials are wood, shell or concrete material consistent with the overall architecture and design of the primary residence. 

(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.21. - Screening of elevated buildings. 
    A building required by section 98-33 of the City's Code of Ordinances, to be elevated more than three feet above grade shall mask the fact that it is elevated through the use of appropriate architectural screening so that the building, when viewed from public rights-of-way, appears to have been constructed at, or near, natural grade as follows: 
(a)  Architectural screening shall: 
(1)  Create a visual continuity that is integrated with the overall design and architecture of the home using doors, garage doors, entryways, staircase and/or archways. 
(2)  No more than 20 percent of the area being screened can be transparent. 
(b)  Landscape screening shall be installed: 
(1)  A minimum 3-foot-wide landscape area. 
(2)  One understory tree per 20 lineal feet (or portion thereof) of the elevated building length/width viewed from public rights-of way. 
(3)  Planted with shrubs, ornamental grasses and groundcovers to provide 100 percent coverage of the landscape area within one growing season. The landscape design shall (unless spatially impractical) provide layering of plant materials that includes larger background shrubs and low foreground groundcovers. All plant material should be Florida friendly plantings as defined and identified by University of Florida/IFS horticulture experts. 
(4)  Permanent mulch materials, such as organic mulches, stones, and recycled inorganic groundcover materials are not permitted in lieu of vegetation, unless they are provided as accent or focal points that enhance the landscape design. 
(c)  Apartment building types (apartment house, apartment building small and apartment building medium shall also meet the following standards: 
(1)  Parking may only be accessed from the side or rear of the building. 
(2)  No portion of the primary building shall have garage doors facing any street. 
(3)  Parking may be located within the BFE provided the primary face of the building is architecturally designed to be consistent with front entryways of homes that are integrated and not visually seen from any street. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.22. - General building design (residential). 
    In addition to the required private frontages and the standards provided in each frontage, the following standards shall be applied to all residential building types (house and apartment building types) in order to maintain the overall mass and scale, of the PAG community's existing housing stock. 
    The following standards are included to provide a minimum criteria needed to review the overall design, mass and scale as outlined below while allowing an applicant flexibility in the design of the building. The design criteria are typical design elements used by architects to ensure a higher quality development. 
    Any single family or attached residential structure that follows the criteria outlined in section 20.15 must design the building with the following architectural elements: 
(a)  The mass of a building must include: 
(1)  Primary mass . The building shall have a distinct primary mass. 
(2)  Secondary mass . A building should also include secondary mass (private frontage requirements) that form the façade of the building. 
(3)  Voids that allow for natural breaks in the mass. 
(b)  Proportional design elements shall include: 
(1)  Windows in varying, yet similar arrangements. 
(2)  Appropriate vertical visual consistency at the centerline of the façade. 
(3)  Appropriate ratios of visual width between top and bottom halves of the elevation (bottom 1/2 clearly supports the top). 
(4)  Overall design shall be symmetrically or asymmetrically balanced. 
(c)  Design must include the following rhythms: 
(1)  Proximity (objects close together complement each other). 
(2)  Similarity- common textures, colors or features. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.23. - General building design (non-residential). 
    In addition to the required private frontages and the standards provided in each frontage, the following standards shall be applied to non-residential building types only. 
(a)  Public entrance . Buildings that are open to the public shall have an entrance for pedestrians from the street to the building interior. This entrance shall be designed to be a distinctive and prominent element of the architectural design, and shall be open to the public during business hours. Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface or finish which places an emphasis to the entrance. 
(b)  Building orientation . The primary building entrances shall be visible and directly accessible from a street or park space that has a sidewalk or pedestrian path. 
(c)  Storefront character . Buildings shall express a "storefront character". This guideline is met by providing all of the following features along the building frontage as applicable. 
(1)  Regularly spaced and similar-shaped windows with window hoods or trim (all building stories). 
(2)  Large display windows on the ground floor . All street-facing, park-facing and plaza-facing structures shall have windows covering a minimum of 40 percent and a maximum 80 percent of the ground floor of each storefront's linear frontage. Blank walls shall not occupy over 50 percent of a street-facing frontage and shall not exceed 20 linear feet without being interrupted by a window or entry. Mirrored glass, obscured glass and glass block cannot be used in meeting this requirement. Display windows may be used to meet this requirement if the first floor has not been design as a flood proof first floor. 
(d)  Building façade . A clear visual division shall be maintained between the ground level floor and upper floors with either a cornice line or awning from 12 feet to 16 feet above grade, whichever applies to the proposed development. No more than 20 feet of horizontal distance of wall shall be provided without architectural relief for building walls and frontage walls facing the street. All buildings excluding single family detached homes shall utilize at least three of the following design features to provide visual relief along all elevations of the building: 
(1)  Divisions or change in materials (materials should be drawn from a common palette). 
(2)  Window bays. 
(3)  Separate entrances and entry treatments, porticoes extending at least five (5) feet. 
(4)  Variation in roof lines. 
(5)  Balconies: 6 feet maximum may project into the front or side street setbacks. 
(6)  Dormers. 
(7)  Canopies, extending at least five (5) feet. 
(8)  Gables. 
(9)  Overhang extending at least five (5) feet. 
(10)  Recessed entries (at least three [3] feet from the primary façade). 
(11)  Protruding entries (at least three [3] from the primary façade). 
(12)  Covered porch entries. 
(13)  Cupolas shall be permitted on sloped roofs and are exempt from the height limitations up to twelve feet above the roof line. 
(14)  Buildings shall provide a foundation or base, typically from ground to bottom of the lower windowsills, with changes in volume or material. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
Sec. 20.24. - Design review and required drawings. 
    An applicant shall be subject to the City's permit process. In addition, any development within the PAG Overlay District using the building types, as provided in this division, shall submit architectural elevations of all facades of all structures subject to this division and shall be a required exhibit for plan approval which does not subrogate any requirements outlined in Division 5, Site plan approval procedures, and building permit process. Such exhibits shall include colors, materials, building dimensions, mass and scale proportions, location of service areas and mechanical equipment, screening devices, parking, site furnishings, lighting fixtures, all signage, and any other information as determined necessary to ensure consistency with the intent of this division. All elevations and overall design must be signed and sealed by a licensed architect registered in the State of Florida and must provide a summary and illustrations that identify each standard listed in section 20.22 or 20.23 of this division. The City may request review by the Historic Preservation Board to ensure compatibility of new construction or additions within the PAG overlay district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-17) 
DIVISION 21 - RFO RESORT FACILITIES OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 21.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The RFO Resort Facilities Overlay District is applied to specific residential areas or parts of such areas in the city that have been designated appropriate for a mixture of residential and transient accommodation uses and are designated with the RFO Resort Facilities Overlay on the future land use map and is intended to allow certain types of transient accommodations in addition to the uses permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 21.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in areas designated with the RFO Resort Facilities Overlay District are as follows: 
(a)  All uses permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 21.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures, do not involve the conduct of a business, and are not of a nature prohibited under section 21.5. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 21.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the RFO Resort Facilities Overlay District are as follows: 
(a)  All permitted conditional uses permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
(b)  Transient accommodations-Bed and breakfast inns and motels. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 21.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein or within the underlying zoning district are hereby prohibited in the RFO Resort Facilities Overlay District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the RFO Resort Facilities Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 21.6. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
    The maximum residential density permitted in the RFO Resort Facilities Overlay District shall not exceed the maximum number of dwelling units per acre determined by the underlying residential category. Transient Accommodation use shall not exceed a ratio of 1.67 transient accommodation units to the permitted number of the underlying residential units. The minimum lot area and width requirements in the RFO Resort Facilities Overlay District are as follows: 
(a)  Detached single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings. 
(1)  Lot area: As required by the underlying district regulations. 
(2)  Lot width: As required by the underlying district regulations. 
(b)  Transient accommodation uses. 
(1)  Lot area: 2,609 square feet for each transient accommodation unit other than bed and breakfast inns which shall be developed in accordance with the requirements of section 6.2. 
(2)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(c)  All other uses. The lot area and width requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Lot area: As required by the underlying district regulations. 
(2)  Lot width: As required by the underlying district regulations. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 21.7. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    The minimum yard requirements for principal structures in the RFO Resort Facilities Overlay District are as required in this section. 
(a)  Residential dwellings and transient accommodation uses. 
(1)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: Ten feet. 
(3)  Side yards: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(4)  Rear yard: 20 feet. 
(5)  A minimum of 30 percent of the net buildable lot shall be maintained as green space. 
(b)  All other uses. The yard requirements stated below shall be considered the minimum standards; however, the requirements may be modified by the city under the site plan review process to fit the specific use. 
(1)  Front yard: As required by the underlying district regulations. 
(2)  Secondary front yard: As required by the underlying district regulations. 
(3)  Side yards: As required by the underlying district regulations. 
(4)  Rear yard: As required by the underlying district regulations. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 21.8. - Maximum height of structures. 
(a)  Residential and transient accommodation structures: As required by the underlying district regulations. 
(b)  Other structures: 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 21.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Residential. Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(b)  Transient accommodations. Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(c)  All other uses. As determined necessary under the conditional use approval procedures. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 21.10. - Landscaping required. 
    All uses shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of division 22 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 21.11. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential uses: 0.40. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 21.12. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    The lot area used in the calculation of the maximum impervious surface ratio shall exclude any portion of the property lying seaward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for residential and transient accommodation uses: 0.70 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for non-residential uses: Underlying district requirements. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2008-33, § 1, 8-26-08) 
DIVISION 22 - LANDSCAPING AND TREE PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, adopted Nov. 8, 2005, amended Div. 22, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 22 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 22.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent and purpose of these regulations to provide standards for landscaping and tree protection to improve the appearance of the city, as well as assist in the natural control of air and water pollution and soil conservation. Emphasis shall be placed upon landscaping as a means of achieving beauty in the community. It will be required on all projects, and in some projects and areas it will be the primary tool available. Landscaping is considered extremely important to the aesthetic and environmental goals of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 22.2. - Applicability. 
    The minimum requirements set out in this section are applicable to each zoning district relative to tree protection, the landscaping of certain setback areas and additional required on-site landscaping, including vehicular use areas. Landscape design and planning shall be integrated into the overall design concept and not be considered merely as an afterthought. Towards this end, proposed landscaping schemes will be evaluated as to their relationship to the existing natural landscape, developed and other proposed landscape, including those on adjacent properties and street rights-of-way and the building or buildings proposed. The city may require additional landscaping if it deemed important for buffering or screening. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 22.3. - General requirements. 
(a)  Plan approval. All new construction, except single-family and two-family dwellings as regulated under section 22.5, must have a site plan and landscape plan approved by the city prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Screening of certain areas. Screening shall be employed for parking lots as required, and to mask from the public view such service areas as trash and garbage areas, outside equipment of unaesthetic character, and accessory buildings or areas not enhancing or in keeping with the aesthetics of the project or the neighborhood. 
(c)  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the approved landscape plan prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy and shall be installed in accordance with accepted landscape practices within the area. All plant material listed as Category I by the Florida Exotic Pest Plants Council (FEPPC) shall be removed prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  Maintenance. The owner and tenant, or their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping in accordance with section 22.10, and landscaped areas shall be so maintained as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. If trees, shrubs or other landscape material should die, such materials must be replaced within 30 days. 
(e)  Protection of landscaped areas. All landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by curbs, wheel stops or other similar device. 
(f)  Preservation of existing plant material. In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, in part or in whole, for purposes of off-street parking or other vehicular use areas, or in conjunction with other landscaping requirements, an applicant will be encouraged to retain such landscaping. The city manager may adjust the application of the standards set out in this section to allow credit for such plant material if, in his opinion, such an adjustment is in keeping with and will preserve the intent of this section. 
(g)  Reclamation. In the event construction activity ceases on a zoning lot that has been cleared of vegetation, the owner shall be required to restore sufficient vegetation and/or provide such other means, as determined by the city, to ensure the stability of the soil on the lot. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 22.4. - Type, quality and size of plant material. 
(a)  Quality. Plant materials used in conformance with the provisions of this article shall conform to the standard for Florida No. 1 or better, as given in Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, part I, 1963, and part II, published by the Florida Department of Agriculture, or equal. 
(b)  Invasive exotic plant materials. No plant listed by the Florida Exotic Pest Plants Council shall be counted towards the required landscaping. 
(c)  Trees. Except as otherwise provided herein, all trees planted under the provisions of this Code shall be of a species having an average crown of greater than 15 feet at maturity and having a trunk which can be maintained in a clean condition, free of branches, from grade to five feet above grade. Trees having an average mature spread of crown less than 15 feet may be substituted by grouping the trees so as to create the equivalent of a 15-foot crown spread. 
(1)  Canopy trees shall have a minimum height of 12 feet and a DBH dimension of three inches at the time of planting. A recommended list of canopy trees and palms to be used includes but is not limited to the following types: 
Quercus virginiana (Live Oak) 
Conocarpus erectus (Buttonwood) 
Conocarpus erectus serviceus (Silver Buttonwood)* 
Tabebuia Caraba (Silver Trumpet/Yellow Flower)* 
Pinus elliottii (Slash Pine) 
Tabebuia argentia (Gold Tree) 
Swietenia mahogani (Mahogany) 
Celtis laevigata (Sugarberry) 
Platanus occidentalis (Sycamore) 
Juniperus silicicola (Southern Red Cedar) 
Bucida buceras (Black Olive) 
(2)  One of the following palms is equivalent to one required canopy tree when planted at the required height of 12 feet of clear trunk: 
Phoenix dactylfera (Medjool Date Palm)* 
Phoenix canariensis (Canary Island Date Palm) 
Roystonea elata (Royal Palm)* 
Cocos nucifera (Coconut Palm)* 
Or any single or multi-stemmed palm known to be of equivalent mature size. 
(3)  Three of the following palms are equivalent to one required canopy tree when planted at the required height of eight feet of clear trunk: 
Syragus romanzoffiana (Queen Palm) 
Acoelorrhaphe wrightii (Paurotis Palm) 
Sabal palmetto Cabbage Palm (Sabal Palm)* 
Washingtonia robusta (Washingtonian Palm) 
Or any single palm known to be of equivalent mature size. 
(4)  Required canopy trees may be replaced with under-story trees when the mature height of the canopy trees will conflict with overhead power lines, excluding service drops. Appropriate setbacks of trees from such power lines, as referenced by Florida Power and Light's "Plant the Right Tree in the Right Place" publication shall be required, a copy of which is on file at the office of the city clerk. 
(5)  Accent/under-story trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in overall height and a tree DBH dimension of two inches at the time of planting. 
(6)  The following is a recommended list of accent/under-story trees to be used: 
Jatropha Hastata Compacta (Jatropha)* 
Coccoloba Uvifera (Sea Grape) 
Coccoloba diversifolia. (Pigeon Plum) 
Tecoma stans (Yellow Elder) 
Persea borbonia (Redbay) 
Ilex vomitoria (Yaupon Holly)* 
Callistemon vaminalis (Weeping bottlebrush) 
Eriobotrya japonica (Loquat) 
Myrica cerifera (Wax Myrtle) 
Lagerstroemia indica (Crepe Myrtle) 
(d)  Credit for saving existing trees. No credit shall be given to canopy trees identified by these regulations as nuisance trees. The following trees shall be considered nuisance trees: Malalueca quinquenervia (Punk Tree), Schinus terebinthifolius (Brazilian Pepper), Casuarina spp. (Australian Pine), Cupaniopsis anacardioides (Carrotwood), Melia azedarack (China Berry), and Sapium sebiferum (Chinese Tallow) or any tree listed by the Florida Pest Plant Council. Credit is given for existing canopy trees, in good health as provided below: 
(1)  Credit is given at the following ratios for existing canopy trees in good health to be preserved: 
4?-10? DBH = 1 tree 
10?-20? DBH = 2 trees 
Over 20? DBH = 3 trees 
(2)  Credit is given at the ratio of three palms to one tree for existing native palms. 
(3)  A maximum ten percent required parking credit may be allowed for the purpose of preserving native trees. 
(e)  Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs and hedges shall be a minimum of two feet in height when measured immediately after planting. Hedges, where required, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous unbroken solid visual screen within one year after time of planting. A recommended list of shrubs and hedges to be used includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
Rapholepis Indica (Dwarf Indian Hawthorne)* 
Conocarpus erectus (Buttonwood) 
Coccoloba Uvifera (Sea Grape) 
Allamanda Cathartica (Dwarf Allamanda)* 
Plumbago Capensis (Blue Plumbago)* 
Serenoa Repens (Saw Palmetto)* 
Penta Lanceolata (Pentas)* 
Chrysobalanus icaco (Cocoplum) 
Myrica pumila (Dwarf Wax Myrtle) 
Ilex vomitoria (Dwarf Yaupon Holly) 
Lantana involucrata (Beach Lantana) 
Viburnum obovatum (Walter Viburnum)* 
(f)  Ground covers. Ground covers in lieu of grass, in whole or in part, shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage. In no instance shall stone or gravel be utilized for more than 20 percent of the minimum required pervious area. A recommended list of ground covers to be used includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
Gallardia Pullchella (Gallardia)* 
Helianthus Debius (Beach Sunflower)* 
Lantana Camara (Dwarf Yellow Lantana)* 
Trachelospernum Jasmine Varigated (Varegated Confederate Jasmine)* 
Trachelospernum Jasmine Minima Varegated (Varegated Dwarf Confederated Jasmine)* 
Trachelospernum Jasminoides (Confederate Jasmine)* 
Licania michauxii (Gopher Apple) 
Scaevola plumieri (Inkberry) 
Stachytarpheta jamaicensis (Prone Porterweed)* 
Zamia pumila (Coontie)* 
Muhlenbergia capillaris (Muhley Grass)* 
(g)  Lawn grass. Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown in permanent lawns in the city area. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged or sprigged, except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. A recommended list of ground covers to be used includes but is not limited to, the following: 
Stenotaphrum secundatum (St. Augustine) 
Paspalum vaginatum (Seashore Paspalum) 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 22.5. - Landscaping for single-family and two-family dwellings. 
    All new or substantially improved single-family and two-family dwellings shall be landscaped in accordance with this subsection prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Trees required. All trees shall meet the standards of section 22.4. The number of trees required to be planted upon construction of a single-family and two-family dwelling shall be as follows: 
Lot Size Minimum Number of Trees 3,500 to 6,000 square feet 2 trees 6,001 to 7,500 square feet 3 trees 7,501 to 10,000 square feet 4 trees 10,001 to 16,000 square feet 6 trees Over 16,000 square feet 8 trees  
(b)  Credit for remaining trees. If, on a zoning lot for a single-family or two-family dwelling, existing trees can be saved and will remain in good condition when construction is complete, credit shall be given pursuant to section 22.4(d). 
(c)  Other materials. The remainder of the required landscaped areas shall be adequately landscaped with shrubs, grass, ground cover or other landscape treatment as described in subsection 22.4. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 22.6. - Landscaping for all other developments. 
(a)  New multifamily and all nonresidential developments. New multifamily and all nonresidential developments shall be landscaped in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section. 
(b)  Additions to existing buildings. When the cost of any addition to or renovation of an existing multifamily or nonresidential building is determined to be a substantial improvement, as defined in Division 2, the property shall be landscaped in accordance with paragraph (a) prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If the proposed addition or renovation will not constitute a substantial improvement and if the property does not comply with the requirements of this division, one square foot of landscaping for each one square foot of additional building area shall be required. If no buildings are constructed, landscaping equal to the following table shall be required. 
Cost of Renovation Dollar Amount of Landscaping Required $1,001.00-$10,000.00 25 percent of renovations costs $10,001.00-$25,000.00 20 percent of renovations costs $25,001.00-$100,000.00 15 percent of renovations costs Over $100,001.00 10 percent of renovations costs  
    In the event that the required landscaping cannot be placed on the property in such a way as to permit proper maintenance, said landscaping may be placed in the public right-of-way with the approval of the city. If that is not practical, a payment in accordance with the table above may made to the city for landscaping in an appropriate area. 
(c)  Changes in use. Changes in use of existing buildings shall require the landscaping of the property to bring it into full compliance with all the standards provided in this section. 
(d)  Community Redevelopment District (CRD). All new projects within the CRD abutting Gulf Boulevard and Blind Pass Road are encouraged to utilize plant material marked with an (*) within the front setback. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 22.7. - Development standards. 
(a)  Front setback areas. Required landscaping in front setback areas in all districts, except RU-1, RU-2 and RLM-1, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Minimum size of landscaped areas. Except where driveways and walkways providing ingress and egress crossing the property line, the entire length of the property frontage shall be landscaped and shall have a minimum depth from the front property line inward to the property equal to ten percent of the adjacent right-of-way width. 
(2)  Minimum number of trees. The total number of trees shall not be less than one for each 180 square feet or fraction thereof of the area to be landscaped. 
(3)  Other materials. The remainder of the required landscaped areas shall be adequately landscaped with a mixture of shrubs, grass, ground cover or other approved landscape treatment. 
(b)  Vehicular use areas. Except along the boundary of a vehicular use area that is landscaped in accordance with paragraph (a) preceding, other vehicular use areas, where such areas will not be entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure from any abutting property line there shall be provided landscaping between such areas and such property lines as follows: 
(1)  Planting area. A strip of land at least six feet in depth, located between the property line and the vehicular use area shall be landscaped. 
(2)  Minimum number of trees. The minimum number of trees is one tree for each 30 linear feet or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Minimum size of landscaped areas. Except for driveways crossing property lines, the entire boundary of the vehicle use area shall be landscaped. 
(4)  Hedge required. Unless otherwise approved during the site plan review process, a hedge in accordance with section 22.4 of at least two feet in height shall be placed along the entire length of such landscaped area. 
(5)  Other materials. The remainder of the required landscaped area shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other approved landscaping treatment. 
(c)  Interior landscaping for vehicular use areas. 
(1)  Area to be landscaped. 
a.  Minimum area per parking space. Off-street parking areas shall have at least 20 square feet of interior landscaping for each parking space, excluding those spaces abutting a perimeter for which landscaping is required by other parts of this section. 
b.  Minimum area relative to other vehicular use areas. In addition, other vehicular use areas, such as loading areas or vehicle storage lots, shall have two square feet of landscaping area for each 100 square feet or fraction thereof. 
c.  Determination of size of vehicular use areas. Where the property contains both parking areas and other vehicular use areas, the two types of areas may be separated for the purposes of determining the other vehicular use areas by first multiplying the total number of parking spaces by 300 and subtracting the resulting figure from the total square footage of paved areas. 
d.  Minimum size of landscaped areas. Each separate landscaped area shall contain a minimum of 400 square feet and shall have a minimum dimension of at least ten feet, unless otherwise specifically provided for elsewhere in this Code. 
e.  Parking areas with fewer than 20 parking spaces. On properties with fewer than 20 total parking spaces, interior landscaping required above may be added to the perimeter landscape areas pursuant to paragraph (3) below. 
(2)  Plant materials. 
a.  Generally. Each separate landscaped area shall include at least one tree, as specified in section 22.4(c), with the remaining area adequately landscaped with shrubs, ground cover or other approved landscaping material. 
b.  Minimum number of trees. The total number of trees shall not be less than one for each 100 square feet or fraction thereof of required interior landscaping areas. 
c.  Location of landscaped areas. Such landscaped areas shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving and at strategic points to guide traffic flow and direction. 
(3)  Exception. In off-street parking areas and other vehicular use areas where the strict application of this section will seriously limit the function of such area, the required landscaping may be permitted to be located along the perimeters of the area, including such perimeters which may be adjacent to the building on the site. Such landscaping shall be in addition to all other landscaping requirements. 
(d)  Walkways, pedestrian connections and additional landscaped areas. Pedestrian walkways shall be landscaped with additional shade or ornamental trees equal to an average of one shade tree per 50 linear feet of walkway, unless the walkway is adjacent or included within an existing compliant buffer or frontage planting. One shade tree shall be planted for each 200 square feet of separate additional landscaped area. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 22.8. - Buffer requirements and installation standards. 
(a)  Generally. A buffer shall be defined as specified land area together with its planting and landscaping requirements. Buffers may also contain a barrier, such as a fence, wall, hedge, or berm, where such additional screening is necessary to achieve the desired degree of buffering between adjacent uses. 
    Landscaped buffers shall be required to separate transient accommodation and nonresidential uses from residential or institutional uses, where such area abuts property zoned or in fact used primarily for residential or institutional purposes, to eliminate or minimize potential negative effects such as dirt, noise, litter, glare of lights, signs, parking areas, or to provide spacing to reduce the adverse impacts of noise, odor, or danger from fires or explosions. The size and nature of the buffer shall be determined by the site plan process. Buffers shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  A buffer may be used for passive recreation, when appropriate upon approval of the approving authority. 
(2)  A buffer may be used for utility or drainage easements, provided that the requirements of such use and the buffer requirements are compatible. 
(3)  A buffer may be used for satisfaction of minimum setback requirements. 
(4)  A buffer may be used for satisfaction of minimum open space requirements. 
(5)  A buffer may be used for storm water retention or detention areas so long as the required buffer plantings are provided and the design and landscaping of the buffer does not interfere with proper functioning of the drainage system and the design water depth does not harm the viability of the plantings. 
(6)  A buffer may be used for passive recreation such as pedestrian or bicycle trails subject to the following limitations: 
a.  No plant material is eliminated. 
b.  The total width of the buffer is maintained. 
c.  All other requirements of these regulations are met. 
(7)  A buffer may be used for installation of underground utilities and utility structures provided such structures do not exceed four feet in height so long as the location and use of the utility lines does not interfere with required buffer plantings. 
(8)  The following uses shall not be allowed in a required buffer: principal structures, accessory structures, swimming pools, tennis courts, or similar active recreation uses; storage facilities, or parking facilities. 
(9)  Buffers shall remain part of the zoning lot for which they are required. 
(10)  The required buffer shall not contain any development, impervious surfaces, or site features that do not function to meet the standards of this section. No grading, development, or land-disturbing activities shall occur within the buffer unless approved as part of a development permit. Storm water detention, retention or treatment areas and easements shall be shown on the approved landscape plan and such areas shall not occupy more than 50 percent, horizontally, of the width of the buffer. 
(11)  The arrangement of required plants and trees shall be distributed in a relatively uniform manner and as depicted on the approved landscape plan. 
(12)  Existing trees and vegetation within a required buffer, which meet these requirements may be counted toward the total buffer plant material requirements. If existing trees and plants do not fully meet the standards for the type of buffer required, additional vegetation shall be planted. 
(b)  Location of buffers. The buffers required by these regulations shall be located along the perimeter of a zoning lot where required, extending the entire length of the zoning lot, except at approved entrances or exits to the property or in required sight triangles. Buffers shall extend to the zoning lot line or right-of-way line, except where easements, covenants, or natural features may require the buffer to be set back from the property line. 
(1)  Buffers shall not be located on any portion of an existing, dedicated, or proposed right-of-way, road easement, or private street. 
(2)  Where an existing utility easement is partially or wholly within a required buffer, the developer shall design the buffer to eliminate or minimize plantings within the easement. Such design may necessitate choosing a buffer with more land area or fewer required plantings. 
(3)  All general landscape requirements of these regulations shall be met. 
(c)  Landscape buffer along public streets. Landscape buffers along "A" and "B" streets shall meet the following guidelines: 
(1)  A five- to 15-foot landscape buffer shall be required along public streets and shall include shade trees and groundcover. 
(2)  All planted shrub and groundcover areas shall achieve a 100-percent coverage of their planting area within one year. 
(3)  Permitted features for front buffers - sidewalks, signs, low wall and picket fences (wrought iron, wood or PVC). 
(4)  Additional features such as a knee walls and decorative picket fencing are permissible with the following standards. 

a.  Knee wall - maximum 24 inches. 
b.  Decorative fencing - maximum 48 inches and must have at least 50 percent of required buffer planting adjacent to right-of-way. 
(5)  Prohibited features in front buffers - chain-link fences, walls greater than two feet, loading, service or dumpsters areas or similar items may not be placed in the front buffer or in any additional "open space" adjacent to the street or any direction visible from the street. 
(d)  Buffer requirements. The following types of buffers shall be required for the uses described and illustrated on the following pages. 
(1)  Commercial use adjacent to single-family or two-family residential - Type C 
(2)  Transient accommodation use adjacent to single-family or two-family residential - Type C 
(3)  Mixed use adjacent to single-family or two-family residential - Type B 
(4)  Commercial use adjacent to mixed-use with residential component - Type B 
(5)  Multi-family use adjacent to single-family or two-family residential - Type B 
(6)  Commercial use adjacent to commercial use - Type A 
(7)  Commercial use adjacent to transient accommodation use - Type B 
(8)  Multi-family use adjacent to multi-family use - Type A 
(e)  Fencing within buffers. Fencing for the purpose of security or protection is allowable within all buffers provided the fence is in compliance with the applicable standards of these regulations. Developments proposing a privacy fence five feet or more in height within a required buffer may be allowed a 50 percent reduction in the density of plantings. Such request shall be submitted in writing by the applicant and shall include provisions by the owner for maintenance of the buffer and the fencing. 



(f)  Plant sizes and design requirements. 
(1)  Trees in buffers of ten feet or less should be small or medium. Trees in buffers of more than ten feet may be small, medium, or large provided, however, at least one-half of the required trees shall be large. Trees used in required buffers may be used to meet the required plantings for the property, provided the trees meet or exceed all size, type, and location requirements for replacement trees as specified in these regulations. 
(2)  Alternative designs for required buffers may be approved by the city manager upon a finding that such alternative design meets the intent of these regulations and sound landscaping practices. In no case is the city manager authorized to reduce the width of a buffer or the total number of plants required on the site. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 22.9. - Preservation standards. 
(a)  Construction barriers. During the development of the property, the owner of the property shall be responsible for the erection of any and all barriers or protective guards necessary to protect any existing or installed vegetation from damage during construction. 
(b)  Wall. Wherever a change of grade is planned, the trees to be preserved shall be protected by a wall so as to preserve the existing grade for the tree's root system. 
(c)  Topsoil. Wherever a change of grade is planned, the topsoil stripped on site shall be preserved for the new landscaping to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 22.10. - Maintenance standards. 
(a)  Landscaped areas. All required landscaped areas must include an in-ground automatic irrigation system. The plantings in any landscaped area must be properly maintained in order for the landscaped area to fulfill the purposes for which it was established. Such maintenance shall include all actions necessary to keep the landscaped area free of litter and debris and to keep plantings healthy and orderly in appearance. Where reclaimed water is not used to irrigate, the developer is required to use drip or micro-spray irrigation systems. 
(b)  Buffers. The plantings, fences, walls, and berms that constitute a buffer must be properly maintained in order for the buffer to fulfill the purpose for which it is established. Such maintenance shall include all actions necessary to keep the buffer free of litter and debris, and to keep plantings, walls, fences, and berms in good repair and neat appearance. All buffer material shall be protected from damage by motor vehicles or pedestrians which could reduce the effectiveness of the buffer. 
(c)  Damage. In the event that any vegetation or physical element functioning to meet the standards of this division is severely damaged, it shall be replanted or replaced within 30 days. In the event that the damage is found to be caused by a catastrophic event, a grace period of 180 days shall be granted for replacement. 
(d)  Pruning. Trees shall be pruned in accordance with the pruning standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI publication A300); however, the topping of trees is prohibited. Topping shall be considered a violation of Section 22.11 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 22.11. - Tree protection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed any tree having a DBH of three inches or more or any palm with a height of eight feet or more overall without first having obtained a tree removal permit from the city in accordance with section 22.13. Diameter at breast height or DBH means the measurement of a single-stemmed or multi-stemmed tree at four and one-half feet above grade. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 22.12. - Tree removal permit required. 
    Approval of a tree removal permit shall be regulated by the following: 
(a)  Mangroves. Mangroves shall be removed only in accordance with the provisions of F.S. §§ 403.9321 through 403.9333. 
(b)  Approved permits. Tree removal permits issued by the city, in accordance with the administrative regulations pertaining thereto, shall be valid for a period of three months from the date of issuance. 
(c)  New development or redevelopment. When the development of a vacant property or the redevelopment of an existing developed property is proposed, the following requirements shall be followed: 
(1)  Where no trees having a three-inch DBH or greater exist on a site proposed for development, an applicant for a development permit shall verify in writing at the time of permit application that no protected trees exist. Such verification shall be in the form of a notarized statement which shall be filed with the application. 
(2)  Where such trees do exist on a site proposed for development or redevelopment and are proposed for removal or relocation, a plan showing in what manner removed trees will be replaced or where such trees will be relocated shall be submitted with the application. 
(3)  Where such trees will remain, a plan shall be submitted showing how such trees will be protected during the development process. 
(d)  Standards for approval. In determining whether or not a permit should be issued, the city manager shall consider and base his decision on the following: 
(1)  The condition of the tree with respect to disease, insect attack, danger of falling, proximity to existing or proposed structures and interference with utilities; 
(2)  The necessity of removing a tree to construct proposed improvements in order to allow reasonable economic use of the property; 
(3)  Whether the tree has been determined to be an historic or specimen tree, meaning a tree which has been determined to be of notable historic or high value to the city because of type, size, age or community association; 
(4)  Impact upon the urban and natural environment including: 
a.  Ecological impacts. Whether the removal of trees will have an adverse impact upon existing biological and ecological systems, microclimatic conditions which directly affect these systems, or whether such removals will create conditions which may adversely affect the dynamic equilibrium of associated systems. 
b.  Noise pollution. Whether the removal of trees will significantly increase ambient or point source noise levels to the degree that a public nuisance is anticipated to occur. 
c.  Wildlife habitat. Whether the removal of trees will significantly reduce the available habitat for wildlife existence and reproduction or result in the emigration of wildlife from adjacent or associated ecosystems. 
(5)  The ease with which the applicant can alter or revise any proposed development to eliminate the need to remove the tree; and 
(6)  Whether the tree is one of the Category I exotic invasive plants, as listed by the Florida's Exotic Pest Plants Council, including, but not limited to the Australian Pine (Casaurina spp.), Chinese Tallow (Sapium sebiferum), Carrotwood (Cupianopsis anacardioides), Punk (cajeput) tree (Melaleuca quinquenervia), and Brazilian Pepper (also known as the Florida Holly) (Schinus terebinthefolius). 
(e)  Replacement of removed trees. Trees removed under the provisions of this section shall be replaced as follows: 
(1)  New developments. Where trees were removed to accommodate a new development, replacement trees shall be governed by the landscaping requirements of this Code for new developments. 
(2)  Other properties. Replacement of removed trees shall be required within six months of the date of issuance of the tree removal permit as follows: 
a.  When the removed tree is of a native species, the replacement tree shall also be of a native species. 
b.  Except as provided in paragraph d herein, removed trees four-inches DBH or smaller shall be replaced by one tree for each tree removed. 
c.  Except as provided in paragraph d herein, removed trees larger than four-inches DBH shall be replaced by two trees for each tree removed. 
d.  When the total number of trees on the property meet or exceed the requirements in section 22.4 for single-family and two-family properties, replacement trees shall not be required. 
(f)  Denial of a tree removal permit. In the event a tree removal permit is denied, the city manager shall specify the reasons for such denial in writing. Applicants may appeal a denial in accordance with section 3.14 of this Code. 
(g)  Removal of hazardous trees required. It shall be unlawful for any owner of real property to allow, suffer or permit any tree which has been damaged or injured to remain upon the real property when the tree creates and constitutes a hazard endangering the life or limb of any person or surrounding adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 22.13. - Relocation by the city. 
    In some instances where the trees to be removed are healthy and desirable, with the permission of the owner, the city shall have the option to relocate the tree at its expense. If the city chooses relocation under this provision, such relocation shall be accomplished within 15 working days of the issuance of the permit. If the city fails to remove the tree within the 15-working day period, the permit holder shall be allowed to proceed as provided in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 22.14. - Tree removal permit requirements. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit to remove a tree as required by this section shall make written application, accompanied by the payment of the applicable fee set forth in Appendix A, St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances, to the city manager. 
(b)  Failure to obtain the required permit shall result in a penalty charge equal to twice the cost of the original permit or $100.00, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 11-8-05) 
DIVISION 23 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, adopted Nov. 8, 2005, amended Div. 23, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 23 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 23.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent and purpose of these regulations to provide accessible, attractive, secure, properly lighted, well maintained and screened off-street parking facilities for the citizens and the visitors of the City of St. Pete Beach. These regulations are also intended to reduce traffic congestion and hazards and to assure the maneuverability of emergency vehicles by requiring the adequate, appropriately designed and well placed provision of off-street parking and loading in proportion to the needs generated by varying types of land use. These requirements are also intended to protect residential neighborhoods from the adverse effects of vehicular noise and traffic generated by adjacent non-residential land use districts. It is the intent of these regulations that every structure and use erected or established shall be provided with adequate off-street parking facilities for the use of occupants, employees, visitors, customers or patrons. It is also the intent of these regulations that certain uses provide adequate off-street loading facilities. Such off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be maintained and continued so long as the permitted use continues. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 23.2. - Residential parking restricted. 
    Residential parking restrictions shall apply within the RU-1, RU-2, RLM-1, RLM-2 and RM zoning districts. For the purpose of this section, the term "stored" shall be construed to include parking for a period exceeding 48 hours. 
(a)  Recreational vehicles. No recreational vehicle, as defined in Division 2, shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes. Such vehicles may be stored in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Recreational vehicles may be stored in a rear yard, except waterfront yards, or side yard; and 
(2)  No more than one recreational vehicle may be stored in a front yard, provided that such vehicle is located as follows: 
a.  On an improved surface; and 
b.  Such that the length of the vehicle is perpendicular to the front property line of the zoning lot; and 
c.  Located a minimum of ten feet from the back of the curb on any public street. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles that are stored off-site may be parked anywhere on a residential lot for up to 48 hours for the purpose of loading or unloading. 
(4)  Visiting recreational vehicles shall be allowed to park temporarily for one week in any consecutive 90-day period provided the property owner notifies the city of such recreational vehicle within 24 hours. 
(5)  Right-of-way parking of recreational vehicles shall be in accordance with Section 82-136 of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Boats and trailers. Boats and trailers may be stored in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Boats and trailers may be stored in a rear or side yard; and 
(2)  No more than one boat and/or trailer may be stored in a front yard, provided that the following regulations are met: 
a.  On an improved surface or on an unimproved area adjacent to the side property line; and 
b.  Such that the length of the boat and/or trailer is perpendicular to the front property line of the zoning lot; and 
c.  Located a minimum of ten feet from the back of the curb on any public street. 
(3)  Right-of-way parking of boats and trailers shall be in accordance with section 82-136 of the St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Personal watercraft. Up to two personal watercraft may be stored in accordance with paragraph (b) preceding. 
(d)  Commercial vehicles. Overnight parking of commercial vehicles, as defined in Division 2, shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 23.3. - Applicability and scope. 
(a)  One and two-family residential uses shall have the required number of parking spaces set forth in the applicable district regulations and shall comply with Section 23.11(b) of this Code. 
(b)  Every other use hereafter instituted, and every other structure hereafter erected or enlarged, shall have permanently maintained off-street parking areas pursuant to the provisions set out in this division. 
(c)  Where on-street parking is available, such on-street parking shall not be used as a substitute for any parking required by this Code. 
(d)  Where an existing use has fewer parking spaces than the number of parking spaces that would be required by this Code and the existing use is increased in density or intensity, additional parking spaces shall be required only as necessary for the increased units, square footage or intensity of the use. 
(e)  Wherever in any zoning district, off-street facilities are provided for the parking or display of any and all types of vehicles or boats, whether such vehicles or boats are self-propelled or not, such off-street facilities and all land upon which vehicles traverse the property as a function of the property use, including "drive-in" facilities, shall conform to the minimum requirements of these regulations. 
(f)  Where, upon the date of adoption of this Code, a use exists whose parking, for any reason whatsoever, is less than that which was required by the zoning code in effect at the time a building permit was issued for the structure(s) thereon, such parking shall be deemed a lawfully existing characteristic of use and shall be deemed to be in conformity with these regulations and shall be allowed to continue. However, any expansion of the use shall comply with subsection (d) above. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 23.4. - General parking requirements. 
    All off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the following general requirements: 
(a)  No building or use shall be permitted or constructed unless off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Computation of required spaces. 
(1)  Fractional space requirements shall be rounded up to the next whole space. 
(2)  In houses of worship and other places of public assembly in which occupants utilize benches, pews or similar seating arrangements, each 18 linear inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining the required number of parking spaces. 
(3)  In multistory buildings having vertical penetrations including, but not limited to, elevator, mechanical closets, air shafts, stairways and other similar penetrations, and large retail establishments in excess of 5,000 square feet in area having "backroom" storage or working space, may deduct these spaces from the gross square footage in calculating parking space needs. 
(4)  In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately and the off-street parking space for one use shall not be considered as providing the required off-street parking for any other use, except as provided for in the shared parking criteria in this division. 
(c)  Off-street parking areas shall not be used for sales, dead storage, repair, dismantling or servicing of any type or kind, nor shall areas devoted to such activities count toward meeting off-street parking requirements. 
(d)  Off-street parking areas for five or more automobiles shall have individual spaces that are designed, maintained and regulated so that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street or sidewalk and so that any automobile may be parked and unparked without moving another automobile. 
(e)  Except as provided in section 23.7, all off street parking areas shall be surfaced with asphalt, bituminous or concrete material, clay brick or concrete paving units, and maintained in a smooth, well-graded condition; provided, however, turf block may be used for the parking space surface. 
(f)  If artificially lighted, such lighting shall be so designed and arranged that light is directed away from any adjoining property used or zoned for residential purposes and so designed and arranged as to shield public roadways and all other adjacent properties from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind. 
(g)  Be arranged for the convenient access and safety of pedestrians and vehicles. 
(h)  Be so arranged that no vehicle shall be required to back from such facilities directly onto arterial or collector streets as defined by the ITE Manual. 
(i)  Have curbs, motor vehicle stops or similar devices so as to prevent vehicles from overhanging on or into public rights-of-way or adjacent property. 
(j)  Off-street parking spaces shall be reserved for the exclusive use of residents, customers, patrons, or employees of the principal use of the property they are designed and intended to serve; provided, however, the city may authorize such parking on non-residentially zoned properties to be used on a temporary basis by the general public in connection with a special event approved by the city under Article II of Chapter 26 of the City of St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances during those times the principal use of the property is not operating. 
(k)  Required off-street parking shall be located as follows: 
(1)  On the same or contiguous property of the use the parking is intended to serve; 
(2)  On non-contiguous property which has the same zoning classification or a zoning classification which allows the use as permitted or conditional, as the use the parking is intended to serve, provided: 
a.  The off premise parking is within eight hundred (800) feet of the principal use to be served, to be measured along the most direct pedestrian route; except for a restaurant, hotel, or theater use that operates and maintains a valet parking service for customers, for which the off premise parking may be located within one thousand (1,000) feet from the principal use it is intended to serve, to be measured along the most direct pedestrian route. 
b.  An identifiable pedestrian connection is provided between the off-premise parking area and the principal use it is intended to serve. The pedestrian connection shall require no crossing of a collector or arterial street, except at a signalized intersection. 
c.  A parking agreement in a form approved by the city attorney is recorded with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Pinellas County, Florida, at the owner's expense providing that the off-premise parking area will not be disposed of except in conjunction with the sale or use of the building the parking area serves so long as the parking is required. 
(l)  Non-required, supplemental surface parking associated with an off-premise parking lot within the Gulf Boulevard Redevelopment District shall be limited to a time period not to exceed five years from the date the conditional use permit is originally approved by the city commission. 
(m)  Conditional use approval for a commercial parking lot in the Bayou Residential Character District shall be limited to two years from the date the conditional use permit is originally approved by the city commission. 
(n)  Notwithstanding any other provisions or restrictions contained in this Code, all parking lots, that have been permitted in accordance with this Code and in place at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, are considered vested until such time as the owner of the lot chooses to expand or change use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 11-8-05; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 23.5. - Number of parking spaces required. 
    Regardless of any other requirement of these regulations, each and every separate or individual store, office, or other business shall be provided with at least one off-street parking space, excluding required handicap parking, unless specific provision to the contrary is made herein. 
    The following minimum off-street parking requirements are applicable to all districts except as otherwise provided herein: 
Use Parking Requirement (spaces) Automobile Service Station 1 space per bay plus 3 spaces Any form of residential 2 per unit Bar, Nightclub 1 per 50 SF floor area Bed and Breakfast 1 space per guest room plus 1 space for owner or operator Convenience Store 1 per 200 SF floor area Grocery Store 1 per 100 SF floor area Legitimate Theatre 1 per 3 seats Marina or Commercial Docks Boat slips/live aboard 1.0 per boat slip High and dry slips 1.0 per 4 boat slips or fraction thereof Boat slips/non-live aboard 1.0 per 4 boat slips or fraction thereof Office 1 per 300 SF floor area Place of Worship 1 per 3 seats in auditorium or chapel area Restaurant 1 per 100 SF floor area Retail Sales and Service 1 per 200 SF floor area Schools 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area, plus one for each teacher Theater, Movie 1 per 3 seats Transient Accommodations 1 per transient accommodation unit, plus 1 additional per 10 transient accommodation units, plus additional parking for accessory facilities in accordance with the following: Office space 1 per 300 SF floor area Retail and restaurant space 1 per 200 SF floor area Ballrooms, lobby area, conference and meeting rooms, and fitness facilities 1 per 1,000 SF floor area Vehicle Rental 1 per 200 SF floor area, must be marked as customer spaces plus one for each rental vehicle  
(a)  In instances of new construction or facility expansion involving the establishment of outdoor seating areas or other accessory or supplemental uses, the number of required parking spaces shall be increased in accordance with the above table such that parking is adequate to accommodate the entire area of use, both internal and external to the structure; provided, however, outdoor dining or outdoor drinking areas shall not be required to provide additional parking when the outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area is less than 500 square feet or is located on a private sand beach affiliated with a temporary lodging establishment. Any portion of the outdoor dining or outdoor drinking area greater than 500 square feet not located on a private sand beach affiliated with a temporary lodging establishment shall be included as gross floor area for the purposes of calculating off-street parking requirements at the rate set forth in the above table or as otherwise provided by this Code. 
(b)  Parking spaces that are in excess of the number of spaces required by this division shall be constructed as grass parking, turf block or in a parking structure. 
(c)  Where a project is intended to be developed in phases, the city manager may approve the development of a parking area intended to serve each phase as it is developed. 
(d)  All retail projects shall be required to provide a minimum of five bicycle rack spaces, or a number of bicycle rack spaces equal to ten percent of the required number of vehicle parking spaces, whichever is greater. 
(e)  For properties zoned CRD-EA, permitted non-residential and transient accommodation uses are exempt from the minimum parking standards above. Residential uses shall provide the required off-street parking in the table above. 
(f)  For commercial properties located in the Downtown Redevelopment District, additional parking shall be required for a change of use only if there is an increase in the floor area of an existing building or construction of additional buildings upon a determination by the city that there is inadequate space to increase on-site parking in accordance with city requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 11-8-05; Ord. No. 2006-37, § 1, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 2010-18, § 1(Exh. A), 11-8-11; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 3, 5-26-15) 
Sec. 23.6. - Handicap parking requirements. 
    Handicapped parking shall be provided consistent with the requirements of Florida Statutes, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 23.7. - Pervious and semi-pervious parking. 
(a)  Pervious/semi-pervious parking . Drought tolerant sod, shell, gravel or other similar pervious or semi-pervious surfaces that do not cause erosion, barriers to pedestrian access, or adverse effects to abutting parcels may be approved under the site plan provisions of Division 5 of this Code for parking facilities that meet one of the following criteria: 
(1)  An off-premise or commercial parking lot in the Gulf Boulevard Redevelopment District for which a conditional use permit has been issued. 
(2)  Non-required (excess) parking on the same premise as the use it is intended to serve. 
(3)  Required parking in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  For houses of worship, up to 50 percent of required off-street parking facilities 
b.  For parks and recreation facilities in a Recreation/Open Space (R/OS) District all required parking except for parking required under section 23.6 of this Code. 
c.  For public and private schools, child care and family day care facilities, private clubs, and assisted living facilities, up to 30 percent of their required parking facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 11-8-05; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 4, 5-26-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-03, § 4, adopted May 26, 2015, amended § 23.7 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Grass and turf block parking" to "Pervious and semi-pervious parking," as set out herein. 
Sec. 23.8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-03, § 5, adopted May 26, 2015 repealed § 23.8, which pertained to off-site parking, when allowable, and derived from Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, adopted Nov. 8, 2005. 
Sec. 23.9. - Shared off-street parking. 
(a)  Two or more owners or operators of buildings or uses requiring off-street parking facilities may make collective provision for such facilities, provided that the total of such parking spaces when combined or used together shall not be less than the sum of the requirements computed separately, except in accordance with the requirements of this section. Any arrangement for combined off-street parking shall be subject to the filing of a legal instrument satisfactory to the city manager ensuring that such off-street parking will be maintained in the future so long as a use or uses requiring such off-street parking continue. 
(b)  No part of an off-street parking area required for any building or use shall be included as a part of an off-street parking area similarly required for another building or use except as shared parking as set forth below. 
(c)  The city manager may approve shared parking facilities for developments or uses with different operating hours or different peak business periods if the shared parking complies with the all of following standards: 
(1)  Shared parking may not be used to satisfy the off-street parking standards for upper-story residential uses. 
(2)  Shared parking spaces must be located within 600 feet of the primary entrance of all uses served. Required parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall meet all requirements of the Florida Accessibility Code. 
(3)  Shared parking areas for uses located in a nonresidential district shall not be located in any residential district. 
(4)  Those wishing to use shared parking as a means of satisfying off-street parking requirements must submit a shared parking analysis to the city manager that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared parking. The study must be provided in a form established by the city manager and made available to the public. It must address, at a minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking spaces. 
(5)  A shared parking plan shall be enforced through written agreement among all owners of record. The owner of the shared parking area shall enter into a written agreement with the county with enforcement running to the county providing that the land comprising the parking area shall never be disposed of except in conjunction with the sale of the building which the parking area serves so long as the facilities are required; and that the owner agrees to bear the expense of recording the agreement and such agreement shall bind his or her heirs, successors, and assigns. An attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record shall be submitted to the city manager for recordation in a form established by the city manager. Recordation of the agreement must take place before issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy for any use to be served by the shared parking area. A shared parking agreement may be revoked only if all required off-street parking spaces will be provided on-site in accordance with the off-street parking schedules in this section. The written agreement shall be voided by the city if other off-street facilities are provided in accord with these zoning regulations. 
(6)  Where the uses subject to a shared parking agreement change, the city manager shall have the authority to require a revised shared parking study and a new shared parking agreement when the revised shared parking study indicates additional parking is required. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 23.10. - Utilization of boat slips as required parking. 
    Eating and drinking establishments and water oriented retail businesses may utilize boat slips to meet off-street parking requirements subject to approval by the city manager in accordance with the following standards: 
(a)  All slips must be under the ownership or long-term control of the subject business. 
(b)  Boat slips must be available on a first come, first served basis, with no fee assessed for use. 
(c)  Boat slips must be reasonably designed to accommodate customer boats. 
(d)  The dock facility must be properly accessible in accordance with the regulations governing the maneuvering of watercraft on the adjacent waterway. 
(e)  Boat slips must only be used for transient mooring and no overnight storage of vessels shall be allowed. 
(f)  Dock facilities must be compliant with applicable regulations governing handicap access and other accessibility or safety concerns. 
(g)  Dock facilities must meet all other provisions of the city's land development code related to commercial docks. 
(h)  No more than 20 percent of required off-street parking can be provided as boat slips. 
(i)  Boat slips are allowed to meet off-street parking requirements strictly on a one space per slip basis. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 23.11. - Parking construction and design requirements. 
(a)  General construction requirements. 
(1)  All driveway and off-street parking areas shall be constructed of asphaltic concrete, concrete, pavers or equal on a properly constructed and compacted base unless an alternative is approved by the city. 
(2)  No slag, rock, pea gravel or other loose type of material shall be used. 
(3)  All driveway aprons within the public rights-of-way shall be constructed of concrete. 
(4)  All points of ingress/egress from parking areas to public rights-of-way shall be constructed only upon approval from the city or other public agency having jurisdiction over the right-of-way. 
(b)  Single-family and two-family residential. 
(1)  For each single family and two-family zoning lots there shall be no more than two driveways providing access to one street, however, in the case of corner lots, no more than three driveways shall be permitted for any lot. 
(2)  The minimum width of any driveway shall be 12 feet, and the maximum width of any driveway shall be 24 feet measured along the property line. 
(c)  All other uses. 
(1)  In additional to meeting the general construction requirements of paragraph (a) above, all off-street parking areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the dimensional requirements illustrated below, except that in developments requiring more than 50 total parking spaces, a maximum of 25 percent of such spaces may be designed for compact car parking and may be as small as 8 feet by 16 feet in dimension. Any such space provided must be identified by legible signage as a compact car parking space. 
a.  Parallel. The dimensional requirements for parallel parking spaces are nine feet in width and 24 feet in length. 
b.  Perpendicular - 90 Degree. The dimensional requirements for this configuration are: 
c.  Angled - 60 Degree. The standard dimensions for this configuration are: 

d.  Angled - 45 Degree. The standard dimensions for this configuration are: 

(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 23.12. - Off-street loading spaces. 
    All transient accommodation uses having food service, convention and/or meeting room facilities that in total floor area exceed 10,000 square feet and all nonresidential uses exceeding 10,000 square feet in floor area shall be required to provide one off-street loading space for the first 10,000 square feet and one additional off-street loading space for each additional 10,000 square of floor area or part thereof as follows: 
(a)  Dimensions. The minimum dimensions of any required off-street loading space shall be a clear horizontal area of 12 feet by 30 feet, exclusive of platforms and piers, and a clear vertical space 14 feet high. For vehicle sales facilities, the loading space shall be large enough to accommodate at least one full size vehicle transport truck. 
(b)  Changes in uses. When the use of a structure or land or any part thereof is changed to a use requiring off-street loading facilities, the full amount of off-street loading spaces required shall be supplied and maintained. When any structure is enlarged or any use extended so that the size of the resulting occupancy requires off-street loading space, the full amount of such space shall be supplied and maintained for the enlarged structure or extended use. 
(c)  Accessibility. Each off-street loading space shall be directly accessible from a street or alley without crossing or entering any other required off-street loading space. Such loading space shall be accessible from the interior of the building it serves and shall be arranged for convenient and safe ingress and egress by motor truck or motor truck and trailer combinations, and so no truck or trailer shall be required to back from such facilities directly onto public streets. 
(d)  Construction. All off-street loading areas shall be constructed of asphaltic concrete, concrete or equal on a properly constructed and compacted base unless an alternative is approved by the city. 
(e)  Use restricted. Off-street loading areas shall not be used for sales, dead storage, repair, dismantling or servicing of any type or kind. 
(f)  Shared off-street loading. Collective, joint or combined provisions for off-street loading facilities for two or more buildings or uses may be made, upon the approval of the city, provided that such off-street loading facilities are sufficient in size and capacity to meet the combined requirements of the several buildings or uses and are designed, located and arranged to be usable thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 23.13. - Maintenance of off-street parking and loading areas and driveways. 
    All off-street parking and loading areas and driveways shall be properly maintained as to surface condition, striping and drainage to ensure that such facilities can continue to serve in a similar fashion as for they were originally approved. The failure to adequately maintain off-street parking and loading areas and driveways, resulting in a nuisance or unsafe condition for pedestrians or motor vehicles, shall be considered a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 23.14. - Fee in-lieu of required on-site parking. 
(a)  The amount of any on-site parking required under section 23.5 of this Code for development in the Downtown Redevelopment District may be reduced by the payment of the fee as established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(b)  Any money collected by the city under this section may be used only for the purchase of land for, or the construction, maintenance, or operation of on-or off-street municipal parking facilities created by this fund, and any other costs associated with the provision of municipal parking in the Downtown Redevelopment District. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 6, 5-26-15) 
DIVISION 24 - SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 24.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this division is to ensure the orderly development and subdivision of real estate in order to provide for economical and sufficient streets with adequate widths and with proper alignment and grades designed to promote the public safety, health and general welfare, to provide for suitable residential neighborhoods with adequate streets and utilities and appropriate building sites, to save unnecessary expenditure of public funds by initial proper construction of streets and utilities, and to provide proper land records for the convenience of the public and for better identification and permanent location of real estate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 24.2. - Replatting to increase density prohibited. 
    Existing recorded platted lots in the RU-1, RU-2, RLM-1, RLM-2 and RM districts shall not be recombined and/or re-subdivided for the purpose of increasing development density. Zoning lots within these districts consisting of two or more platted lots may be restored to the original number of lots with the approval of the city; provided such restoration shall not reduce the zoning lot area required to support the existing development on the property and that all of the resulting lots meet the minimum lot area and width required in the district. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 24.3. - Approval of the city commission required. 
    No real property within the city shall be divided and offered for sale until a plat thereof is approved by the city commission; provided, however, that the procedures and standards set forth in this division shall not apply to the exceptions enumerated in section 24.4 nor shall any plat be recorded without first having obtained city commission approval of the final plat. No building permits shall be issued for structures located in a lot created subsequent to the date of adoption of this division unless such lot creation has been approved by the city and is recorded in the public records of Pinellas County. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 24.4. - Exemptions. 
    Exemptions from the requirements of section 24.3 are: 
(a)  The public acquisition of strips of land for the widening of existing streets or other public use. 
(b)  With the city manager's approval, the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots in accordance with section 24.2 where no new parcels or residual parcels result in lots of less area, width or depth than the original lots of record. 
(c)  With the city manager's approval, the transference of part of one lot or tract to an adjacent lot or tract provided such transference does not reduce any lot or tract to an area or width less than the minimums specified in this chapter and further provided:. 
(1)  That no structural nonconformities will be created by the transference; and 
(2)  That no transference between nonconforming lots shall be allowed unless the transference will result in bringing both lots into conformity with the district regulations. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 24.5. - Procedure for securing approval of a subdivision. 
    Subdivision approval shall be governed by the following procedures: 
(a)  Preliminary plat approval. A sub-divider or property owner shall submit a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, prepared in accordance with the requirements of the administrative regulations for preliminary plats to the city manager for consideration by the appropriate board of authority and the city commission. Before acting to grant preliminary approval or to reject the proposed subdivision, the appropriate board of authority shall receive reports from the city manager certifying compliance with, or noting deviations from, the requirements of this division and commenting on any other items which bear upon the public interest in the proposed subdivision. 
(1)  After preliminary approval has been granted by the appropriate board of authority, the plat shall be forwarded to the city commission for approval. 
(2)  No improvements shall be made in the subdivision until the preliminary plat has been approved by the city commission and detailed plans for such improvements have been approved by the city. 
(3)  The final plat of the subdivision shall be prepared and submitted for final approval within one year from the date of the preliminary approval. 
(b)  Final plat approval by the city commission. The owner or sub-divider shall submit the final plat prepared in accordance with the approved preliminary plat, if applicable, and the requirements of the administrative regulations for final plats to the city manager. After being reviewed for compliance with the preliminary approval and the administrative requirements, the city manager shall transmit the plat to the city commission for approval. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 24.6. - Installation of improvements and utilities. 
    All subdivisions shall have storm drains installed, streets graded, paved or surfaced, curbs and gutters, sanitary sewage collection and disposal facilities, potable water lines or mains, and reclaimed water lines or mains, all to be installed by the owner or sub-divider in accordance with the applicable standard specifications of the city. 
(a)  Such construction or installation shall be subject to inspection and approval by the city. 
(b)  Fire hydrants, street paving, sanitary sewage collection and disposal facilities, water lines and mains (potable and reclaimed water), or any other improvements and utilities to be constructed or installed upon or within proposed public rights-of-way, and all storm drains, regardless of location, shall be subject to the prior approval of the city. 
(c)  The cost of any or all such construction or installations or furnishing of improvements and utilities shall be borne by and paid for by the owner or sub-divider when such improvements and utilities are installed. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 24.7. - Alternative methods of guaranteeing improvements. 
    Where the improvements and utilities, as required, have not been completed prior to the submission of the plat for final approval, the approval of the plat shall be subject to one of the following alternatives if required by the city: 
(a)  The owner or sub-divider filing with the city a performance or surety bond in an amount to be determined by the city with sureties satisfactory to the city guaranteeing the grading and paving of the streets and the construction and installation of curbs and gutters, storm drains, sewer collection and sewage disposal facilities, sidewalks, water lines or mains and fire hydrants within such reasonable time as may be specified by the city. 
(b)  The deposit with the city or the placing in escrow of cash or a certified check in an amount to be determined by the city to cover the cost of the improvements and utilities. The city may release portions of this security deposit as work progresses. 
(c)  The owner or sub-divider entering into an agreement with the city guaranteeing the completion of the required work, such agreement to be binding on the grantees, assigns, successors, heirs and personal representatives of the owner or sub-divider and upon subsequent purchasers of the property involved or of any interest therein and to be recorded at the option of the city. Such agreement shall permit progressive development of the subdivision by sections, and shall provide that satisfactory security be furnished the city guaranteeing the completion of the necessary improvements and installation of utilities before each section of the subdivision is developed. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 24.8. - General requirements and minimum design standards. 
(a)  General requirements. Whenever a proposed subdivision involves the construction of new connections to existing public streets, or other modifications to existing public streets, such construction, connections, and/or modifications shall be subject to the design criteria and permitting requirements of the government entity having jurisdiction over the public street. 
(b)  Street names. In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, irrespective of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place or court. 
(c)  Minimum street widths. The minimum width of proposed streets measured from lot line to lot line shall be 30 feet, with a minimum of 24 feet of pavement width including curbs and gutters. 
(d)  Corner radii. There shall be a minimum radius at the property line of 20 feet at all intersections, provided that a greater radius at the intersection of any public street may be required by the approving authority having jurisdiction over the public street. 
(e)  Dead end streets. Where streets are designed to have one end permanently closed as in a cul-de-sac, they shall terminate in a circular area having a minimum property line radius of 50 feet, and a minimum outside curb radius of 40 feet unless otherwise approved by the city commission. 
(f)  Lot dimensions. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the proposed subdivision and for the type of development contemplated, and shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Every lot or parcel of land shall abut a street. 
(2)  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
(3)  Every lot shall have the minimum width required by the applicable zoning district, except that every corner lot shall have the minimum width plus five feet, but in no case shall the frontage upon a public street be reduced below the district requirement. 
(4)  Every lot shall have the minimum lot area required by the applicable zoning district. 
(g)  Utility easements. To provide for public service poles, conduits, storm drains, and surface swales, sewer or gas mains easements as required by the appropriate utility shall be provided. No building or other obstruction shall be erected and no trees or shrubbery shall be planted on any easement other than fences and hedges of a type approved by the city, and such fences and hedges shall be cleared away or trimmed by the property owner whenever necessary in the opinion of the city or the utility having facilities in the easement. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 24.9. - Development and subdivision of single-family attached dwellings. 
    Except in the RU-1, RU-2, RLM-1 and RLM-2 districts where single-family attached dwellings are not permitted, the design and the platting of developments containing single-family attached dwellings shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  The overall density of the development shall not exceed the maximum permitted in the applicable district regulations. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 24.8(f), the minimum width of an individual unit within a single-family attached development shall be 16 feet, and when subdivided into separate lots, the maximum lot coverage for an individual lot shall be 70 percent. 
(c)  No fewer than three nor more than ten attached dwellings shall be located within a building group, and no interconnection or overlapping between individual dwelling units shall be permitted. 
(d)  No part of any portion of any building group shall be nearer than 10 feet to any part of any portion of any other building group nor nearer to any property lot line of the overall zoning lot than is required by the district regulations. 
(e)  Developments of single-family attached dwellings, in addition to complying with all applicable provisions of this division, shall comply with one of the following methods of land transfer and ownership: 
(1)  The subdivision of the whole tract into individual parcels in accordance with this division, together with the platting of the property for record in accordance with the Florida Law and other applicable ordinances of the city; 
(2)  Providing for the development of the entire tract in accordance with this division, retaining, however, title to all of the lands in the name of a condominium corporation and providing for all other usual condominium documents and procedures; 
(3)  Providing for the development of the entire tract in accordance with this division, retaining, however, title to all of the lands in single ownership by recording a duly executed unity of title in the Pinellas County property records, thereby stipulating that such tract shall not be eligible for further subdivision. 
(f)  In the event a property that has been subdivided in accordance with this subsection is proposed to be redeveloped in a different form than a single-family attached development, the subdivision plat shall be replatted prior to the issuance of any development permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 24.10. - Variances. 
    Where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, strict adherence to the provisions of the regulations in this article would cause an unnecessary hardship, a variance may be granted in accordance with section 3.13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 24.11. - Preliminary and final plats; content and form. 
    Preliminary and final plats shall be prepared in accordance with the administrative guidelines applicable to subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
DIVISION 25 - COASTAL PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION 

Sec. 25.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    This section is intended to provide for the protection and enhancement of the beach and dune system along the Gulf of Mexico by regulating the location of development on or adjacent to these natural resources and, to the fullest possible extent, to achieve a continuous and uninterrupted frontal dune along the entire Gulf of Mexico beachfront. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 25.2. - Matters regulated. 
    The requirements of this section shall apply to all development of Gulf-front properties unless specifically exempted in section 25.3. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 25.3. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(a)  Structures or construction extending seaward of the mean high-water line which are regulated by F.S. § 161.041, such as groins, jetties, moles, breakwaters, seawalls, revetments, beach nourishment, inlet dredging, and like kinds of projects; 
(b)  Piers, pipelines or outfalls which are regulated pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 161.053; 
(c)  Fencing or other structures approved by the state, county or city used to assist in sand erosion control or control of pedestrian beach use of dunes areas; 
(d)  Gulf-front property which has been designated as a "critically eroded beach area" and has come within the jurisdiction of the county or the Florida Department of Environmental Protection; and 
(e)  The following activities, provided that any such activity performed by private individuals shall require a permit from the city: 
(1)  The operation of city government vehicles performing an official function; 
(2)  Non-mechanical beach cleaning and debris removal; 
(3)  Landscape maintenance and modification that does not involve dune vegetation or removal of sand or dirt from the beach/dune system; 
(4)  Remodeling of habitable and non-habitable structures that does not involve alteration of the foundation, footprint, or structural envelope; or 
(5)  Replacement of impervious pavement with permeable surfaces such as pavers or crushed shell on a permeable base. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 25.4. - Development controls. 
    The city, the State of Florida and Pinellas County have adopted construction control lines and other regulations to protect the beaches and dunes of Pinellas County, including those within the City of St. Pete Beach, as follows: 
(a)  St. Pete Beach Bulkhead Line. There is established a beach bulkhead line, as provided by the official bulkhead line map, such map having been adopted and made part of this section by reference. 
(b)  Florida Coastal Construction Control Line. The State of Florida has established a Coastal Construction Control Line (CCCL) in accordance with Section 161.053, Florida Statutes, that is administered by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 1(Exh. A), 9-12-12) 
Sec. 25.5. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  No person, municipality, county or other public or private agency shall develop or cause any development seaward of the CCCL without a permit from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(c)  Further, no person, municipality, county or other public agency shall develop or cause any development or construct any seawall, revetment, or similar structure incidental thereto within the submerged lands of the Boca Ciega Bay and adjacent waters without a permit from any and all governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the submerged land. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the following shall be prohibited: 
(1)  The removal or disturbance of vegetation of a dune; 
(2)  Planting of vegetation except for native, salt-resistant species suitable for beach and dune stabilization; 
(3)  The crossing, passing over or passing through any dune by any person or vehicle, except in where such crossing is marked for access pursuant to this section; or 
(4)  Blocking or causing to be blocked by any means whatsoever any pathway leading to or from a public beach. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 1(Exh. A), 9-12-12) 
Sec. 25.6. - Tiki huts. 
(a)  The city may permit the location of a tiki hut on the beach in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Tiki huts shall be allowed only in conjunction with the approval of the owner of the property upon which the tiki hut will be located. No tiki hut shall have utility services, shall serve food or drinks, or shall be used for any other service beyond the sales of services for an approved commercial water sports operation. 
(2)  Tiki huts shall be removed from the beach in the event of the issuance of a warning for a storm that, in the opinion of the city, is expected to be of sufficient strength to warrant such removal. 
(3)  Any tiki hut or other similar structure placed or erected on the beach after the adoption of this Code without a permit from the city shall in violation of this Code and all remedies shall be sought in accordance with the provisions of section 3.16 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 1(Exh. A), 9-12-12; Ord. No. 2016-15, § 2, 10-25-16) 
Sec. 25.7. - Dune preservation and enhancement. 
    In accordance with F.S. Ch. 161, the St. Pete Beach Comprehensive Plan and this Code, dunes along the Gulf of Mexico with the city shall be protected, and such dunes will be enhanced under the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 25.8. - Development requirements. 
(a)  Development on any Gulf-front property upon which no dune exists shall require the construction of a dune which shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Applicants for development on any Gulf-front property which has an existing dune and where such proposed development would alter any portion of the dune shall be required to file a plan in accordance with the requirements of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection for dune restoration. The restoration of the dune shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 25.9. - Permit required. 
(a)  Dunes. In no instance shall any person, municipality, county or other public or private agency excavate or otherwise cause damage to a dune or conduct or cause to be conducted any activity to improve or enhance a dune without obtaining the necessary permits from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and the city. 
(b)  Other non-exempt activities. All other non-exempt activities, including construction, excavation, fill placement, repair of shore protection structures, and other activities seaward of the coastal construction setback line and activities that would alter the topography or disturb the vegetation of the beach/dune system, including vehicular traffic relating thereto, are required to obtain a permit from both the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
Sec. 25.10. - Permitting procedures. 
(a)  Development. Applications for development of Gulf-front properties, including any proposed development activity regulated under this section, shall be required to submit a site plan in accordance with Division 5 of this Code. Prior to the issuance of any development order or other permit, the applicant shall provide copies of all required county and state permits. 
(b)  Other activities. Applications for non-development activities enumerated in section 25.3 shall be filed with the city manager for administrative approval. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 1(Exh. A), 9-12-12) 
Sec. 25.11. - Variances. 
    Variances to this section may be sought under the procedures of section 3.13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 3, 5-1-03) 
DIVISION 26 - SIGN ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), adopted April 23, 2013, amended Div. 26 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Div. 26, §§ 26.1-26.40, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2011-42, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 24, 2012; Ord. No. 2012-16, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 12, 2012. 

Sec. 26.1. - Purpose, intent and scope. 
    It is the purpose of this division to promote the public health, safety and general welfare through reasonable, consistent and nondiscriminatory sign standards. The sign regulations in this division are not intended to censor speech or to regulate viewpoints, but instead are intended to regulate the secondary effects of speech and especially insofar as those secondary effects may adversely affect aesthetics and traffic and pedestrian safety. In order to preserve and enhance the city as a desirable community in which to live, vacation and do business, a pleasing, visually attractive environment is of foremost importance. The regulation of signs within the city is a highly contributive means by which to achieve this desired end. These sign regulations have been prepared with the intent of enhancing the visual environment of the city and promoting its continued well-being, and are intended to: 
(a)  Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communications in the city; 
(b)  Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; 
(c)  Improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
(d)  Minimize the possible adverse affect of signs on nearby public and private property; 
(e)  Foster the integration of signage with architectural and landscape designs; 
(f)  Lessen the visual clutter that may otherwise be caused by the proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation, excessive height, and excessive size (area) of signs which compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
(g)  Allow signs that are compatible with their surroundings and aid orientation, while precluding the placement of signs that contribute to sign clutter or that conceal or obstruct adjacent land uses or signs; 
(h)  Encourage and allow signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in which they are located and consistent with the category of use and function to which they pertain; 
(i)  Curtail the size and number of signs and sign messages to the minimum reasonably necessary to identify a residential or business location and the nature of any such business; 
(j)  Establish sign size in relationship to the scale of the lot and building on which the sign is to be placed or to which it pertains; 
(k)  Categorize signs based upon the function that they serve and tailor the regulation of signs based upon their function; 
(l)  Preclude signs from conflicting with the principal permitted use of the site and adjoining sites; 
(m)  Regulate signs in a manner so as to not interfere with, obstruct the vision of or distract motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians; 
(n)  Except to the extent expressly preempted by state or federal law, ensure that signs are constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and satisfactory manner, and protect the public from unsafe signs; 
(o)  Preserve, conserve, protect, and enhance the aesthetic quality and scenic beauty of all districts of the city; 
(p)  Allow for traffic control devices consistent with national standards and whose purpose is to promote highway safety and efficiency by providing for the orderly movement of road users on streets and highways, and that notify road users of regulations and provide warning and guidance needed for the safe, uniform and efficient operation of all elements of the traffic stream; 
(q)  Protect property values by precluding to the maximum extent possible sign-types that create a nuisance to the occupancy or use of other properties as a result of their size, height, illumination, brightness, or movement; 
(r)  Protect property values by ensuring that sign-types, as well as the number of signs, are in harmony with buildings, neighborhoods, and conforming signs in the area; 
(s)  Regulate the appearance and design of signs in a manner that promotes and enhances the beautification of the city and that complements the natural surroundings in recognition of this city's reliance on its natural surroundings and beautification efforts in retaining economic advantage for its resort community, as well as for its commercial properties; and 
(t)  Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.2. - Definitions. 
    All words used in this division shall carry their customary dictionary meanings, except that the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned or discontinued sign or sign structure means (a) A sign pertaining to or associated with an event, business, service, or purpose which is no longer ongoing and which has been inactive or out of business for a period of 90 consecutive days or longer; or (b) a sign which contains structural components but no display for a period of 90 consecutive days or longer. This does not include individual panels within a sign for multi-tenant developments unless the multi-tenant development is more than 50 percent vacant. 
    Advertising means sign copy intended to aid, directly or indirectly, in the sale, use or promotion of a product, commodity, service, activity, entertainment, or real or personal property. 
    Animated sign means a sign which includes action, motion, or color changes, or the optical illusion of action, motion or color changes, including signs set in motion by movement of the atmosphere, or made up of external sign elements that revolve or turn. 
    Area of ground supports means the total area of a freestanding sign's structural elements. 
    Artwork means a two- or three-dimensional representation of a creative idea that is expressed in a form and manner as to provide aesthetic enjoyment for the viewer rather than to specifically convey the name of the business or a commercial message about the products or services offered on the property upon which the artwork is displayed. 
    Attached sign means a wall sign, an integral roof sign, marquee sign or a canopy sign. 
    Banner means any sign or string of one or more signs, usually made of cloth or other lightweight material, which is used to attract attention, whether or not imprinted with words or characters, including, but not limited to, balloons and pennants. Flags shall not be considered banners. 
    Beacon means a stationary or revolving light which flashes or projects illumination, single color or multicolored, in any manner which has the effect of attracting or diverting attention, except, however, this term does not include any kind of lighting device which is required or necessary under the safety regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration or other similar agency. This definition does not apply to any similar type of lighting device contained entirely within a structure and which does not project light to the exterior of the structure. 
    Billboard means a sign structure and/or sign utilized for advertising an establishment, an activity, a product, service or entertainment, which is sold, produced, manufactured, available or furnished at a place other than on the property on which said sign structure and/or sign is located. 
    Building frontage. See frontage, building. 
    Bus stop informational sign means a freestanding or attached noncommercial sign located at a bus stop and providing information as to the route, hours or times of service. 
    Canopy sign means any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
    Commercial message means any sign wording, logo, or other representation or image that directly or indirectly names, advertises, or calls attention to a product, service, sale or sales event or other commercial activity. 
    Construction sign means a temporary on-premise sign identifying the ongoing construction activity during the time that a building permit is active and prior to completion of the work for which the permit was issued, containing sign copy is limited to the ongoing construction activity and identifying the contractor and/or any subcontractor engaged to perform construction activity on the site. 
    Copy means the linguistic or graphic content of a sign. 
    Designer sign means a sign that is custom made wall or monument-type signs, reviewed by the city manager or his designee and found to be of a higher creative, artistic and three-dimensional, or sculptural nature than the standard types of signs typically used within the sign industry. 
    Double-faced sign means a single sign with items of information relating to the same business on both sides of the sign and mounted as a single structure. 
    Drive-thru menu sign means a sign placed so as to be viewed from a drive-thru lane and which contains only a listing of the products, with prices, offered for sale by the business on which the sign is located and which may provide a mechanism for ordering the products while viewing the sign. 
    Eave means the lowest horizontal line of a sloping roof. 
    Election sign means a temporary sign erected or displayed for the purpose of expressing support for or opposition to a candidate or stating a position regarding an issue upon which the voters of the city shall vote. 
    Electronic message board sign means a sign by which the message copy can be electronically changed and controlled. This shall include but not be limited to changeable words, lines, logos, symbols, or illustrations and shall include all LED type signs regardless if the sign periodically changes copy. 
    Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix and includes the painting of wall signs. 
    Facade means the entire building front. 
    Flag means any fabric, or bunting containing distinct colors, patterns or symbols, used as an ornamental flag or as a symbol of government, political subdivision, corporation or business or other entity. (See also ornamental flag.) 
    Flagpole means a pole on which to raise a flag. 
    Flashing sign means a sign which permits light to be turned on or off intermittently more frequently than once per minute. 
    Foot-candle means a unit of measure of luminosity of a surface that is everywhere one foot from a uniform point source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot. 
    Footlambert means the centimeter gram second unit of brightness equal to the brightness of a perfectly diffused surface that radiates or reflects one lumen per square centimeter. 
    Free expression sign means a sign, not in excess of three square feet in size (area) and the top of the sign is not more than six feet off the ground, communicating information or views on matters of public policy concern or containing any other noncommercial message, that is otherwise lawful. 
    Freestanding sign, monument or pole means a sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on or anchored in the ground or at ground level and which are independent of any building or other structure. 
    Frontage means the length of the property line of a parcel of land which runs parallel with and along a road right-of-way or street, exclusive of alleyways. 
    Frontage building means the length of the single face of a building or that portion of building occupied by a single office, business or enterprise, commonly referred to as "store-front", which is abutting a street, parking area, or other means of customer access such as an arcade, a mall or a walkway. 
    Garage or yard sale or garage-yard sign means any on-site temporary sign pertaining to the sale of personal property in, at or upon any residentially-zoned property located in the city. Garage or yard sales shall include, but not be limited to, all such sales, and shall include the advertising of the holding of any such sale, or the offering to make any sale, whether made under any name such as garage sale, lawn sale, yard sale, front yard sale, backyard sale, home sale, attic sale, rummage sale, patio sale, flea market sale, or any similar designation. 
    Ground level means the finished grade of a parcel of land exclusive of any filling, berming or mounding. Ground level on marina docks or floating structures shall be the finished grade of the landward portion of the adjoining parcel. 
    Grand opening sign means an on-premises temporary sign announcing the opening of a newly licensed business, that does not exceed 16 square feet in sign area and that is not displayed for longer than 30 days after the issuance date of the occupational license for the new business. 
    Height means vertical distance measured from ground level nearest the base of the sign to the highest point on the sign. 
    Holiday and seasonal decorations mean decorations that pertain to legal or other recognized holidays or to a season of the year. 
    Illuminated sign means any sign or portion thereof which is illuminated by artificial light, either from an interior or exterior source, including outline, reflective or phosphorescent light, whether or not the source of light is directly affixed as part of the sign. 
    Integral roof sign means any sign erected or constructed as an integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. No integral portion of the roof shall extend more than five feet above the structural roof. 
    Lot. See definition of parcel. 
    Maintenance means the replacing, repairing or repainting of a portion of sign structure, periodically changing changeable copy or renewing copy which has been made unusable by ordinary wear. 
    Marquee means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
    Marquee sign means any sign attached to a marquee. 
    Menu display sign means a fully enclosed or otherwise protected from the elements sign structure, including, but not limited to, a box, shadow box or cabinet, attached to a wall or freestanding, which is used solely for the purpose of displaying restaurant menus. A menu display may be used for a restaurant without drive-thru service and for transient lodging facilities which have restaurant facilities open to the general public in addition to the registered guests. Menu display sign structures shall be limited to one per establishment, having a maximum surface area of not more than 12 square feet, and the zoning districts in which they are permitted. 
    Multi-tenant development means a development where more than one business may be located, including businesses located above the first floor or otherwise without frontage on a public right-of-way. 
    Nameplate sign or occupant identification sign means a sign indicating the name and/or profession or address of a person or persons residing on the premises or legally occupying the premises. 
    Noncommercial message means any message, which is not a commercial message. 
    Noncommercial on-site directional sign means an on-site sign providing direction or information to pedestrian or vehicular traffic that is related or reasonably necessary to the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the premises, and not displaying a commercial message, e.g., "entrance," "exit," "caution," "no parking," "one way only," "no trespassing," and the like. 
    Nonconforming sign means a sign which does not conform with the regulations provided in this division. 
    Off-premises sign or off-site sign means any sign relating in its subject matter to commodities, accommodations, services or activities on a premises other than the premises on which the sign is located. See also Billboard. This does not include a locally recognized non-profit Chamber of Commerce that promotes its members within the city. 
    On-premises sign or on-site sign means any sign relating in its subject matter to the commodities, accommodations, service or activities on the premises on which it is located. 
    Ornamental flag means any fabric or similar material containing patterns, drawings or symbols used for decorative purposes and designed to be flown as a flag. 
    Parcel means land which has been or which is proposed to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit under single ownership. 
    Parapet means a false front or wall extension above the roof of a building. 
    Pennant means any series of small flag-like or streamer-like pieces of cloth, plastic, paper or similar material attached in a row to any staff, cord, building, or at only one or two edges, the remainder hanging loosely. 
    Permanent sign means any sign which, when installed, is intended for permanent use. For the purposes of this division any sign with an intended use in excess of 12 months from the date of installation shall be deemed a permanent sign. 
    Portable sign means any sign or poster that is not permanently attached to the ground or structure. For purposes of this division, a cold-air inflatable sign shall be considered to be a portable sign. 
    Premises means any property owned, leased or controlled by the person actively engaged in business at that location. 
    Projecting sign means any sign affixed perpendicularly to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
    Real estate sign means a sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed temporarily. 
    Revolving sign or rotating sign means any sign that revolves or rotates. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected and constructed wholly on or over the roof of a building, which is supported by the roof structure, or any sign that extends in whole or in part above the roofline of a building. 
    Roofline means the highest continuous horizontal line of a roof. On a sloping roof, the roofline is the principal ridgeline or the highest line common to one or more principal slopes of roof. On a flat roof, the roofline is the highest continuous line of a roof or parapet, whichever is higher. 
    Safety sign. See Warning sign. 
    Sandwich board sign means a portable double-faced, freestanding sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area that is designed such that it can be displayed during business hours and easily removed at the close of business. 
    Shopping center means a group of five or more independent commercial establishments owned and operated as a planned unit, with off-street parking provided on the property. A shopping center may include a building or structure owned in fee simple, condominium, cooperative, leasehold or other ownership. 
    Sight visibility triangle means a triangular shaped portion of land established at street intersections or street and driveway intersections in which nothing is erected, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. For street intersections, this triangle is measured 20 feet in length from the intersection along the abutting curb lines to form a triangle; and for driveway intersections, this triangle is measured ten feet from the intersection along the curb line and along the driveway line to form a triangle. (See illustration in section 6.21 herein.) 
    Sign means any device, fixture, placard or structure which uses color, form, graphics, illumination, architectural style or design with text, or writing to advertise, attract attention, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of any person or entity or to communicate information of any kind to the public. The term "sign" includes sign structure. 
    Sign area means the total square foot area of sign surface, including all parts thereof devoted to the background, computed by bounding the exterior of the sign structure or surface with a series of straight or curved lines tangent thereto (see illustrative examples in section 26.3, herein). The area of a sign painted directly on a wall or awning and signs with letters attached directly to walls or awnings shall be calculated by constructing an imaginary series of straight lines or lines formed, bounded or characterized by curves around the outside of all elements of the sign. 
    Sign face means the part of the sign that is or can be used to identify, display, advertise, communicate information, or for the visual representation which attracts or intends to attract the attention of the public for any purpose. 
    Sign structure means any structure which is designed specifically for the purpose of supporting a sign, which has supports or which is capable of supporting a sign. The definition shall include any decorative covers, braces, wires, supports, or other components attached to or placed around the sign structure. 
    Snipe sign means any sign tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to telephone poles, utility poles, or fences, with the message appearing thereon not applicable to the present use of the premises upon which the sign is located. 
    Statutory sign means a sign required by any statute of the State of Florida or the United States. 
    Street address sign means any sign denoting the street address of the premises on which it is attached or located. 
    Subdivision monument identification sign means a monument sign which contains only the name of a platted subdivision or other residential development. 
    Temporary sign means a sign intended for a use not permanent in nature. For the purposes of this division, a sign with an intended use of one year or less shall be deemed a temporary sign. 
    Time and temperature sign means a sign which displays the current time and temperature at intervals no more frequently than once per minute and which contains no other messages. Time and temperature signs are regulated within the zoning districts in which they are allowed. 
    Traffic control device sign means any sign located within the right-of-way that is used as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the national standard. A traffic control device sign includes those signs that are classified and defined by their function as regulatory signs (that give notice of traffic laws or regulations), warning signs (that give notice of a situation that might not readily be apparent), and guide signs (that show route designations, directions, distances, services, points of interest, and other geographical, recreational, or cultural information). 
    Vehicle sign means a sign attached to or placed on a vehicle, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, boats, campers, and trailers, and that is located on public or private property and is intended to be viewed from a right-of-way for the purpose of providing advertisement of products or services or directing people to a business or activity. This includes signs attached to the following vehicles: On- or off-site inoperable vehicles, junk or abandoned vehicles as defined in section 98-67 of the Code of Ordinances, vehicles that have not been driven or moved in 72 hours, or a vehicle with signage attached to it that renders the vehicle not safely drivable. This definition excludes those signs that identify a business organization or its principal services and contact information on a vehicle during that period of time such vehicle is regularly and customarily used to traverse the public street during the normal course of business. 
    Visibility triangle. See Sight visibility triangle. 
    Wall sign means a sign which is painted on, fastened to, or erected against the wall of a building with its face in a parallel plane with the plane of the building facade or wall, which is used for advertising. 
    Warning sign or safety sign means a sign which provides warning of a dangerous condition or situation that might not be readily apparent or that poses a threat of serious injury (e.g., gas line, high voltage, condemned building, etc.) or that provides warning of a violation of law (e.g., no trespassing, no hunting allowed, etc.). 
    Waterside identification sign means a sign identifying a residential complex, single business property or shopping center and which can be only be viewed from the waters of the Gulf of Mexico, Boca Ciega Bay, the intracoastal waterway or any other navigable waterway. 
    Window sign means any sign painted on or mounted in any fashion on the interior or exterior of the surface of a window. 
    Wind sign means a sign, which uses objects or material fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind, and shall include pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers or captive balloons to express a commercial message; however, the term "wind sign" shall not include flags. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13; Ord. No. 2016-24, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 2017-17, § 2, 11-14-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions, § 2.1. 
Sec. 26.3. - Illustrations of type of signs and methods of measurement. 
    The following diagrams illustrate the types of signs and methods of measurement: 
How to measure sign area. 

(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.4. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs and sign types are prohibited within the city limits and shall not be erected. Any lawfully existing permanent sign or sign type which is among the prohibited signs and sign types listed below shall be deemed a nonconforming sign subject to the provisions of section 26.5. 
(a)  Billboards; off-site signs. 
(b)  Revolving signs; rotating signs. 
(c)  Flashing or animated signs. 
(d)  Banners, except those used to advertise special events, approved with a special event permit. The banner may not be placed on the property in which the event is to take place more than 21 days prior to the special event. 
(e)  Wind signs. 
(f)  Portable signs, other than sandwich board signs as allowed within certain zoning districts pursuant to this division. 
(g)  Roof signs, other than integral roof signs in nonresidential zoning districts. 
(h)  Abandoned and discontinued signs. 
(i)  Snipe signs. 
(j)  Bus bench advertising signs; bus shelter advertising signs. 
(k)  Signs that emit sound, vapor, smoke, odor, particles or gaseous matter. 
(l)  Signs that have unshielded illuminating devices. 
(m)  Signs that obstruct, conceal, hide or otherwise obscure from view any official traffic or governmental sign, signal or device. 
(n)  Any attached sign that exceeds 100 square feet in area. 
(o)  Any freestanding sign that is higher than 35 feet. 
(p)  Any freestanding sign that exceeds 135 square feet in sign area. 
(q)  Any sign within a sight visibility triangle that obstructs a clear view of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(r)  Any sign in the public right-of-way, other than traffic control device signs, bus stop informational signs, warning signs or safety signs. 
(s)  Any sign attached to a seawall or pier, other than a warning sign or safety sign. 
(t)  Any sign other than a traffic control device sign that uses the word "stop" or "danger," or presents or implies the need or requirement of stopping or the existence of danger, or which is a copy or limitation of official traffic control device signs, and which is adjacent to the right-of-way of any road, street, or highway. 
(u)  Any sign nailed, fastened or affixed to any tree. 
(v)  Any sign prohibited by state or federal law. 
(w)  Vehicle signs. 
(x)  Any sign located on real property without the permission of the property owner. 
(y)  Beacons, except as required by federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.5. - Nonconforming signs. 
    A nonconforming sign that was lawfully erected may continue to be maintained: (a) until the nonconforming sign is substantially damaged or destroyed, or (b) until the real property on which the sign is located is redeveloped, whichever of the foregoing occurs first. At such time the sign is substantially damaged or destroyed or at such time the real property is redeveloped, the nonconforming sign must either (a) be removed or (b) be brought into conformity with this division and with any other applicable law or regulation. For the purpose of this section, the term "redevelopment" shall mean a substantial improvement of the principal structure on the real property. 
    In addition to the above, all legally erected nonconforming electronic message board signs, including all LED-type signs, must be made to conform to the applicable provisions of this Division by January 1, 2027. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13; Ord. No. 2016-24, § 3, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 26.6. - Exemptions. 
    This division does not pertain to the following: 
(a)  A sign, other than a window sign, located entirely inside the premises of a building or enclosed space. 
(b)  A statutory sign. 
(c)  Historic markers for locally designated historic resources. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.7. - Building permits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or business or the person in charge of the business to erect, construct, alter or maintain an outdoor advertising display sign, as defined in the Florida Building Code, without first obtaining a building permit from the city in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Building Code and applicable law. Permit fees shall be paid in accordance with the applicable city fee schedules. The requirement of a building permit under the Florida Building Code is separate and independent of the requirement for a sign permit under this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.8. - Shielding of illumination. 
    Illuminated signs, in addition to conforming to all other requirements of this division, shall be shielded in such a manner so that no direct source of light is cast into residential properties or into a public street or right-of-way. Illuminated signs shall not interfere with pedestrian or motorist vision. The illumination shall not be reflective or phosphorescent and shall perform in a steady nonfluctuating or nonundulating manner and shall be placed in a manner that will not create a nuisance to other premises or interfere with vehicular movements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.9. - Substitution of noncommercial speech for commercial speech. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained in this division or Code to the contrary, any sign erected pursuant to the provisions of this division or Code may, at the option of the owner, contain a noncommercial message unrelated to the business located on the premises where the sign is erected. The noncommercial message may occupy the entire sign face or any portion thereof. The sign face may be changed from commercial to noncommercial messages, or from one noncommercial message to another, as frequently as desired by the owner of the sign, provided that the size, height, setback and other dimensional criteria contained in this division and Code have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.10. - Content neutrality as to sign message (viewpoint). 
    Notwithstanding anything in this division or Code to the contrary, no sign or sign structure shall be subject to any limitation based upon the content (viewpoint) of the message contained on such sign or displayed on such sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.11. - Sign permit required. 
(a)  Allowed temporary and allowed permanent signs of the type described in section 26.25 shall be exempt from sign permitting hereunder. 
(b)  No sign permit shall be issued for the erection of a prohibited sign. 
(c)  Unless exempt from permitting, no permanent sign shall be erected, altered, relocated, maintained or displayed until a sign permit is obtained from and appropriate fee paid to the city. 
(d)  A sign lawfully erected under permit may be repainted or have ordinary and customary repairs performed, including replacement of plastic or glass panels, without a new sign permit; however, if such sign is to be structurally altered or repaired in any manner, a new sign permit shall be required and the altered or repaired sign must meet all requirements of this division and this Code. Nonconforming signs that have been substantially damaged, deteriorated beyond 50 percent of the value of the sign, or destroyed shall not be issued a permit for repairs and shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.12. - Application. 
(a)  A sign permit application for a permanent sign shall be made upon a form provided by the city. The sign permit application is in addition to any building permit application required by the Florida Building Code. The sign permit application shall be accompanied by plans and specifications drawn to scale, together with any site plan required by Division 5 of the Land Development Code. The applicant shall furnish the following information on or with the sign permit application form: 
(1)  The legal description of the real property where the sign is proposed to be located. 
(2)  The zoning district for the real property on which the sign will be located. 
(3)  The name, mailing address and telephone number (where available) of the owner(s) of the real property where the sign is proposed to be located. 
(4)  A notarized statement of authorization signed by the owner(s) consenting to the placement of the proposed sign on the real property. 
(5)  The name, mailing address and telephone number of the sign contractor. 
(6)  Type of proposed sign (e.g., attached wall sign, freestanding monument sign). 
(7)  The square footage of the surface area of the proposed sign. 
(8)  The setbacks for the proposed sign. 
(9)  The cost of the proposed sign. 
(10)  If the proposed sign is a freestanding sign: 
a.  The lot frontage on all adjacent street rights-of-way. 
b.  The dimensions of the supporting structure. 
c.  The height of the proposed sign. 
(11)  If the proposed sign is an attached sign, the building frontage for the building to which the attached sign shall be affixed. 
(12)  The number, type, location, and surface area for all existing signs on the same lot and/or building on which the sign will be located. 
(13)  If the proposed sign is to be an illuminated sign, the type, placement, intensity and hours of operation. 
(b)  An applicant shall deliver a sign permit application for a permanent sign to the city's chief building official, or such other person as may be designated by the city. The sign permit application shall be reviewed for a determination of whether the proposed sign meets the applicable requirements of this division and any applicable zoning law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.13. - Fees. 
(a)  Initial application fees. Every person making an initial application for a sign permit shall pay fees to the city at the time of approval of the application. The fees shall be established by resolution of the city commission and shall be as stated in appendix A to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.14. - Maintenance of signs. 
(a)  Maintenance of signs. 
(1)  All visible portions of a sign and its supporting structure shall be maintained in a safe condition, and neat appearance according to the following: 
a.  If the sign is lighted, all lights shall be maintained in working order and functioning in a safe manner. 
b.  If the sign is painted, the painted surface shall be kept in good condition. 
c.  Every sign shall be kept in such manner as to constitute a complete or whole sign. 
(2)  Nonconforming signs may suffer only ordinary and customary repairs and maintenance. As provided in section 26.11, a lawfully-erected nonconforming sign shall not be structurally altered except in full conformance with this division. Nonconforming signs that are considered abandoned pursuant to this division shall be demolished or removed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.15. - Appeals. 
(a)  Whenever it is alleged that there has been an error in any order, action, decision, determination, or requirement by an administrative official in the enforcement and application of any provision contained within this division or any other provision of this Code pertaining to sign permits (including any allegation that an administrative official has failed to act within applicable time frames), the aggrieved party shall file a written appeal in accordance with section 3.14 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.16. - Enforcing official. 
    The city manager shall be the enforcing official of this division. The enforcing official is charged with the duty of administering this division and securing compliance therewith. Further, the enforcing official shall make such inspection as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this division and shall initiate appropriate action, if any, to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.17. - Failure to comply. 
    If the city manager finds that any sign has been erected, altered or maintained in violation of this division, the city shall notify the owner of record of the property upon which such sign is located by either certified mail or by hand delivery that such violation exists. The owner shall cause the violation to be remedied or shall file an appeal of the violation within three working days after receipt of the notice. Where it is determined that such illegal sign poses an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public, the city may cause the immediate removal of the sign by its own action. Cost of such removal shall be paid by the property owner. In addition to removal, the city shall be entitled to proceed with alternative legal or equitable remedies, including injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.18. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  The acts enumerated in this section shall be a violation of this division and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this division, by other city codes, and by state law. Such remedies may be pursued simultaneously. 
(b)  It shall be a violation to: 
(1)  Install, create, erect or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any approved plan or permit governing such sign or the site on which the sign is located. 
(2)  Install, create, erect or maintain any sign requiring a permit without having first obtained such permit. 
(3)  Fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this division or for which the sign permit has lapsed. 
(4)  Install, erect, place, or maintain any sign contrary to the provisions of this division, including any sign or sign structure not allowed within the applicable zoning district. 
(5)  Continue any such violation. 
(c)  Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this division shall be considered a separate violation, and each day of a continued violation shall be considered a separate violation. 
(d)  Any violation of this division or any condition or requirement adopted pursuant to this division may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to law. The remedies of the city shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Issuing a stop work order for any and all work on any signs on the same site. 
(2)  Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires the removal of the sign or the correction of the violation. 
(3)  For a sign which poses an immediate danger to the public health or safety, taking such measures as are available to the city under the applicable provisions of this division for such circumstances. 
(e)  A person in violation of this division shall be subject to prosecution and, upon conviction, shall be punished as set forth in section 1-14 of chapter 1, St. Pete Beach Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.19. - Adoption of zoning regulations. 
    The boundaries of the various districts shown upon the official zoning map and the regulations of the comprehensive zoning ordinance contained in Land Development Code, governing the use of land and buildings and other matters set forth therein are made part of this division. Except as provided in this division, no sign shall be erected, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered which does not comply with all the district regulations established by this division for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.20. - Freestanding signs. 
(a)  Freestanding signs shall not be permitted within any required side yard adjacent to property in an RU-1, RU-2, RLM-1 or RLM-2 district or within a required front yard established for protection of a right-of-way corridor. 
(b)  Freestanding signs shall not be located within any visibility triangle established for the intersections of public streets or the intersections of driveways providing ingress and egress from a property to a public street. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.21. - Setback measurement. 
    Required setbacks for signs in all zoning districts shall be measured from the property line to the nearest part of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.22. - Double-faced signs. 
    Double-faced signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts, provided the signs are designed and constructed such that the two sign faces are back to back and directionally oriented 180 degrees from each other. The maximum sign area allowed shall be permitted for each sign face. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.23. - Illuminated and electronic message board signs. 
    The following conditions and restrictions shall apply to illuminated signs. 
    Except as hereinafter provided in this section, illuminated signs, or illumination in show windows, display windows, in or upon any building shall have the source of light concealed from view from the exterior of the building or structure, except that where channel letters or figures are used for any sign the illumination thereof may be visible if recessed within the depth of the channel. 
    Electronic message board signs are subject to the following maximum illumination intensity levels when measured at a distance of 50 linear feet from base of sign: 
Maximum illumination intensity level for electronic message board signs shall not exceed 0.3 foot candles over ambient light when measured at 50 linear feet from the base of the sign. 
Internally illuminated signs or portions of a sign that are internally illuminated shall not be larger than 50 square feet in area. 
No more than 32 square feet of the total allowable signage square footage may be an electronic message board sign. Electronic message board signs shall only be located in a front yard or on a building front façade, and in no case shall be closer than 10 feet from the front yard property line. Electronic message board signs are only permitted on properties adjacent to Gulf Boulevard from 37 th Avenue to 75 th Avenue. 
    Electronic message board signs, including LED-type, shall only be permitted as defined above. All other existing nonconforming electronic message board signs shall be subject to the amortization schedule set forth in section 26.5. 
    No animated or flashing illumination shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13; Ord. No. 2016-24, § 4, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 2017-17, § 3, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 26.24. - Time and temperature signs. 
    Time and temperature signs may be utilized as part of an otherwise allowed freestanding or attached sign in RFM and CG-1 zoning districts; otherwise they are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.25. - All districts. 
    The regulations in this division apply in every zoning district in the city, except where otherwise specified or indicated. Sign permits are not required for signs and sign-types described and identified in this section, below. 
(a)  Street address signs. For each parcel within the city, one street address sign may be displayed for each public street or waterfront. For parcels in residential use, the street address sign shall not exceed two square feet in sign area. For each parcel in nonresidential use, the street address sign shall not exceed six square feet in sign area. 
(b)  Nameplate signs or occupant identification signs. For each residence, business or other occupancy within the city, one nameplate sign may be displayed. For residences the nameplate or occupant identification signs shall not exceed two square feet in sign area. For any nonresidential use, the nameplate or occupant identification sign shall not exceed six square feet in sign area. 
(c)  Noncommercial onsite directional signs. Noncommercial onsite directional signs, not exceeding four square feet in sign area, shall be allowed on each parcel within the city. 
(d)  Noncommercial onsite parking space signs. Noncommercial onsite parking space number signs, not exceeding one square foot of sign face per sign, shall be allowed on each parcel in noncommercial use having multiple parking spaces onsite. One such sign shall be allowed for each parking space. 
(e)  Noncommercial onsite marina slip number signs. Noncommercial onsite marina slip number signs, not exceeding one square foot of sign face per sign, shall be allowed for each marina having marina slips. One such sign shall be allowed for each marina slip. 
(f)  Free expression signs. For each parcel within the city and for each residential unit within a multifamily residence, one free expression sign not exceeding three square feet in sign area may be displayed. The free expression sign may be displayed as an attached sign or as a freestanding sign; if displayed as a freestanding sign, the free standing sign shall not exceed three feet in height. A free expression sign is in addition to any other sign permitted under this Code and is permitted in any zoning district. Only one such sign shall be permitted on each such parcel or each residential unit. The sign must be located within six feet of a building located on the lot or parcel; or if there is no building on the lot or parcel, the sign must be located at least 15 feet from any street. 
(g)  Election signs . For each lot within the city one election sign for each issue may be displayed. An election sign may be displayed as an attached sign or as a freestanding sign. On parcels that are in residential use, the election sign shall not exceed three square feet in sign area; and, if the election sign is displayed as a freestanding sign on the parcel, the election sign shall not exceed three feet in height. On parcels that are in nonresidential use, the election sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign area; and, if the election sign is displayed as a freestanding sign on the parcel, the election sign shall not exceed six feet in height. Freestanding election signs shall be set back at least three feet behind the sidewalk or, if there is no sidewalk, ten feet from the edge of pavement. Election signs are prohibited on public property and public right-of-way. An election sign shall be removed within seven calendar days following the election to which it pertains. 
For this section, the term lot means: the least fractional part of subdivided lands having limited fixed boundaries and an assigned number, letter, legal description or other name through which it may be identified. 
(h)  Artwork . Artwork is allowed in all districts. 
(i)  Flagpoles. One flagpole is allowed for each parcel in the city. Flagpoles in residential districts shall not exceed 20 feet in height, and flagpoles in nonresidential districts shall not exceed 30 feet in height. 
(j)  Flags. For each detached dwelling unit in a residential district, one flag not greater than 15 square feet in sign area may be displayed. For each parcel in a multi-family residential district and in a nonresidential district, three flags not greater than 24 square feet in sign area (each) may be displayed. 
(k)  Warning signs and safety signs. Warning signs and safety signs, not exceeding four square feet in sign area, shall be allowed in all districts. 
(l)  Machinery and equipment signs. Machinery and equipment signs shall be allowed in all districts. 
(m)  Construction signs. One construction sign shall be allowed on each parcel within the city. Construction signs shall not exceed three square feet in sign area for residential properties, and 16 square feet in sign area for nonresidential properties. 
(n)  Real estate signs. For each parcel within the city, one real estate sign may be displayed on each parcel of land or part thereof that is for sale, lease, or rent; however, when more than one dwelling unit or nonresidential space on a parcel of land is for sale, lease, or rent, there may be one real estate sign for each such unit or space. In addition, waterfront lots may display one additional real estate sign within the required waterfront yard. Real estate signs shall not exceed three square feet in sign area for residential properties, and 16 square feet in sign area for nonresidential properties. The real estate sign shall be removed immediately upon the sale, lease or rent of the real estate that was offered for sale, lease, or rent. 
(o)  Temporary garage-yard sale signs. For each parcel with a lawful residential use, one temporary garage-yard sale sign may be displayed. A temporary garage-yard sale sign shall not exceed four square feet in sign area. A temporary garage-yard sale sign may not be displayed for a period longer than two days during any calendar month and shall be removed upon the conclusion of the sale. 
(p)  Temporary grand opening signs. For each new business or business name change, one temporary grand opening sign shall be permitted for 30 days after the issuance of an occupational license for the new business or the business name change. A temporary grand opening sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign area. A temporary grand opening sign may be a temporary covering, such as a toaster cover, sign boot, or sign sock, which covers an existing permitted attached or freestanding sign. 
(q)  Temporary seasonal signage. During the period November 15 until January 7 each year, each business holding a valid business tax receipt shall be allowed to display one additional sign of the types allowed for the applicable zoning district, excluding freestanding pole or monument signs. Such sign shall not require a permit, but must conform to the dimensional requirements of the code. 
(r)  Window signs. For each parcel within the city, one or more window signs may be displayed. On parcels that are in residential use, the window sign(s) shall not exceed an aggregate of three square feet in sign area. On parcels that are in nonresidential use, the window sign(s) shall not be restricted from the date of adoption of this ordinance until December 31, 2012; following which such signage shall not exceed an aggregate of more than 50 percent of any window surface. 
(s)  Temporary holiday and seasonal decorations. Temporary holiday and seasonal decorations shall be allowed in all districts. 
(t)  Temporary valet parking station signs. One temporary valet parking station sign no more than four square feet in sign area shall be allowed on each parcel. The temporary valet parking station sign shall only be visible during hours that the valet is operating. 
(u)  Bus stop information signs. Bus stop informational signs up to three square feet in area shall be allowed in all districts. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13; Ord. No. 2016-24, § 5, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 26.26. - RU-1, RU-2, RLM-1 and RLM-2 Residential Districts. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, the following permanent signs are also allowed within RU-1, RU-2, RLM-1 and RLM-2 Residential Districts. The permanent signs described below require a sign permit. 
(a)  Subdivision monument identification signs. For each platted subdivision or neighborhood entrance within any RU-1, RU-2, RLM-1 and RLM-2 Residential Districts, one subdivision monument identification sign not exceeding six feet in height and 24 square feet in sign area shall be allowed. 
(b)  Freestanding monument signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use within the RU-1, RU-2, RLM-1 and RLM-2 Residential Districts, one freestanding monument sign shall be allowed. The freestanding monument sign shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Maximum height. The monument sign shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(2)  Maximum size. The monument sign shall not exceed 18 square feet in sign area. However, in the event that the parcel is greater than one acre in size and has two street frontages, two freestanding monument signs shall be allowed, but each freestanding monument sign shall be subject to the maximum height and maximum size criteria described above. 
(c)  Attached signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use within the RU-1, RU-2, RLM-1 and RLM-2 Residential Districts, one attached sign shall be allowed. The attached sign shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Maximum size. An attached sign shall not exceed six square feet in sign area. 
(2)  Height restrictions. An attached sign may not appear above the first floor of a building. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.27. - RM and DCR Residential Districts. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign-types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, the following permanent signs are also allowed within RM Residential District. The permanent signs described below require a sign permit: 
(a)  Subdivision monument identification signs. For each platted subdivision or neighborhood entrance within any RM or DCR Residential District, one subdivision monument identification sign not exceeding six feet in height and 24 square feet in sign area shall be allowed. 
(b)  Freestanding monument signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use within the RM or DCR Residential District, one freestanding monument sign shall be allowed. The freestanding monument sign shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Maximum height. The monument sign shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(2)  Maximum size. The monument sign shall not exceed 24 square feet in sign area. However, in the event that the parcel is greater than one acre in size and has two street frontages, two freestanding monument signs shall be allowed, but each freestanding monument sign shall be subject to the maximum height and maximum size criteria described above. 
(c)  Attached signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use within the RM or DCR districts, one attached sign shall be allowed. The attached sign shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Maximum size. An attached sign shall not have a sign area that exceeds (a) eight square feet or (b) one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage, whichever is less. 
(2)  Height restrictions. An attached sign may not appear above the first floor of a building. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.28. - ROR Residential/Office/Retail District. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign-types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, each business within the ROR District may have up to three of the following signs in [subsections] (a)-(e) below, subject to permit approval and compliance with the conditions for each type of sign: 
(a)  Subdivision monument identification signs. For each platted subdivision or neighborhood entrance within any ROR Residential/Office/Retail District, one subdivision monument identification sign not exceeding six feet in height and 24 square feet in sign area shall be allowed. 
(b)  Freestanding monument signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use within the ROR Residential/Office/Retail District, one freestanding monument sign shall be allowed. The freestanding monument sign shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Maximum height. The monument sign shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(2)  Maximum size. The monument sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in sign area. However, in the event that the parcel is greater than one acre in size and has two street frontages, two freestanding monument signs shall be allowed, but each freestanding monument sign shall be subject to the maximum height and maximum size criteria described above. 
(c)  Attached signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use within the ROR Residential/Office/Retail District, attached signs shall be allowed. Attached signs shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Maximum size. An attached sign shall not have a sign area that exceeds one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage. 
(2)  Height restrictions. An attached sign may not appear above the second floor of a building. 
(d)  One sandwich board sign or one designer sign, subject to the following: 
(1)  Sandwich board -Shall be located in front of the storefront for which it advertises and shall not be placed in the right-of-way, shall not be placed within the visibility triangle required for intersections at streets and driveways, as required by this Code, be no larger than five feet in height and 12 square feet in area per face, shall have no illumination of any kind, and may be displayed only during the time when the business is open to the public. 
(2)  Designer sign -Shall not be located on public right-of-way or within the visibility triangle required by this Code and shall be no larger than five feet tall by three feet wide by three feet deep. 
(e)  A projecting sign, provided that the sign is no larger than 12 square feet in area, does not project within two feet of any curb, and has a minimum ground clearance of seven feet. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.29. - RFM Resort Facilities Medium District. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, the following permanent signs and temporary signs are also allowed within RFM Resort Facilities Medium District. The permanent signs described below require a sign permit: 
(a)  Freestanding monument signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use within any RFM Resort Facilities Medium District, one freestanding monument sign shall be allowed. The freestanding monument sign shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Maximum height. The monument sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height. 
(2)  Maximum size. The monument sign shall not exceed 135 square feet in sign area. However, in the event that the parcel is greater than one acre in size and has two street frontages or more than 400 feet along one street frontage, two freestanding monument signs shall be allowed, but each freestanding monument sign shall be subject to the maximum height and maximum size criteria described above. 
(b)  Attached signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use within the RFM Resort Facilities Medium District, attached signs shall be allowed. Attached signs shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Maximum number. Up to three attached signs shall be allowed with a combined sign area not exceeding the maximum permitted in paragraph (c)(2); however, in the event the parcel contains a multi-tenant development, each individual business use may have one attached sign. 
(2)  Maximum size. An attached sign shall not have a sign area that exceeds one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage. 
(3)  Height restrictions. An attached sign may not appear above the second floor of a building. 
(c)  Drive-thru menu signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use that utilizes a drive-thru lane within RFM Resort Facilities Medium District, one drive-thru menu sign shall be allowed for each drive-thru lane. An allowed drive-thru menu sign may be either a free-standing sign or an attached sign, and shall not exceed 40 square feet in sign area and ten feet in height. Drive-thru menu signs shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(d)  Attached menu display signs. For each parcel within RFM Resort Facilities Medium District with (a) a restaurant without drive-thru service or (b) with a transient lodging facility that has restaurant facilities open to the general public, one attached menu display sign shall be allowed. An attached menu display sign shall be a wall sign not exceeding 12 square feet in sign area An attached menu display sign shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(e)  Theater signs. For each parcel with a theater within RFM Resort Facilities Medium District, one attached theater sign shall be allowed. An attached theater sign shall be a wall sign not exceeding 15 square feet in sign area for each auditorium within the theater, subject to a maximum limit of 64 square feet in sign area. An attached theater sign shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(f)  Waterside identification signs. For each parcel within RFM Resort Facilities Medium District with a residential complex, business property or shopping center theater that can only be viewed from a navigable waterway, one waterside identification sign shall be allowed. A waterside identification sign may be either a free-standing sign or an attached sign. A waterside identification sign shall not exceed eight feet in height and shall not exceed 20 square feet in sign area. A waterside identification sign shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(g)  Boat or beach concession signs. Each licensed boat or beach concession rental business operating along the Gulf of Mexico and on the site of a business having Gulf frontage may be permitted signs as follows: 
(1)  Permission required. The applicant shall provide the city with a letter, granting approval for placement of the signs, from the owner of the real property upon which signs are to be located prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(2)  Advertising permitted. Signs at boat or beach concession rental business licensed sites shall only provide descriptions of the specific activities and services offered at the site where the sign is located. Such signs shall not be permitted to advertise or imply the availability of any activities or services that are not specifically available at the site. 
(3)  Lighted signs. Lighted signs shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Sandwich board signs. Operators may display sandwich board sign on the sandy beach during the hours of business operation in accordance with subparagraphs (i) through (iv) below. Such signs shall be removed from the beach when the business is closed. 
(i)  Maximum area: 12 square feet per face. 
(ii)  Number permitted: One. 
(iii)  Maximum height: Five feet. 
(iv)  Setbacks: 40 feet from the water's edge. 
(5)  Tiki hut or ticket office signs. Operators may display signs on the tiki huts or ticket offices as follows: 
(i)  Maximum area: Eight square feet per face. 
(ii)  Number permitted: Three per tiki hut; not more than two on one side. 
(iii)  Location: Signs may be attached to or painted on the sides of the tiki hut at a point no higher than four feet above the ground, provided however, that one of the signs may be raised and attached at a point on the side of the tiki hut just below the eave of the roof. 
(6)  Operators without a tiki hut or ticket office. Licensed board or beach concession rental businesses that do not use a tiki hut or other structure for their businesses shall be permitted to keep one sandwich board sign on the beach overnight, provided such sign is no larger than eight square feet in area per face and is located or protected so as to not be a hazard to people walking on the beach after dark. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.30. - CG-1 Commercial District. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign-types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, each business within the CG-1 District may have up to three of the following signs in [subsections] (a)-(f) below, subject to permit approval and compliance with the conditions for each type of sign (businesses with more than 300 feet of frontage may choose up to four signs from [subsections] (a)-(f)): 
(a)  Freestanding monument signs. Up to two freestanding monument signs are permitted, provided that the sign face does not exceed 50 square feet in area, is not taller than eight feet in height, and is not located within the visibility triangle as required by this Code. The sign may be located within the front yard setback but shall be located at least ten feet from the front lot line, and shall not be located within any easement dedicated for pedestrian or utility improvements. If the business owner chooses to have one monument sign instead of two, the sign may be up to 100 square feet in area, but shall not exceed eight feet in height. However, this sign shall be counted as two of the three or four permitted. 
(b)  Attached signs. Subject to the following: 
(1)  Maximum size. An attached sign shall not exceed a sign face area equal to one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage. 
(2)  Height restrictions. An attached sign may not appear above the second floor of a building. 
(c)  Drive-thru menu signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use that utilizes a drive-thru lane within the CG-1 Commercial District, one drive-thru menu sign shall be allowed for each drive-thru lane. An allowed drive-thru menu sign may be either a free-standing sign or an attached sign, and shall not exceed 40 square feet in sign area and ten feet in height. Drive-thru menu signs shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(d)  Attached menu display signs. For each parcel within the CG-1 Commercial District with a restaurant without drive-thru service or with a transient lodging facility that has restaurant facilities open to the general public, one attached menu display sign shall be allowed. An attached menu display sign shall be a wall sign not exceeding 12 square feet in sign area. An attached menu display sign shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(e)  Theater signs. For each parcel with a theater within the CG-1 Commercial District, one attached theater sign shall be allowed. An attached theater sign shall be a wall sign not exceeding 15 square feet in sign area for each auditorium within the theater. An attached theater sign shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(f)  Waterside identification signs. For each parcel within the CG-1 Commercial District with a residential complex, business property or shopping center theater that can only be viewed from a navigable waterway, one waterside identification sign shall be allowed. A waterside identification sign may be either a freestanding sign or an attached sign. A waterside identification sign shall not exceed eight feet in height and shall not exceed 20 square feet in sign area. A waterside identification sign shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.31. - CG-2 Commercial District. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign-types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, each business within the CG-2 District may have up to three of the following signs in [subsections] (a)-(f) below, subject to permit approval and compliance with the conditions for each type of sign (businesses with more than 300 feet of frontage may choose up to four signs from [subsections] (a)-(f)): 
(a)  Freestanding monument. Up to two freestanding monument signs are permitted, provided that the sign face does not exceed 50 square feet in area, is not taller than eight feet in height, and is not located within the visibility triangle as required by this Code. The sign may be located within the front yard setback but shall be located at least ten feet from the front lot line, and shall not be located within any easement dedicated for pedestrian or utility improvements. If the business owner chooses to have one monument sign instead of two, the sign may be up to 100 square feet in area, but shall not exceed eight feet in height. However, this sign shall be counted as two of the three or four permitted. 
(1)  Maximum height. The monument sign shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(2)  Maximum size. The monument sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in sign area. 
(3)  Setback. The sign shall be set back at least ten feet from the property line. 
(b)  Attached signs. Attached signs shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Maximum size. An attached sign shall not exceed a sign face area equal to one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage. 
(2)  Height restrictions. An attached sign may not appear above the second floor of a building. 
(c)  Attached menu display signs. An attached menu display sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign area. 
(d)  Theater signs. For each parcel with a theater within the CG-2 Commercial District, one attached theater sign shall be allowed. An attached theater sign shall be a wall sign not exceeding 15 square feet in sign area for each auditorium within the theater. An attached theater sign shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(e)  Waterside identification signs. For each parcel within the CG-2 Commercial District with a residential complex, business property or shopping center theater that can only be viewed from a navigable waterway, one waterside identification sign shall be allowed. A waterside identification sign may be either a free-standing sign or an attached sign. A waterside identification sign shall not exceed eight feet in height and shall not exceed 20 square feet in sign area. A waterside identification sign shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(f)  One sandwich board sign or one designer sign, subject to the following: 
(1)  Sandwich board -Shall be located in front of the storefront for which it advertises and shall not be placed in the right-of-way, shall not be placed within the visibility triangle required for intersections at streets and driveways, as required by this Code, be no larger than five feet in height and 12 square feet in area per face, shall have no illumination of any kind, and may be displayed only during the time when the business is open to the public. 
(2)  Designer sign -Shall not be located on public right-of-way or within the visibility triangle required by this Code and shall be no larger than five feet tall by three feet wide by three feet deep. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.32. - INS Institutional District. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign-types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, each institution may choose up to three signs from [subsections] (a)-(c) below, subject to the limitations for each sign. 
(a)  Freestanding monument signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use within any INS Institutional District, one freestanding monument sign shall be allowed. The freestanding monument sign shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Maximum height. The monument sign shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(2)  Maximum size. The monument sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in sign area. However, in the event that the parcel is greater than one acre in size and has two street frontages, two freestanding monument signs shall be allowed, but each freestanding monument sign shall be subject to the maximum height and maximum size criteria described above. 
(b)  Attached signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use within the INS Institutional District, attached signs shall be allowed. Attached signs shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Maximum number. Only one attached sign shall be allowed. 
(2)  Maximum size. An attached sign shall not exceed a sign face area equal to (a) 24 square feet or (b) one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage, whichever is less. 
(3)  Height restrictions. An attached sign may not appear above the first floor of a building. 
(c)  One sandwich board sign or one designer sign, subject to the following: 
(1)  Sandwich board -Shall be located in front of the storefront for which it advertises and shall not be placed in the right-of-way, shall not be placed within the visibility triangle required for intersections at streets and driveways as required by this Code, be no larger than five feet in height and 12 square feet in area per face, shall have no illumination of any kind, and may be displayed only during the time when the business is open to the public. 
(2)  Designer sign -Shall not be located on public right-of-way or within the visibility triangle required by this Code and shall be no larger than five feet tall by three feet wide by three feet deep. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.33. - TC-1 and TC-2 Districts. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign-types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, each business within the TC-1 or TC-2 District may have up to three of the following signs in [subsections] (a)-(f) below, subject to permit approval and compliance with the conditions for each type of sign. One of the allowable signs may be internally illuminated subject to section 26.23. Such signs shall not be located on any building façade or property frontage adjacent to Corey Avenue. 
(a)  One sandwich board sign or one designer sign, subject to the following: 
(1)  Sandwich board -Shall be located in front of the storefront for which it advertises and will not be placed in the right-of-way, not be placed within the visibility triangle required for intersections at streets and driveways, as required by this Code, be no larger than five feet in height and 12 square feet in area per face, shall have no illumination of any kind, and may be displayed only during the time when the business is open to the public. 
(2)  Designer sign -Shall not be located on public right-of-way or within the visibility triangle required by this Code and shall be no larger than five feet tall by three feet wide by three feet deep. 
(b)  A marquee or canopy sign; 
(c)  A menu display sign; 
(d)  A projecting sign, provided that the sign is no larger than 12 square feet in area, does not project within two feet of any curb, and has a minimum ground clearance of seven feet; 
(e)  A wall sign, provided the sign is not internally illuminated, unless such sign is on a parcel which abuts Gulf Boulevard south of 76th Avenue, in which case internal illumination shall be allowed. The area of the sign may be one square foot for every linear foot of building frontage, per business, not to exceed a total of 50 square feet. 
(f)  A freestanding monument sign, provided that the sign face does not exceed 40 square feet in area, is not taller than eight feet in height, does not block any pedestrian walkway, and is not located within the visibility triangle as required by this Code. The sign may be located within the front yard setback. 
(g)  Waterside identification signs. For facades of a building that can only be viewed from a navigable waterway, one waterside identification sign shall be allowed. A waterside identification sign may be either a free-standing sign or an attached sign. A waterside identification sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13; Ord. No. 2016-24, § 6, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 26.34. - LR and BHC Districts. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign-types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, each business within the LR or BHC District that has an exclusive entrance to the interior of the building from the exterior of the building may have up to three of the following signs in [subsections] (a)-(e) below, subject to permit approval and compliance with the conditions for each type of sign (businesses with more than 300 feet of frontage may choose up to four from [subsections] (a)-(e) below): 
(a)  A marquee or canopy sign; 
(b)  A menu display sign; 
(c)  A wall sign. The area of the sign may be one square foot for every linear foot of building frontage, per business, not to exceed a total of 70 square feet. 
(d)  Up to two freestanding monument signs, provided that the sign face does not exceed 50 square feet in area, is not taller than 12 feet in height, and is not located within the visibility triangle as required by this Code. The sign may be located within the front yard setback but shall be located at least ten feet from the front lot line, and shall not be located within any easement dedicated for pedestrian or utility improvements. If the business owner chooses to have one monument sign instead of two, the sign may be up to 100 square feet in area, but shall not exceed eight feet in height. However, this sign shall be counted as two of the four permitted. 
(e)  One sandwich board sign or one designer sign, subject to the following: 
(1)  Sandwich board -Shall be located in front of the storefront for which it advertises and will not be located in the right-of-way, shall not be placed within the visibility triangle required for intersections at streets and driveways as required by this Code, be no larger than five feet in height and 12 square feet in area per face, shall have no illumination of any kind, and may be displayed only during the time when the business is open to the public. 
(2)  Designer sign -Shall not be located on public right-of-way or within the visibility triangle required by this Code and shall be no larger than five feet tall by three feet wide by three feet deep. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.35. - CC-1 and CC-2 Districts. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign-types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, each business may have up to three of the following signs in [subsections] (a)-(f) below, subject to permit approval and compliance with the conditions for each type of sign (businesses with more than 300 feet of frontage may choose to four signs from [subsection] (a)-(f): 
(a)  Freestanding monument signs. Up to two freestanding monument signs are permitted, provided that the sign face does not exceed 50 square feet in area, is not taller than eight feet in height, and is not located within the visibility triangle as required by this Code. The sign may be located within the front yard setback but shall be located at least ten feet from the front lot line, and shall not be located within any easement dedicated for pedestrian or utility improvements. If the business owner chooses to have one monument sign instead of two, the sign may be up to 100 square feet in area but shall not exceed eight feet in height. However this sign shall be counted as two of the three or four permitted. 
(b)  A marquee or canopy sign; 
(c)  A menu display sign not to exceed 12 square feet; 
(d)  A projecting sign, provided that the sign is no larger than 12 square feet in area does not project within two feet of any curb and has a minimum ground clearance of seven feet; 
(e)  Wall signs subject to the following: 
(1)  Maximum size. A wall sign shall not exceed a sign face area equal to one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage. 
(2)  Internally illuminated signs are discouraged but not prohibited. Externally illuminated signs are preferable with lighting from above or below casting light on the sign but the lighting shall not shine directly onto adjacent properties or onto the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.36. - CRD-EA District. 
    Each business with its own exterior entrance may have up two signs per frontage from the following list: 
(a)  One projecting sign not to exceed 12 square feet and shall have a minimum clearance from the sidewalk of 7.5 feet. 
(b)  One attached sign, which may include a wall sign, a canopy, or a marquee sign; the attached sign may not be larger than one square foot for every linear foot of building frontage. 
(c)  One sandwich board sign or one designer sign, subject to the following: 
(1)  Sandwich board-Shall be located in front of the storefront for which it advertises and will not be placed in the right-of-way such that the sidewalk width would be less than 48 inches, not be placed within the visibility triangle required for intersections at streets and driveways, as required by this Code, be no larger than five feet in height and 12 square feet in area per face, shall have no illumination of any kind, and may be displayed only during the time when the business is open to the public. 
(2)  Designer sign-Shall not be located on public right-of-way or within the visibility triangle required by this Code and shall be no larger than five feet tall by three feet wide by three feet deep. 
(d)  All other signs are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.37. - UBV District. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign-types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, each business within the UBV District may have up to three of the following signs in [subsections] (a)-(d) below, subject to permit approval and compliance with the conditions for each type of sign: 
(a)  A marquee or canopy sign; 
(b)  A projecting sign, provided that the sign is no larger than 12 square feet in area, does not project within two feet of any curb, and has a minimum ground clearance of seven feet; 
(c)  A wall sign, provided the sign is not internally illuminated. The sign may be externally illuminated with lighting from above or below casting light on the sign, but the lighting shall not shine directly onto adjacent properties or onto the right-of-way. The area of the sign may be one square foot for every linear foot of building frontage per business not to exceed a total of 40 square feet; 
(d)  A freestanding monument sign, provided that the sign face does not exceed 40 square feet in area, is not taller than five feet in height, does not block any pedestrian walkway and is not located within the visibility triangle as required by this Code. The sign may be externally illuminated with lighting from above or below casting light on the sign but the lighting shall not shine directly onto adjacent properties or onto the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.38. - AC District. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign-types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, each business within the AC District may have up to three of the following signs in [subsections] (a)-(f) below, subject to permit approval and compliance with the conditions for each type of sign (businesses with more than 300 feet of frontage may choose up to four signs from [subsections] (a)-(f): 
(a)  Freestanding monument signs. Up to two freestanding monument suns are permitted, provided that the sign face does not exceed 50 square feet in area is not taller than eight feet in height, and is not located within the visibility triangle as required by this Code. The sign may be located within the front yard setback but shall be located at least ten feet from the front lot line, and shall not be located within any easement dedicated for pedestrian or utility improvements. If the business owner chooses to have one monument sign instead of two, the sign may be up to 100 square feet in area but shall not exceed eight feet in height. However, this sign shall be counted as two of the three or four permitted. 
(b)  Attached signs. subject to the following: 
(1)  Maximum size. An attached sign shall not exceed a sign face area equal to one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage. 
(2)  Height restrictions. An attached sign may not appear above the second floor of a building. 
(c)  Drive-thru menu signs. For each parcel with a lawful nonresidential use that utilizes a drive-thru lane within the AC District, one drive-thru menu sign shall be allowed for each drive-thru lane. An allowed drive-thru menu sign may be either a freestanding sign or an attached sign and shall not exceed 40 square feet in sign area and ten feet in height. Drive-thru menu signs shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(d)  Attached menu display signs. For each parcel within the AC Commercial District with a restaurant without drive-thru service or with a transient lodging facility that has restaurant facilities open to the general public, one attached menu display sign shall be allowed. An attached menu display sign shall be a wall sign not exceeding 12 square feet in sign area. An attached menu display sign shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(e)  Theater signs. For each parcel with a theater within the AC District, one attached theater sign shall be allowed. An attached theater sign shall be a wall sign not exceeding 15 square feet in sign area for each auditorium within the theater. An attached theater sign shall be in addition to the freestanding and attached signage otherwise allowed pursuant to the other provisions of this division. 
(f)  Waterside identification signs. For facades of a building that can only be viewed from a navigable waterway, one waterside identification sign shall be allowed. A waterside identification sign may be either a freestanding sign or an attached sign. A waterside identification sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in sign area. 
    In addition to the number and types of signs listed in [subsections] (a)-(f) above, multi-tenant shopping centers in the AC District may have one additional monument sign listing each individual tenant all within the same sign face. The sign shall be no taller than ten feet and no larger than 100 square feet per sign face. The sign shall not be located within any setback or within any pedestrian or utility easement. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.39. - BR District. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign-types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, each business within the BR District may have up to three of the following signs in [subsections] (a)-(e) below, subject to permit approval and compliance with the conditions for each type of sign: 
(a)  A marquee or canopy sign; 
(b)  A projecting sign, provided that the sign is no larger than 12 square feet in area, does not project within two feet of any curb, and has a minimum ground clearance of seven feet; 
(c)  A wall sign, provided the sign is not internally illuminated. The sign may be externally illuminated with lighting from above or below casting light on the sign, but the lighting shall not shine directly onto adjacent properties or onto the right-of-way. The area of the sign may be one square foot for every linear foot of building frontage per business not to exceed a total of 40 square feet; 
(d)  A freestanding monument sign, provided that the sign face does not exceed 40 square feet in area, is not taller than five feet in height, does not block any pedestrian walkway and is not located within the visibility triangle as required by this Code. The sign may be externally illuminated with lighting from above or below casting light on the sign but the lighting shall not shine directly onto adjacent properties or onto the right-of-way. 
(e)  Waterside identification signs. For facades of a building that can only be viewed from a navigable waterway, one waterside identification sign shall be allowed. A waterside identification sign may be either a freestanding sign or an attached sign. A waterside identification sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in sign area. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.40. - Traditional Hotel District. 
    In addition to the permanent and temporary signs and sign-types that are allowed pursuant to section 26.25, each business within the THD District may have up to three of the following signs in [subsections] (a)-(d) below, subject to permit approval and compliance with the conditions for each type of sign: 
(a)  A marquee or canopy sign; 
(b)  A projecting sign, provided that the sign is no larger than 12 square feet in area, does not project within two feet of any curb, and has a minimum ground clearance of seven feet; 
(c)  A wall sign, provided the sign is not internally illuminated. The sign may be externally illuminated with lighting from above or below casting light on the sign, but the lighting shall not shine directly onto adjacent properties or onto the right-of-way. The area of the sign may be one square foot for every linear foot of building frontage, per business, not to exceed a total of 40 square feet; 
(d)  A freestanding monument sign, provided that the sign face does not exceed 20 square feet in area, is not taller than four feet in height, does not block any pedestrian walkway and is not located within the visibility triangle as required by this Code. The sign may be externally illuminated with lighting from above or below casting light on the sign, but the lighting shall not shine directly onto adjacent properties or onto the right-of-way. The sign may be located within the front yard setback. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13) 
Sec. 26.41. - Pass-a-grille overlay district. 
    All signs shall be allowed in accordance with the underlying zoning district's permitted signage, except that internally illuminated signage shall be expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2016-24, § 7, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 26.42. - Severability. 
(a)  Generally. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this division is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this division. 
(b)  Severability where less speech results. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in subsection 26.34(a), or elsewhere in this division, this Code, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this division is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this division, even if such severability would result in a situation where there would be less speech, whether by subjecting previously exempt signs to permitting or otherwise. 
(c)  Severability of provisions pertaining to prohibited signs. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in subsection 26.35(a), or elsewhere in this division, this Code, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this division or any other law is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this division that pertains to prohibited signs, including specifically those signs and sign-types prohibited and not allowed under section 26.4 of this division. Furthermore, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of section 26.4 is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of section 26.4 
(d)  Severability of prohibition on billboards. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this division and/or any other code provisions and/or laws are declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect the prohibition on billboards as contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-13; Ord. No. 2016-24, § 7, 1-10-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-24, § 7, adopted Jan. 10, 2017, added § 26.41 and in so doing renumbered § 26.41 as 26.42, as set out herein. 
DIVISION 27 - P PRESERVATION DISTRICT 

Sec. 27.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The P Preservation District is intended for those areas designated within the P Preservation land use category on the future land use maps. This includes all property seaward of the Florida Coastal Construction Control Line and the mangrove island in Little McPherson Bayou. It is the purpose and intent of this section to safeguard these areas from inappropriate development so that they may benefit all residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 3, 3-9-04) 
Sec. 27.2. - Permitted uses. 
    Use of property within a designated preservation area shall be limited to activities that do not require alteration of the land from its natural state. On that portion of the designated preservation area that is beach, dune walkovers may be permanently constructed with the approval of the city, and limited recreational equipment may be temporarily placed on the beaches. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 3, 3-9-04) 
Sec. 27.3. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for any use: 0.10. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 3, 3-9-04) 
Sec. 27.4. - Maximum impervious surface ratio within the parks. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for any use: 0.20. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 3, 3-9-04) 
DIVISION 28 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 24, 2006, amended Div. 28, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 28 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Table of Amendments. 

Sec. 28.1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Historic preservation board means a board established by Article VII of Chapter 22 of the Code of Ordinances, with the duties and powers as expressed therein and as specifically provided in this division, including having the power and duty to review historic sites, areas, structures and buildings for possible designation as historic resources. 
    Archaeological site means an individual historic resource recognized for its prehistoric or historic artifacts and features. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof intended to be impervious to weather, and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a written authorization by the historic preservation board to the owner of a voluntarily designated property allowing a proposed alteration, relocation or the demolition of a building, structure or site. 
    Certified local government means a designated local government meeting the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, 16 USC 470, which extends some aspects of the federal and state responsibilities for historic preservation to qualified local governments. Under the program, local governments are certified to review and make recommendation to the Florida National Register Review Board concerning nominations to the National Register of Historic Places. 
    Contributing property means and includes any building, structure or site which contributes to the overall historic significance of a designated historic district and which was present during the period of historic significance. In addition, the building, structure or site possesses historic integrity reflecting the character of that time or is capable of yielding important information about a historically significant period or independently meets the criteria for designation as a historic resource. 
    Demolition means the complete removal of a building, structure or portions thereof from a site. 
    Demolition by neglect means the willful abandonment of a building or structure by the owner, resulting in such a state of deterioration that its self-destruction is inevitable or where demolition of the building or structure to remove a health and safety hazard is a likely result. 
    Designated property means any building, structure or site which has been designated by the historic preservation board as a historic resource, historic district or local landmark with agreement and written consent of the property owner. 
    Designation report means a written document indicating the basis for the findings of the historic preservation board concerning the proposed designation of a historic resource pursuant to this division. 
    District area means the general area of any historic district which may enlarge or decrease in size as contributing and noncontributing properties are included either through commission, board or staff recommendation or voluntary inclusion/exclusion. 
    Exterior means all outside surfaces of a building or structure visible from a public right-of-way, or the street easement of the building or structure. 
    Historic district means a geographically definable area designated pursuant to this division possessing a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past development. A district may also be linked by association or history. To qualify as an historic district, an area may contain both contributing and noncontributing properties. 
    Historic resource means any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure, object or other real or personal property of historical, architectural or archaeological value. Historic resources may include but are not limited to monuments, memorials, Native American habitations, ceremonial sites, abandoned settlements, sunken or abandoned ships, engineering works or other objects with intrinsic historical or archaeological value or any part thereof, relating to the history, government, or culture of the city, the county or the state. 
    Incentive means any benefit, whether regulatory, procedural or financial, which becomes potentially available to a property owner upon designation as a historic resource, district or landmark. These benefits may include, but are not limited to, relief from flood mitigation requirements, relief from certain current building code or zoning standards, and abatement of local property taxes. 
    Land Development Code (LDC) means ordinances enacted by governing bodies for the regulation of any aspect of the development and includes any local government zoning, rezoning, subdivision, building construction or sign regulations or any other regulations controlling the development of land. 
    Landmark means a building, structure or site which meets one or more of the criteria contained in this division. A landmark may include the location or significant archaeological features or a historical event. 
    Local landmark means a building, structure or site which may not qualify to be on the National Register, or the state site file, but is recognized by the city as having local historic significance. 
    National Register of Historic Places means a federal listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior of buildings, sites, structures and districts that have attained a quality of significance as determined by the Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended, 16 USC 470, or as may be amended, renumbered or replaced and its implementing regulation, 36 CFR 60, "National Register of Historic Places"; or as may be amended, renumbered or replaced. 
    Noncontributing property means and includes any building, structure or site which does not contribute to the overall historic significance of a designated historic district due to alterations, disturbances or other changes and, therefore, no longer possesses historic integrity or was not present during the period of historic significance or is incapable of yielding important information about that period. 
    Ordinary maintenance and repairs means work done to prevent the deterioration, decay or damage to a building or structure or any part thereof by restoring the building or structure as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage. 
    Owner means an individual, partnership, corporation or public agency holding fee simple title to real property. The term "owner" does not include individuals, partnerships, corporations or public agencies holding easements of less than a fee simple interest, including leaseholds, in real property. 
    Reconstruction means a faithful facsimile or re-creation of the original structure which utilizes a portion of the original building or structure and is not merely a replication or reproduction of a preexisting structure, type of design or architectural style. 
    Sites file inventory means buildings and structures within the historic district/area or those contributing properties of overall historic significance outside the district listed in the State Inventory of Historic and Architectural Resources file maintained by the Secretary of State. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed. The term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof." 
    Substantial improvement means the same as defined under section 106-86. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this division is to identify, evaluate, preserve and protect historical and archaeological sites and districts, and to promote the cultural, moral, economic, educational, aesthetic and general welfare of the public by: 
(1)  Empowering the historic preservation board to determine the historic significance of sites and structures; 
(2)  Empowering the historic preservation board to designate historically significant resources and local landmarks; 
(3)  Protecting voluntarily designated historic resources by requiring the issuance of certificates of appropriateness before allowing alterations to these resources; 
(4)  Encouraging historic preservation by providing incentives to encourage the sensitive rehabilitation and use of designated historic resources; 
(5)  Stabilizing and improving property values through the preservation of older residential and commercial properties by allowing for building additions to be of a size and scale that promote harmony with existing structures in the area; 
(6)  Encouraging the design and construction of new structures, buildings and developments, and the redevelopment and alteration of existing noncontributing structures, buildings and developments, to be in harmony with, and to preserve the integrity of, the historical district, echoing design elements of size, height and scale of existing historic structures; and 
(7)  Promotion of a living history which will foster educational programs aimed at better understanding of the barrier island community heritage. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.3. - Scope. 
    This division shall be applicable to all real property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.4. - Effect of incentives. 
(a)  Any property for which any preservation incentive has been received as a result of said property's voluntary designation as a historic resource shall remain so designated for the life of all structures thereon; provided, however, where the incentive is for property tax relief for said property alone, the incentive shall remain in effect through the last day of the life of all structures thereon or the first day of the tax year in which the incentive is terminated, whichever shall occur first. 
(b)  The voluntary historic designation of any property which is not the subject of any incentives provided by this program, may be terminated any time after 12 months following initial said designation as a historic resource. A minimum of 30 days' written notice of intent to withdraw must be provided to the historic preservation board. 
(c)  Any property owner who elects to take advantage of incentives set forth in this division and who subsequently sells or transfers ownership to another owner shall also be transferring all restrictions relating to this division. The restrictions shall be binding upon the new owner for the remainder of the timeframe established in this section. 
(d)  The historic preservation board may not deny a request for a certificate of appropriateness for a demolition permit for a structure which has been designated and has taken advantage of any of the incentives provided; however, the historic preservation board may impose a stay of demolition for up to 90 days in order to explore possible alternatives to the demolition of the designated structure. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.5. - Ordinary maintenance and repair. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior feature of any historic building, structure or site which does not involve a substantive change in material, design or outer appearance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.6. - Unsafe structures. 
    Nothing in this division shall prevent the emergency stabilization and weatherization of a designated structure on an emergency basis when the city manager certifies in writing that such work is necessary for the purpose of correcting conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health or property. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.7. - Appeals. 
    All appeals shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 3.14 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.8. - Certificate of appropriateness required; criteria for issuance; application requirements. 
(a)  No new construction, addition, moving or demolition permit shall be issued for a voluntarily designated historic resource until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued. 
(b)  No additions to contributing structures within the Pass-a-Grille Overlay that would encroach on the underlying zoning district's setbacks or required yards may be issued a building permit until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued. 
(c)  The criteria for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall be the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, 36 CFR 67 (1983), or as may be amended, renumbered or replaced, and the City Comprehensive Plan, which are adopted by reference as though set forth fully in this division. Copies of the Secretary of the Interior's standards and the City Comprehensive Plan shall be kept on file in the Department of Community Development. 
(d)  A minimum of 30 days prior to the date of the historic preservation board meeting at which the hearing shall be conducted, the applicant for a certificate of appropriateness shall submit to the city a completed application for certificate of appropriateness on a form provided by the city, which application shall include the following: 
1.  A recent survey of the property; 
2.  Elevations, drawn to scale, of the proposed addition(s), signed and sealed by a registered architect or engineer. The elevations shall include detailed information regarding the materials to be used. 
3.  A site plan, drawn to scale, of the proposed addition(s), signed and sealed by a registered architect or engineer. The plans shall include existing and proposed square footage, proposed landscaping, paving, and existing and proposed amounts of impervious surface. 
4.  Digital photographs of each existing elevation of the subject property. 
5.  Digital photos of the adjacent properties. 
    This material shall remain with the building permit application. Additional illustrations can be brought to the historic preservation board meeting, but the illustrations filed with the city shall clearly demonstrate the applicant's intent. 
(e)  Under this division, the historic preservation board shall have reviewed and approved all applications for building, demolition or moving permits before forwarding such to the city manager for review pursuant to this division. The historic preservation board shall consider the granting or denial of a certificate of appropriateness at a public hearing to be held for such purpose. Public notice shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 3.4 of the City of St. Pete Beach Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(Att. B), 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(Att. B), adopted April 27, 2010, changed the title of section 28.8 from "Certificate of appropriateness required; criteria for issuance" to "Certificate of appropriateness required; criteria for issuance; application requirements." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 28.9. - Issuance criteria. 
    Under this division, a building, moving or demolition permit may be issued once the city manager has been provided a valid certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.10. - Building permits. 
    After a building, district or site has been historically designated, the city manager shall refer all related applications for building permits to the historic preservation board for review prior to permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.11. - Demolition permits. 
(a)  Structures that have been designated pursuant to this division and/or buildings considered contributing structures to the National Register Historic District shall not be issued a demolition permit until a Certificate of Appropriateness has been issued for the demolition. 
(b)  The historic preservation board may not deny a request for a certificate of appropriateness for a demolition permit, but may impose a stay of demolition for up to 90 days for designated structures that have taken advantage of any preservation incentives or up to 30 days for either contributing structures or designated structures that have not taken advantage of any preservation incentives in order to inform the applicant about possible incentives for preservation of the structure or explore possible alternatives to the demolition of the structure. When reviewing a certificate of appropriateness request for the issuance of a demolition permit, the historic preservation board shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The historic or architectural significance of the building. 
(2)  The importance of the building to the character of a district, if applicable. 
(3)  The difficulty or impossibility of reproducing such a building because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
(4)  Whether the building is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or city. 
(5)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building. 
(6)  Whether the building is capable of earning a reasonable economic return on its value and whether the perpetuation of the building, considering its physical condition, its location and the anticipated expense of rehabilitation would be economically feasible. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 2011-17, § 1, 6-28-11) 
Sec. 28.12. - Moving permits. 
(a)  After a building or district has been historically designated, the city manager shall refer all related applications for moving permits to the historic preservation board for review prior to permit issuance. 
(b)  When passing upon a certificate or appropriateness for the issuance of a moving permit, the historic preservation board shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building contributes to its present setting. 
(2)  The reasons for the proposed move. 
(3)  The proposed new setting and general environment of the proposed new setting. 
(4)  Whether the building can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
(5)  Whether the proposed relocation site is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building. 
(6)  When applicable, the effect of the move on the distinctive historical and visual character of a designated historic district. 
(7)  Special consideration may be afforded to an application request to move a building or structure, provided the building or structure remains within the corporate limits. 
(8)  Any building or structure which has obtained approval to be moved to a site within the historical district of the city must conform to the standards, guidelines and associated land development regulations of the district. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.13. - Variances. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Article II of Chapter 22, section 22.41 of the City Code of Ordinances and section 3.13 of the Land Development Code, no board of authority shall have power to authorize a variance request for any property designated under this division unless a certificate of appropriateness has been granted for said property by the historic preservation board, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.14. - Review of requests for variances. 
(a)  All requests for a variance for a designated historic property under this division shall be presented to the historic preservation board, which shall upon review submit its objection, recommendation and comment to the board considering the request. The historic preservation board shall establish rules for reviewing such requests. Public notice shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 3.4 of the City of St. Pete Beach Land Development Code. 
(b)  Before recommending that a variance be granted, the historic preservation board shall find that: 
(1)  The variance shall be in harmony with the general appearance and character of the community. 
(2)  The variance shall not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(3)  The proposed work is designed and arranged on the site in a manner that minimizes aural and visual impact on the adjacent properties while affording the owner a reasonable use of his land. 
(c)  In recommending the granting of variances, the historic preservation board may also recommend any appropriate conditions necessary to protect and further the interest of the area and abutting properties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Landscape materials, walls and fences as required buffering. 
(2)  Modifications of the orientation of any openings. 
(3)  Modifications of site arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.15. - Variance relief from certain building code regulations. 
(a)  Voluntarily designated historic resources shall be eligible for relief from the provisions of the building code, as adopted in section 98-26 of the City Code of Ordinances, and for administrative variances or other forms of relief from applicable building codes as provided in this section. 
(b)  Repairs, alterations and additions necessary for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation or continued use or usage of a building or structure may be made without conformance to the technical requirements of the building code when the proposed work has been approved by a certificate of appropriateness and also by the city manager, pursuant to the authority granted to the city manager by other ordinances or statutes and further provided that: 
(1)  The restored building will be no more hazardous based on considerations of life, fire and sanitation than it was in its original condition. 
(2)  Plans and specifications are sealed by a state-registered architect or engineer, if required by the city manager. 
(3)  The city manager has required the minimum necessary corrections to be made before use and occupancy which will be in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a property owner from filing a petition for designation simultaneously with a petition for a conditional use or zoning variance which is adjudicated by any board of authority other than the historic preservation board. The city manager and the appropriate board of authority shall be authorized to act upon the petition filed prior to final designation of the subject building, district or site, provided that approval of any such petition shall be made contingent upon the final designation of the building, district or site by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.16. - Variance from floodplain management regulations. 
(a)  Any alteration or addition to an historic structure, designated pursuant to this division, shall be eligible to request variance from the substantial improvement and/or substantial damage regulations in Article V of Chapter 98 of the Code of Ordinances, as provided in this section if: 
(1)  The structure was designated by the city at the time the city was a certified local government; and 
(2)  The structure is listed on the National Register of Historic Places; or 
(3)  The structure is certified by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States as a contributing property; or 
(4)  The structure is listed on the State of Florida Inventory of Historic Places. 
(b)  The historic preservation board may grant a variance as provided in subsection (a) hereof, at a public hearing, subject to the requirements of sections 28.22 and 28.23 of this division, upon a finding that: 
(1)  The variance will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(2)  The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the original structure. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.17. - Exterior maintenance and repair work. 
    The following criteria shall be applied by the historic preservation board when considering variances pursuant to this division: 
(a)  Distinctive external architectural features and materials shall be repaired whenever possible and shall be replaced only when repair is not possible due to severe deterioration. 
(b)  The removal of historic materials or the alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided to retain the historic character of the structure. 
(c)  Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic structure shall be preserved. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.18. - Additions and modern equipment. 
    Because changes to identified historic resources can impact the historic integrity of sites and structures, it is of paramount importance that due consideration be given to any request to alter the architecture, structural components or site layout of historic resources. The following guidelines are provided as reasonable limits to be applied by the historic preservation board when considering variances and certificates of appropriateness pursuant to this division. Any approvals granted in excess of these standards must be accompanied by a specific finding of fact which determines that such approval does not jeopardize the suitability of the sites and structures involved for continued designation as historic resources or contributing structures and that such approvals do not violate the applicable standards of any National Register designation or other requirement under this division. 
(a)  Additions shall use the same or compatible architectural style and materials as the main building. Paint colors should match the colors of the original structure. 
(b)  Additions shall not overpower the original structure, the scale and massing of additions to the original structure shall be secondary thereto, and the new portion of the structure shall be distinguishable from the old and will be compatible with the historic materials, features, size, scale and proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its environment. 
(c)  Additions shall be attached to the rear and/or to the side of the original structure. 
(d)  Modern equipment and amenities, such as air conditioning, shall be concealed from sight by placing them as far as possible from the street and to the rear of the original structure. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2(Att. B), 4-27-10) 
Sec. 28.19. - Designation procedure; notification required. 
    The following procedure shall apply for the designation of buildings, structures, districts or sites as historic resources: 
(1)  Designation may only be considered at the written request of the property owner. 
(2)  When designation is proposed by the property owner, a petition shall be filed with the historic preservation board on forms approved by the historic preservation board. The historic preservation board shall hold a public hearing on the petition. They shall notify the property owner by certified mail at least 30 days in advance of the hearing, unless such notice is waived by the applicant. 
(3)  An applicant may reapply for historic designation six months after an unfavorable, final designation decision is reached by the historic preservation board. 
(4)  The historic preservation board shall conduct public hearings for a proposed historic district area designation or area extension. Notice of the proposed designation shall be sent by certified mail to the owners of record of the properties proposed for designation. The notice shall describe the properties proposed for designation and shall announce a public hearing of the historic preservation board to consider such designation, to be held no less than 30 days after the mailing of such notice. The properties affected by such district designation shall not be subject to the certificate of appropriateness requirements of this division unless written application for designation of the property shall have been submitted individually by the owner of said property and approved by the historic preservation board in accordance with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.20. - Designation report. 
    Prior to the designation of any historic resource, structure or historic area district or district extension pursuant to this division, a designation report shall be prepared by city staff. The designation report shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Individual historic buildings or archaeological sites: 
a.  A physical description of the building or site and its character-defining features, accompanied by photographs. 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural, archaeological or other significance of the building or site as defined by the criteria for designation established by this division. 
c.  A description of the existing condition of the building or site including any potential threats or other circumstances that may affect the integrity of the building or site. 
d.  A statement of rehabilitation or adaptive use proposals, if applicable. 
e.  A location map, showing relevant zoning and land use information. 
f.  A recommendation concerning the eligibility of the building or site for designation pursuant to this division and a listing of those features of the building or site which require specific historic preservation treatments. 
g.  A photographic record of the property. Such record should include a comprehensive photographic representation of the interior and/or exterior appearance of all structures associated with the designation request. 
(2)  Historic or archaeological districts: 
a.  A physical description of the district, accompanied by photographs of buildings, structures or sites within the district indicating examples of contributing and noncontributing properties within the district. Also, a list of all contributing properties outside the proposed boundaries of the district shall be provided. 
b.  A description of the typical architectural styles, character-defining features, and types of buildings, structures or sites within the district. 
c.  An identification of all buildings, structures and sites within the district and the proposed classification of each as contributing or noncontributing, with an explanation of the criteria utilized for the proposed classification. 
d.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural, archaeological or other significance of the district as defined by the criteria for designation established by this division. 
e.  A statement of recommended boundaries for the district and a justification for those boundaries, along with a map showing the recommended boundaries. 
f.  A statement of incentives, if any, and the specific guidelines which should be used in authorizing any alteration, demolition, relocation, excavation or new construction within the boundaries of the district. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.21. - Designation process; public hearing required. 
(a)  At the public hearing of the historic preservation board upon a proposed designation, the historic preservation board members; the owners of structures, sites or properties within a district proposed for designation; the authorized agent of such owners; and any interested citizens may present testimony or documentary evidence concerning the significance of the building, site or district under consideration. 
(b)  At the close of the public hearing, the historic preservation board shall vote to approve or deny any request for designation of individual properties, sites or structures. Such determination of designation shall be final and not subject to city commission review. For proposed historic district designations, the historic preservation board's shall forward a recommendation to the city commission with respect to the designation, which shall classify all structures within the proposed district as contributing or noncontributing. 
(c)  After reviewing the recommendation of the historic preservation board, the city commission may direct the preparation of an ordinance providing for the recommended designation of the proposed district and schedule such for public hearing. Alternatively, after the reviewing recommendation of the historic preservation board, the city commission may then act to deny the proposed district designation without further notice or hearing. 
(d)  If the city commission directs the preparation of a designation ordinance for a proposed historic district, a public hearing shall be held to consider adoption of the proposed ordinance. Notice of the public hearing shall conform to standard public notification procedures utilized by the city. 
(e)  After final adoption of a designation ordinance by the city commission, districts shall remain designated unless such designation is removed by subsequent ordinance of the city commission. 
(f)  The historic preservation board may elect to consider multiple structures or resources for designation, notwithstanding any other portion of this division. These multiple considerations may be collectively considered under one public hearing. 
(g)  The sale, lease or transfer of ownership of any property designated as a historic resource under this division shall not affect the designation in any way. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.22. - Designation criteria established. 
    The criteria to be applied by the historic preservation board and city commission in the designation of a building, district area or site as historically or archaeologically significant shall be as follows: 
(1)  Historic buildings. A building is of historic significance if it possesses integrity of location, design, setting and materials, and if it: 
a.  Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the city, the county, the state or the United States; or 
b.  Is associated with events which have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our local, state or national history; or 
c.  Is associated with the life of a person who has played a significant role in our local, state or national history; or 
d.  Embodies the distinctive visible characteristics of an architectural style or period, or a method of construction; or 
e.  Is a reconstructed building accurately executed in a suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a restoration master plan, and when no other building or association has survived; and 
f.  Is listed on the National Register of Historic Places or is eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places, or is included on the state master site file, individually or as contributing to a listed historic district. 
(2)  Historic districts. A district is of historic significance if it: 
a.  Represents a significant entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
b.  Represents a geographically defined area which contains buildings, sites, objects and spaces linked historically through location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association; or 
c.  Represents a geographically defined entity whose individual structural components collectively convey a sense of time and place which may relate to one or more periods in history. 
(3)  Archaeological sites and districts. A site or district is of archaeological significance if it: 
a.  Has yielded or is likely to yield significant information relating to prehistory or history; or 
b.  Contains any subsurface remains of historical or archaeological importance or any unusual ground formations of archaeological significance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.23. - Relationship to zoning districts. 
    Designated historic resources may be located within any zoning district classification. Whenever a designation is made by ordinance, the regulations for both the applicable zoning district and this division shall be applied to the designated property. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 28.24. - Certified local government requirements. 
    In order to establish and maintain certified local government status, city staff and the historic preservation board shall undertake the following actions, as required: 
(1)  Provide the state historic preservation office with prior written notice of all meetings at least 30 days in advance. 
(2)  Provide the state historic preservation office with meeting minutes within 30 days of each meeting. 
(3)  Provide the state historic preservation office with meeting attendance reports within 30 days of each meeting. 
(4)  Notify the state historic preservation office of any change in board membership within 30 days of action. 
(5)  Immediately notify the state historic preservation office of all new historic designations or alterations to existing designations. 
(6)  Submit proposed amendments to the city's historic preservation ordinance (section 28 of the Land Development Code) to the state historic preservation office for review and comment at least 30 days prior to adoption. 
(7)  Submit an annual report by November 1 to the state historic preservation office covering the period October 1 through September 30, in accordance with specified requirements for format and contents. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
DIVISION 29 - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 28, 2017, repealed Div. 29, §§ 29.1-29.13, and reenacted a new Div. 29, §§ 29.1-29.13, as set out herein. Former Div. 29 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, adopted Jan. 24, 2006; Ord. No. 2007-01, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 23, 2007; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, adopted April 28, 2009; and Ord. No. 2015-22, § 6, adopted Dec. 15, 2015. 

Sec. 29.1. - Purpose and declaration of public policy. 
(a)  The city commission declares as a matter of public policy that the concurrency requirements of the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Community Planning Act [F.S. § 163.3180 et seq.] are a public necessity, and are important in the protection and enhancement of the quality of life in the city as well as the county and the state. 
(b)  The purpose of this division is to ensure the availability of public facilities and the adequacy of those facilities at adopted levels of service concurrent with the impacts of development. This intent is implemented by means of a concurrency management system which shall measure the potential impact of a development permit application upon the adopted minimum acceptable level of services, as provided in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 29.2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acceptance of completed application means the application for a development order or development permit has been reviewed for completeness and found to have the adequate information necessary to allow continuing the review of the application. 
    Capital improvement means physical assets constructed or purchased to provide, improve, or replace a public facility; generally large scale, high in cost, nonrecurring, and which may require multi-year financing. 
    Certificate of concurrency means the document issued by the city manager certifying the concurrent availability of required public infrastructure and services. At a minimum, the certificate of concurrency shall provide information on the following: 
(1)  Type of proposal. 
(2)  Development potential, including site acreage, number of residential units, number of transient lodging units, nonresidential use, type of development, and building square footage. 
(3)  Individual public facilities reports from the concurrency management team, if required. 
(4)  Level of service capacity status review, if required. 
(5)  Permitted impacts for each public facility and service, where applicable. 
(6)  The date of issuance of certificate of concurrency. 
    CIE means the capital improvement element of the city's adopted comprehensive plan. 
    Concurrency means the provision of the necessary public facilities and services required to maintain the adopted level of service standards at the time the impacts of development occur. 
    Concurrency management system means the procedures and/or process that the city will utilize to assure that development orders and permits are not issued unless the necessary facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of development. 
    Concurrency management team means the city staff directed by the city manager to administer and manage the concurrency determination process. 
    Concurrency monitoring system means the data collection, processing, and analysis performed by the city to determine impacts on the established levels of service for potable water, sanitary sewer, drainage, solid waste, and roads. For traffic circulation: data collection, processing and analysis will be utilized to determine traffic concern areas and traffic restriction areas in addition to impacts on the established levels of service. The traffic circulation data maintained by the concurrency management monitoring system shall be the most current information available to the city. 
    Development means the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; excavation, landfill or land disturbance, and use, change of use or expansion of the use of the land. 
    Development order means any order granting, denying, or granting with conditions, an application for development. 
    Development permit means any building permit, zoning permit, subdivision approval, certification, conditional use, variance, or any other official action of local government having the effect of permitting the development of the land. 
    FDOT means the Florida Department of Transportation. 
    Financial feasibility means that sufficient revenues are currently available or will be available from committed funding sources for the first three years, or will be available from committed or planned funding sources for years four and five, of a five-year capital improvement schedule for financing capital improvements, such as ad valorem taxes, bonds, state and federal funds, tax revenues, impact fees, and developer contributions, which are adequate to fund the projected costs of the capital improvements identified in the comprehensive plan necessary to ensure that adopted level-of-service standards are achieved and maintained within the period covered by the five-year schedule of capital improvements. Level of service (LOS) means an indicator of the extent or degree of service provided by, or proposed to be provided by, a facility based on and related to the operational characteristics of the facility. Level of service shall indicate the capacity per unit of demand for each public facility. 
    Proportionate fair share is a provision that allows for development projects to mitigate the impacts thereof through "fair-share" contributions to facilities identified for capacity improvements in the capital improvements schedule. 
    Public facilities and services means those facilities and services included in the St. Pete Beach Comprehensive Plan required by F.S. § 163.3177, and for which level of service standards have been adopted. 
    Remodeling as defined in the Florida Building Code, Chapter 4, Section 423.5., means the changing of existing facilities by rearrangement of space and/or change of use. 
    Renovations as defined in the Florida Building Code, Chapter 4, Section 423.5., means the rejuvenating or upgrading of existing facilities by installation or replacement of materials and equipment. The use and occupancy of the spaces remain the same. 
    Residential approval means a residential site plan or a final residential subdivision approval. 
    School board means the elected body presiding over the schools of Pinellas County, responsible for exercising all of the powers and duties associated with the district schools, in accordance with F.S. Ch. 1001. 
    Significantly degrade means a peak hour increase in traffic volume of five percent or a decrease in average travel speed of ten percent. This criteria shall be the means of evaluating the transportation impacts in traffic restriction areas upon roadway levels of service. 
    SIS means strategic intermodal system. 
    Traffic concern area means an area within which the level of service for a given road facility has been determined by data from the concurrency management monitoring system to have reached a level of service D during the peak hour or is expected to reach a level of service E or worse during the peak hour in the next five years and no construction improvements are planned in the next five years. 
    Traffic restriction area means an area in which the level of service for a given road facility has been determined by data from the concurrency management monitoring system to be below the acceptable level of service adopted in this article. 
    Transportation concurrency means transportation facilities needed to serve new development shall be in place, or under actual construction, within three years after the city approves a building permit or its functional equivalent that results in traffic generation. 
    Volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratio means the rate of traffic flow of an intersection approach or group of lanes during a specific time interval divided by the capacity of the approach or group of lanes. Volume-to-capacity ratios provide a measure of traffic congestion and are utilized in the concurrency management system to identify congested road segments and to minimize the transportation impacts of development projects that affect them. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 29.3. - Levels of service adopted by reference. 
    The adopted levels of service standards, as stated in the City Comprehensive Plan, for public facilities and services are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 29.4. - General requirements. 
(a)  A certificate of concurrency shall be required prior to the issuance of any development permit for a non-exempt development project. The City of St. Pete Beach shall not issue any development order (excluding future land use or zoning map amendments) or building permit for any project that results in a reduction of the level of service requirements established and adopted in the City of St. Pete Beach Comprehensive Plan. An applicant must prepare and complete an application for a certificate of concurrency including an infrastructure study as determined to be necessary by the Technical Review Committee. If a development will require more than one development permit, the issuance of a certificate of concurrency shall occur prior to the issuance of the initial permit. Upon request by applicants, a preliminary concurrency review shall be performed and a conditional certificate of concurrency may be issued. This conditional certificate shall not be binding upon the city and shall only be effective for the year in which the annual concurrency monitoring report was issued. Only those certificates of concurrency issued for development permits shall be binding. Applicants may be charged a fee established by the city commission for certificates of concurrency. 
(1)  Application for development . The property owner, or authorized representative, must provide a complete application for development containing the required documentation for the specific development order or permit. The Technical Review Committee shall then review the application for completeness in a timely manner to ensure that the required information is sufficient to accept the application and continue its review. 
(2)  Development review . When the application for development has been accepted, it shall be processed and reviewed for impacts of the development on the public facilities and services identified in this division. 
(3)  Concurrency review . The concurrency review shall compare the available and reserved capacity of the facility or service to the demand projected for the proposed development. The available capacity shall be determined by adding the total of the existing excess capacity and the total future capacity of any proposed construction or expansion that meets the requirements of section 29.6. The levels of service (LOS) of all facilities and services must be sufficient before a development permit can be issued. 
a.  Traffic restriction and traffic concern areas . Traffic restriction and concern areas shall be designated on an annual basis at the time the annual concurrency monitoring report is issued. These areas will be designated based on the criteria defined in section 29.2. Applications for development permits within these areas may require detailed traffic studies. 
1.  If the development is found to be in a traffic restriction area, a traffic study shall be required. If the traffic study indicates that the affected roadway is not significantly degraded, the project will be found concurrent for traffic. 
2.  If the development is found to be in a traffic concern area, a traffic study may be required. If the traffic study indicates that the affected roadway LOS may be lowered below the adopted LOS, the project will be found concurrent for traffic only if provisions and measures are attached as conditions to prevent the reduction of the LOS. 
3.  If the development is found to be in a traffic restriction or traffic concern area and the traffic study indicates that the affected roadway is significantly degraded, the project will be found concurrent for traffic only if provisions and measures are attached as conditions to prevent the significant degradation of the affected roadway. 
4.  If the development is not found to be in a traffic restriction or traffic concern area but the estimated traffic volumes resulting from the development degrade the peak hour LOS below the adopted LOS standard, the project will be found concurrent for traffic only if mitigation provisions are attached as conditions to prevent the degradation of the affected roadway below the adopted LOS standard. 
(4)  Certificate of concurrency . 
a.  The certificate of concurrency shall indicate the date of issuance and shall automatically expire simultaneously with the expiration of the development permit to which it applies. In the event that a time extension is requested prior to the expiration of the development permit, then the accompanying certificate of concurrency may be renewed upon determination by the Technical Review Committee that the conditions of concurrency will still be met. 
b.  Any development order or permit that is issued within the effective period of a validly issued certificate of concurrency shall be vested for the purposes of concurrency until the expiration of that development order or permit, provided that development commences within the validity period of the development order or permit and continues in good faith. 
(5)  Development order or development permit compliance . 
a.  Any development orders and development permits approved and issued after the effective date of this division shall be based upon and in compliance with the certificate of concurrency issued for that application. 
(b)  The burden of showing compliance with the adopted levels of service and meeting the concurrency evaluation shall be upon the applicant. For non-exempt development orders or projects, the applicant shall prepare and submit an infrastructure study that determines the extent of any degradation of the infrastructure below the adopted levels of service unless determined unnecessary by the City's Technical Review Committee based on an evaluation of potential impact relative to the nature, size, type, and location of the proposed development project or land use amendment application. Mitigation fees and/or physical or operational improvements determined to be reasonably required in proportion to the impacts caused by the increased density and/or intensity of new development in consideration of the long-term concurrency management plan of the local government who owns and operates the facility or system, shall be stipulated as conditions of approval as part of the development order. The Technical Review Committee shall document its findings pertaining to its review. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 29.5. - Exemptions. 
    The following developments are exempt from the requirements of this division in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 163.3180: 
(1)  Final approved development orders relating to a development of regional impact (DRI) project, pursuant to F.S. Chapter 380. 
(2)  All single-family homes built upon individual zoning lots. 
(3)  Any development which can be demonstrated to represent no net increase in density or intensity of land use as compared to the immediately previous use of the development site. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 29.6. - Minimum requirements for concurrency. 
    An application for a development permit and/or order must comply with the following minimum concurrency requirements for each of the following public facilities and services: 
(a)  For potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, and drainage one of the following are the minimum standards that must be met to satisfy the concurrency requirement: 
(1)  The necessary facilities and services are in place at the time a development permit or order is issued; 
(2)  A development permit or order is issued subject to the condition that the necessary facilities and services will be in place when the impacts of the development occur; 
(3)  The necessary facilities are under construction at the time a permit or order is issued; 
(4)  The necessary facilities and services are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement. An enforceable development agreement may include, but is not limited to, development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220, or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. Chapter 380. 
(b)  For recreation and open space, one of the following are minimum standards that must be met to satisfy the concurrency requirement: 
(1)  Compliance with the standards in subsections (a)(1)-(4) of this section; 
(2)  At the time the development permit or order is issued, the necessary facilities and services are the subject of a binding executed contract which provides for the commencement of the actual construction of the required facilities, or the provision of services within one year of the issuance of the development permit or order; 
(3)  The necessary facilities and services are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement which requires the commencement of the actual construction of facilities or the provision of services within one year of the issuance of the applicable permit or order. An enforceable development agreement may include, but is not limited to, development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220 or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. Chapter 380. 
(c)  For roads and mass transit, where the city has committed to provide the necessary public facilities and services in accordance with the five-year schedule of capital improvements, the city will satisfy the concurrency requirement by complying with the standards in subsections (a)(1)-(4) and (b)(2) of this section and by assuring that the following provisions are met: 
(1)  The capital improvements element and schedule of capital improvements, in addition to meeting all of the other statutory and rule requirements, is financially feasible. The schedule of capital improvements may include those projects included in the county capital improvement element or in the first three years of the adopted state department of transportation five-year work program. 
(2)  The five-year schedule of capital improvements which includes both necessary facilities to maintain the adopted level of service standards to serve the new development proposed to be permitted and the necessary facilities and services required to eliminate that portion of existing deficiencies which are a priority to be eliminated during the five-year period. 
(3)  A financially feasible funding system based on currently available revenue sources which is adequate to fund the public facilities and services required to serve the development authorized by the development order and development permit and which are included in the five-year schedule of capital improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 29.7. - Action upon failure to show available capacity. 
    Where available capacity cannot be shown, the following methods may be used to maintain adopted level of service: 
(a)  A plan amendment which limits the adopted level of service standard for the affected facilities and/or services. 
(b)  A binding executed contract between the city and the applicant to provide the necessary improvements. 
(c)  An enforceable development agreement, which may include, but is not limited to, development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220. 
(d)  A change in the funding source. 
(e)  A reduction in the scale or impact of the proposed development. 
(f)  Phasing of the proposed project. 
(g)  Transportation management or restriction programs that reduce the traffic impact of the development by mandating the use of mass transit, increasing effective roadway capacity, shifting the effects on peak hour, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 29.8. - Concurrency annual monitoring report. 
(a)  On an annual basis, the city manager shall prepare a concurrency annual monitoring report. The city manager shall convey such annual report to the city commission. 
(b)  The city manager shall establish and maintain a concurrency monitoring system for the purpose of monitoring the status of public facilities and services, and to be used in the establishment of each annual report. 
(c)  The concurrency annual report shall be issued every year and will be effective for one year. Nothing herein precludes the issuance and effectiveness of more frequent concurrency reports, if updating or correction is deemed necessary, including but not limited to circumstances where: errors are noted; the impact of issued development orders, as monitored by the city manager, indicates a degradation to the adopted level of service; or where changes in the status of capital improvement projects changes the underlying assumptions of the concurrency annual report. 
(d)  Under no circumstances will a more frequent concurrency report divest those rights acquired by a preceding concurrency annual report, except where a known danger exists to the health, safety or welfare of the general public. 
(e)  The concurrency annual report shall include, at a minimum, a review of the levels of service and capacity for all the adopted levels of service standards included in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 29.9. - Providing for intergovernmental coordination. 
(a)  The city as the provider of public facilities or services to other government entities. 
(1)  The city shall provide services to other local government entities within the county in accordance with the policies included in the Comprehensive Plan. The city shall administer this division such that the development in those areas shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and implementing ordinance. 
(2)  The city shall require that all proposed development within these other local government entities which require city services be submitted to the city manager to disseminate the proposal to the appropriate review personnel. A certificate of concurrency from the city shall be required for any public facility or services provided by the city to any local government in which a permit or order is proposed to be issued. 
(b)  The city as the recipient of public facilities or services from other government entities. 
(1)  The city shall recognize the level of service provided by other governmental entities who provide services or facilities to the city in accordance with the policies of the comprehensive plan. The city shall ensure that all development within its area shall be in accordance with such policies as identified in the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The city shall work with other governmental entities to ensure appropriate intergovernmental coordination. Appropriate methodology for tracking concurrency will be coordinated with these other governmental entities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 29.10. - Providing for adequate funding. 
    The capital improvement element of the comprehensive plan was designed to meet requirements of the state law mandating that local governments provide sufficient capacity of public facilities concurrent with development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 29.11. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations of this division shall be subject to prosecution and punishment pursuant to section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided by subsection (a) of this section for violation of this division, any violation of this article shall be subject to appropriate civil action in the court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 29.12. - Proportionate fair share program. 
(a)  General requirements . 
(1)  An applicant may choose to satisfy the transportation concurrency requirements of the city by making a proportionate fair-share contribution, pursuant to the following requirements: 
a.  The proposed development is consistent with the comprehensive plan and applicable land development regulations; and 
b.  The five-year schedule of capital improvements for St. Pete Beach includes a transportation improvement(s) that, upon completion, will mitigate the transportation impacts of the proposed development in accordance with the requirements of this subsection. 
(2)  The applicant may also choose to satisfy transportation concurrency by contributing to an improvement that, upon completion, will satisfy the requirements of this subsection, but that is not contained in the Schedule where the following apply: 
a.  St. Pete Beach adopts, by resolution or ordinance, a commitment to add the improvement to the schedule no later than the next regularly scheduled update. To qualify for consideration under this subsection, the proposed improvement must be determined to be consistent with the comprehensive plan, and in compliance with the provisions of this subsection. 
b.  If the funds allocated for the schedule are insufficient to fully fund construction of a transportation improvement required for the applicant to comply with the terms of this subsection, the city may enter into a binding proportionate fair-share agreement with the applicant authorizing construction of that amount of development on which the proportionate fair-share is calculated if the proportionate fair-share amount in such agreement is sufficient to pay for one or more improvements which will significantly benefit the impacted transportation system. 
c.  The improvement or improvements funded by the proportionate fair-share component must be adopted into the schedule. 
d.  Any improvement project proposed to meet the applicant's fair-share obligation must meet design standards of the city, county and FDOT as applicable. 
(b)  Proportionate fair share mitigation agreement . 
(1)  Upon notification that a proposed development project is subject to transportation concurrency regulations and is eligible to participate in the proportionate fair share program, the applicant shall be notified in writing of such during the site plan review process pursuant to section 5.1 of Division 5 herein.. 
(2)  If the applicant chooses to exercise this concurrency option, a meeting shall be held to discuss eligibility, application submittal requirements, potential mitigation options, and related issues. If the impacted facility is on the SIS, then the FDOT will be notified and invited to participate in the meeting. 
(3)  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3180(16)(e), proposed proportionate fair-share mitigation for development impacts to facilities on the SIS requires the concurrence of the FDOT. Therefore, agreements involving improvements to SIS facilities will require approval by FDOT. 
(4)  After a mitigation project is identified and agreed upon by the city, the applicant and FDOT (if the project affects an SIS facility), a proposed proportionate fair-share obligation and binding agreement will be prepared by the city or the applicant with direction from the city. The final agreement will become a part of the site plan submittal which will be delivered to the appropriate parties for review. Final approval of the site plan and agreement rests with the city manager. 
(c)  Determining proportionate fair-share obligation . 
(1)  The proportionate fair-share obligation shall be based on the impact a development has on a transportation facility as determined by a traffic impact analysis that assesses the volume of traffic generated by the proposed development. 
(2)  A facility shall be considered impacted when the net trips generated by the proposed development meets or exceeds five percent of the facility's peak hour capacity. 
(3)  Should the impacted facility be operating at an LOS that meets the locally adopted LOS standard, it would not be eligible for the application of proportionate fair share provisions. 
(4)  Should the impacted facility be operating at a substandard LOS based on existing conditions or as a result of the impacts of a proposed development, the facility would be identified as eligible for proportionate fair share provisions and the applicant would be notified as such. 
(5)  Proportionate fair-share mitigation for concurrency impacts may include, without limitation, separately or collectively, private funds, contributions of land, and construction and contribution of facilities. 
(6)  A development shall not be required to pay more than its proportionate fair-share. The fair market value of the proportionate fair-share mitigation for the impacted facilities shall not differ regardless of the method of mitigation. 
(7)  The methodology used to calculate an applicant's proportionate fair-share obligation shall be as provided for in F.S. § 163.3180(12), as follows: 
The cumulative number of trips from the proposed development expected to reach roadways during peak hours from the complete build out of a stage or phase being approved, divided by the change in the peak hour maximum service volume (MSV) of roadways resulting from construction of an improvement necessary to maintain the adopted LOS, multiplied by the construction cost, at the time of developer payment, of the improvement necessary to maintain the adopted LOS. 
OR 
Proportionate Fair-Share = S[[(Development Trips;sub \sub;) / (SV Increase;sub \sub;)] x Cost;sub \sub;] 
Where: 
Development Trips;sub \sub; = Those trips from the stage or phase of development under review that are assigned to roadway segment "i" and have triggered a deficiency per the CMS; 
SV Increase;sub \sub; = Service volume increase provided by the eligible improvement to roadway segment "i"; 
Cost;sub \sub; = Adjusted cost of the improvement to segment "i". Cost shall include all improvements and associated costs, such as design, right-of-way acquisition, planning, engineering, inspection, and physical development costs directly associated with construction at the anticipated cost in the year it will be incurred. 
(8)  For the purposes of determining proportionate fair-share obligations, the city shall determine improvement costs based upon the actual cost of the improvement as obtained from the MPO transportation improvement program. Where such information is not available, improvement cost shall be determined using one of the methods described below. 
a.  An analysis by the city of construction costs that incorporates data from recent projects and is updated annually; or 
b.  The most recent issue of FDOT transportation costs, as adjusted based upon the type of cross-section (urban or rural); locally available data from recent projects on acquisition, drainage and utility costs; and significant changes in the cost of materials due to unforeseeable events. Cost estimates for state road improvements not included in the adopted FDOT work program shall be determined using this method in coordination with the FDOT district. 
(9)  The value of a proportionate fair share mitigation project proposed by the applicant and accepted by the city shall be determined using one of the methods provided in this subsection. 
(10)  The city may also accept right-of-way dedication for the proportionate fair-share payment credit for the dedication shall be based on fair market value established by an independent appraisal approved by the city and at no expense to the city. The applicant shall supply a drawing and legal description of the land and a certificate of title or title search of the land to the city at no expense to the city. If the estimated value of the right-of-way dedication proposed by the applicant is less than the estimated total proportionate fair-share obligation for that development, then the applicant must also pay the difference. 
(d)  Impact fee credit for proportionate fair-share mitigation . 
(1)  Proportionate fair-share contributions shall be applied as a credit against impact fees consistent with the terms of the impact fee section of section 41.6 of the Land Development Code. 
(2)  Impact fee credits for the proportionate fair-share contribution will be determined when the transportation impact fee obligation is calculated for the proposed development. Impact fees owed by the applicant will be reduced per the proportionate fair-share agreement as they become due per the impact fee section of section 41.6 of the Land Development Code. If the applicant's proportionate fair-share obligation is less than the development's anticipated road impact fee for the specific stage or phase of development under review, then the applicant or its successor must pay the remaining impact fee amount to the city. 
(e)  Proportionate fair-share agreements . 
(1)  Upon execution of a proportionate fair-share agreement, the applicant shall receive transportation concurrency approval or functional equivalent. Should the applicant fail to apply for a development permit in accordance with section 29.4(1), then the agreement shall be considered null and void, and the applicant shall be required to reapply. 
(2)  Payment of the proportionate fair-share contribution is due in full prior to issuance of the final development order or recording of the final plat and shall be non-refundable. If the payment is submitted more than 12 months from the date of execution of the agreement, then the proportionate fair-share cost shall be recalculated at the time of payment based on the best estimate of the construction cost of the required improvement at the time of payment, pursuant to section 29.11(c) and adjusted accordingly. 
(3)  All proportionate fair share mitigation improvements authorized under this subsection must be completed prior to issuance of a development permit, or as otherwise established in a binding agreement that is accompanied by a security instrument that is sufficient to ensure the completion of all required improvements. It is the intent of this subsection that any required improvements be completed before issuance of building permits or certificates of occupancy. 
(4)  Dedication of necessary right-of-way for facility improvements pursuant to a proportionate fair-share agreement must be completed prior to issuance of the final development order or recording of the final plat. 
(5)  Any requested change to a development project subsequent to a development order may be subject to additional proportionate fair-share contributions to the extent the change would generate additional traffic that would require mitigation. 
(6)  Applicants may submit a letter to withdraw from the proportionate fair-share agreement at any time prior to the execution of the agreement. 
(7)  The city may enter into proportionate fair-share agreements for selected corridor improvements to facilitate collaboration among multiple applicants on improvements to a shared transportation facility. 
(f)  Appropriation of fair-share revenues . 
(1)  Proportionate fair-share revenues shall be placed in the appropriate project account for funding of scheduled improvements in the CIE, or as otherwise established in the terms of the proportionate fair-share agreement. Proportionate fair-share revenues may be used for operational improvements prior to construction of the capacity project from which the proportionate fair-share revenues were derived. Proportionate fair-share revenues may also be used as the 50 percent local match for funding under the FDOT Transportation Regional Incentive Program (TRIP). 
(2)  In the event a scheduled proportionate fair share improvement is removed from the CIE, then the revenues collected for its construction may be applied toward the construction of another improvement within the same corridor or planning sector that would mitigate the impacts of development pursuant to the requirements of section 29.11(a)(2)b. 
(3)  Where an impacted facility has been designated as a regionally significant transportation facility in an adopted regional transportation plan, the city may coordinate with other impacted jurisdictions and agencies to apply proportionate fair-share contributions and public contributions to seek funding for improving the impacted regional facility under the FDOT TRIP. Such coordination shall be ratified by the city through an interlocal agreement that establishes a procedure for earmarking the developer contributions for this purpose. 
(4)  Where an applicant constructs a transportation facility that exceeds their proportionate fair-share obligation calculated under section 29.11(c)(7), the city shall reimburse them for the excess contribution using one or more of the following methods: 
a.  An impact fee credit account may be established for the applicant in the amount of the excess contribution, a portion or all of which may be assigned and reassigned under the terms and conditions acceptable to the city. 
b.  An account may be established for the applicant for the purpose of reimbursing the applicant for the excess contribution with proportionate fair-share payments from future applicants on the facility. 
c.  The city may compensate the applicant for the excess contribution through payment or some combination of means acceptable to the city and the applicant. 
(g)  Cross jurisdictional impacts . 
(1)  In the interest of intergovernmental coordination and to reflect the shared responsibilities for managing development and concurrency, the city may enter into an agreement with one or more adjacent local governments to address cross jurisdictional impacts of development on multi-jurisdictional transportation facilities. The agreement shall provide for application of the methodology in this subsection to address the cross jurisdictional transportation impacts of development. 
(2)  A development application submitted subject to transportation concurrency requirements and meeting all of the criteria listed below shall be subject to this subsection. 
a.  All or part of the proposed development is located within an area or corridor designated by an adjacent local government where development projects are subject to transportation concurrency requirements in accordance with their respective land development codes. 
b.  If the additional traffic from the proposed development would use five percent or more of the adopted peak hour LOS maximum service volume of a multi-jurisdictional transportation facility within the concurrency jurisdiction of the adjacent local government ("impacted multi-jurisdictional facility"). 
c.  The impacted multi-jurisdictional facility is projected to be operating below the level of service standard, adopted by the adjacent local government, when the traffic from the proposed development is included. 
(3)  Upon identification of an impacted multi-jurisdictional facility, the city shall notify the applicant and the affected adjacent local government in writing of the opportunity to derive an additional proportionate fair-share contribution, based on the projected impacts of the proposed development on the impacted adjacent facility. 
(4)  The adjacent local government shall have up to 90 days in which to notify the city of a proposed specific proportionate fair-share obligation, and the intended use of the funds when received. The adjacent local government must provide reasonable justification that both the amount of the payment and its intended use comply with the requirements of F.S. § 163.3180. Should the adjacent local government decline proportionate fair-share mitigation under this subsection, then the provisions of this subsection would not apply and the applicant would be subject only to the proportionate fair share requirements of the city. 
(5)  If the subject application is subsequently approved by the city, the approval shall include a condition that the applicant provides, prior to the issuance of any building permit covered by that application, evidence that the proportionate fair-share obligation to the adjacent local government has been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 29.13. - Concurrency monitoring system. 
    The Community Development Department (in cooperation with the Building Official) shall be responsible for monitoring development activity to ensure that all development is consistent with the criteria outlined herein. All existing and committed development and its impact on the current facility capacity subject to level-of-service standards shall be documented. Monitoring of the systems shall occur at a minimum prior to the adoption of the Capital Improvements Schedule and shall include: 
(a)  All changes in zoning districts. 
(b)  A summary of all building permits. 
(c)  A summary of all demolition permits. 
(d)  Summary of all certificates of occupancy. 
(e)  A summary of systems and the impacts incurred. 
Compliance with the City's existing levels of service will be calculated and capacity reserved at the time of final action of an approved site plan or building permit if no site plan is required. If no site plan is required, or an enforceable Developers Agreement then capacity shall be reserved at the time of final action. Capacity reservation shall be valid for 18 months. If construction is not initiated during this period, the reservation shall be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2(Exh. A), 2-28-2017) 
DIVISION 30 - TC-1 TOWN CENTER CORE DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 22, 2011, repealed the former Div. 30, §§ 30.1-30.11, and enacted a new Div. 30 as set out herein. The former Div. 30 pertained to TC-1 Town Center Core District and derived from Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, adopted 6-3-08. 

Sec. 30.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The TC-1 Town Center Core District is established as the government and business center of the city and is intended to support medium to high intensity land uses. The Town Center Core District exists to accommodate neighborhood commercial uses and downtown residential development in a pedestrian-friendly environment. Residential uses will only be permitted as a component of a mixed-use development and shall not be allowed on the ground level of any structure. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 30.2. - Permitted uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses in the TC-1 Town Center Core District are as follows: 
(a)  Financial institutions without drive-through service. 
(b)  Government buildings and other public or civic facilities, including parks and recreation facilities and transit stations and stops. 
(c)  Office uses. 
(d)  Personal service businesses such as barbershops, beauty shops, day spas, tailoring, garment alteration and repair, shoe repair, pet grooming, dry cleaning pick-up and drop-off and other personal service uses similar in character and impact. Body art, bail-bond, check-cashing, and other similar services are prohibited. 
(e)  Printing and copying. 
(f)  Residential uses as a component of mixed-use development only. Residential uses shall not be allowed on the ground floor level of any structure. 
(g)  Eating and drinking establishments - full-service restaurant, limited-service restaurant, take-out only restaurant, bar/lounge, subject to Section 6.24 of this Code as may be applicable. 
(h)  Retail uses except automotive sales lots, pawn shops, liquor stores, and tobacco shops. 
(i)  Theaters, cinemas and other indoor commercial entertainment facilities. 
(j)  Artist studios and art galleries. 
(k)  Grocery stores and pharmacies without drive-through service. 
(l)  Commercial kitchen. 
(m)  Sales, rentals, and/or service of bicycles, mopeds, motorcycles, segways, and scooters; 
(n)  Other commercial uses similar in character, nature and impact to permitted uses listed above. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2013-25, § 2, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 5, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 30.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Electric vehicle charging stations. 
(b)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited under section 30.5. 
(c)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(d)  Temporary uses under the provisions of section 6.11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 30.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the TC-1 Town Center Core District are as follows: 
(a)  Automotive retail stores and automotive service stations with related services. Such uses shall only be allowed on lots which front directly on 75th Avenue. 
(b)  Car washes. 
(c)  Commercial developments with a gross square footage of greater than 25,000. 
(d)  Convenience stores without the sale of gasoline or other fuels. 
(e)  Cigar shops and cigar bars. 
(f)  Financial institutions with drive-through service. 
(g)  Pharmacies with drive-through service. 
(h)  Public or private parking structures. 
(i)  Bed and breakfast inns, subject to the following: 
(1)  In addition to any density and intensity which may be allowed, the city shall also establish a reserve of units, not to exceed 50 total temporary lodging units for the entire Town Center Core District, which shall be allocated by ordinance of the city commission upon request of an individual property owner on a first come, first serve basis. Such allocation shall not exceed ten units per acre, or a total of ten units per redevelopment project. The remaining number of available reserve temporary lodging units shall be specified in each city commission ordinance allocating such units and each such ordinance shall provide that no units beyond those remaining available shall be allocated to any subsequent project. This limitation shall be absolute and shall apply regardless of the proposed size or density of the project requesting such allocation. 
(j)  Class I mobile food trucks, subject to the criteria found in Division 6, herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2013-25, § 2, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 2017-12, § 1, 11-28-17; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 30.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
(a)  All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or conditionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the TC-1 Town Center Core District. 
(b)  Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways, or are likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the TC-1 Town Center Core District. Uses which are not listed as permitted shall be prohibited, including the following: 
(a)  Manufacturing, storage or distribution as a primary use, except artisanal uses. 
(b)  Enameling, painting, or plating, except as an artist's studio. Such use must be limited exclusively to the interior of the structure. 
(c)  Carting, moving or hauling yards. 
(d)  Prisons or halfway houses. 
(e)  The manufacture, storage, or disposal of any hazardous wastes or materials. 
(f)  Scrap yards. 
(g)  Kennels, except as an ancillary use to a police station, veterinary office, or dog grooming facility. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 30.6. - Density and intensity. 
(a)  Single use or multi-tenant non-residential uses shall not exceed a FAR of 1.00, exclusive of the area of any structured parking. 
(b)  The residential density of mixed-use developments shall not exceed 15 units per acre. 
(c)  Mixed-use developments with at least one level of residential use shall receive an additional FAR of 0.45, for a total allowable FAR of 1.45. 
(d)  Both maximum commercial FAR and maximum residential density shall be available based upon the entire site area, and the presence of one shall not limit the density or intensity of the other. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 30.7. - Building height. 
(a)  Twenty-eight (28) feet for an exclusively nonresidential uses; or 
(b)  Forty (40) feet for bed and breakfasts and buildings containing nonresidential uses mixed with residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 30.8. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Setbacks are as follows: 
Front yard: 0 feet minimum; 5 feet maximum on Corey Avenue 5 feet minimum; 15 feet maximum on all other streets. Side yard: 0 feet on Corey Avenue 10 percent of lot width on each side on all other streets. Rear yard 5 feet on Corey Avenue 10 feet on all other streets.  
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 30.9. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for all uses shall not exceed 0.90. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 30.10. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 30.11. - Landscaping. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 22 of the Land Development Code, Landscaping and Tree Protection. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 30.12. - Design requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 39. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 30.13. - Signs. 
    Shall be in accordance with Division 26. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 22, 2011, enacted provisions designated as § 34.12. To facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as § 30.13 of this division. 
DIVISION 31 - TRADITIONAL HOTEL DISRICT - THD 

Sec. 31.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The THD Traditional Hotel District is intended for, and restricted to, those areas designated within the Residential High (RH) land use category on the city's Future Land Use Plan Map to which the Resort Facilities Overlay (RFO) has been applied. The purpose of this district is to provide for the redevelopment of properties in areas traditionally utilized for small hotels and motels in a manner consistent with the present character of the surrounding area and which minimizes the negative impacts of such facilities on adjacent and nearby residential properties. This district shall only be established on those lots which lie south of 15th Avenue and for which the owner(s) can demonstrate said lots were utilized as temporary lodging facilities with five or more units as of December 31, 2010, and which were at that time, and have since remained, properly permitted and/or licensed by all applicable regulatory authorities. Such authorities shall include the City of St. Pete Beach, the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation and the Florida Department of Revenue. Any facility which cannot demonstrate that proper license fees and taxes have been paid throughout the required period of operation to the proper licensing or taxing authority, including the State of Florida and Pinellas County, shall not be eligible for application to this district. 
(Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2008-38, § 1, 10-28-08; Ord. No. 2010-31, § 2, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 31.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the Traditional Hotel District are as follows: 
(a)  Temporary Lodging Facilities -Density shall not exceed 50 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2010-31, § 2, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 31.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  The following accessory uses are permitted in the THD district: 
1.  Retail sales, limited to 100 square feet in area. The sales shall be located inside the principal structure and shall not have signage outside the structure advertising such retail goods for sale. 
2.  Office space for the administrative use of the accommodation, such as check-in, check-out areas, reservations, and accounting. 
3.  Meeting or conference rooms for the use of guests. 
4.  Fitness facilities for the use of guests. 
(b)  In addition to those commercial accessory structures permitted in 6.12, the following accessory structures are permitted in the THD District: 
1.  Garages; 
2.  A storage building; 
3.  Decks and patios; 
4.  Fountains; 
5.  Gazebos; 
6.  Trellises. 
(c)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11. 
(Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2010-31, § 2, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 31.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the Traditional Hotel District are as follows: 
(a)  Recreational -Public parks and/or recreational facilities. 
(b)  Spas. 
(Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2010-31, § 2, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 31.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the Traditional Hotel District. Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the Traditional Hotel District. 
(Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 31.6. - Minimum zoning lot requirements. 
    The maximum Temporary Lodging density permitted in the Traditional Hotel District shall not exceed 50 units per acre. The minimum lot area and width requirements in the Traditional Hotel District are as follows: 
(a)  Lot area: 3,500 square feet. Two or more zoning lots shall not be combined for the purposes of development under this division, nor shall existing zoning lots be subdivided in any way which allows additional separate hotel or motel facilities to be developed. 
(b)  Lot width: 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2010-31, § 2, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 31.7. - Minimum yard requirements. 
    The minimum yard requirements for principal structures in the Traditional Hotel District are as required in this section. No structures shall be permitted seaward of the city's coastal construction and excavation setback line. 
(a)  Front yard: 20 feet. 
(b)  Secondary front yard: Ten feet. 
(c)  Side yard: Ten percent of the lot width. 
(d)  Read yard: 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 31.8. - Maximum height of structures. 
(a)  New construction or any improvements to any buildings within the THD shall not exceed 28 feet in height to the midpoint of a sloped roof or top of the parapet of a flat or low sloped roof (less than 4:12), and measured from the base flood elevation determined under the most restrictive applicable standard for the building site, further provided that the overall roof height shall not exceed 32 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2011-03, § 2, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 31.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 8-26-08) 
Sec. 31.10. - Landscaping required. 
    All uses shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of division 22 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 31.11. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR): 0.65. 
(Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 31.12. - Maximum floor area. 
    No new structure shall be larger in aggregate square footage than the structures which occupied the site prior to redevelopment, except that the Building Official may allow a 5% increase in the aggregate square footage overall, plus the minimum necessary increases in aggregate square footage in cases where such increases are reasonably necessary to implement current Building Code or other statutory requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2010-31, § 2, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 31.13. - Additional requirements for spas. 
1)  All unenclosed spas shall provide a solid screening wall or fence at least six feet in height. This requirement shall be waved in instances where an enclosed structure is positioned between the spa and the adjacent private property. 
2)  No spa shall be located in such a manner as to be separated from the facility it serves by any public right-of-way. 
3)  Any existing facility expanded under this Division which currently has a pool or spa shall not construct a spa unless such existing pool or spa is first removed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-31, § 2, 2-22-11) 
DIVISION 32 - CC1 COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR BLIND PASS ROAD DISTRICT 

Sec. 32.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The CC1 Commercial Corridor Blind Pass Road is intended to provide for general commercial and residential uses that properly buffer the adjacent residential districts that border the corridor. Residential uses will only be allowed as a component of mixed-use projects and design requirements will serve to create a more urban form for redeveloped properties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 32.2. - Permitted uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the CC1 Commercial Corridor Blind Pass Road are as follows. 
(a)  Clinics; 
(b)  Clubs, community service establishments; 
(c)  Clubs, private; 
(d)  Eating and drinking establishments-with or without outdoor seating; 
(e)  Financial institutions with and without drive-through service; 
(f)  Laundries, self-service; 
(g)  Office uses; 
(h)  Printing and copying services; 
(i)  Retail uses; 
(j)  Personal service businesses such as barbershops, beauty shops and salons, day spas, gyms and fitness centers, tailoring, garment alteration and repair, shoe repair, dry cleaning pick-up and drop-off and other personal service uses similar in character and impact; 
(k)  Social service agencies; 
(l)  Veterinarians; dog grooming facilities; 
(m)  Multi-family residential uses as a component of mixed-use development only. Multi-family residential uses shall not be allowed on the ground level of any structure; 
(n)  Single-family, detached residential uses (Only on parcels which do not directly abut Blind Pass Road); 
(o)  Government buildings and other public facilities, including parks and recreation facilities; 
(p)  Artist studios with retail and/or wholesale distribution space for artist's original handmade works, excluding mass produced or manufactured products; 
(q)  Public facilities such as schools, public parks and/or recreational facilities; 
(r)  Other commercial uses similar in character, nature and impact to permitted uses listed above. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 32.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited under section 32.5; 
(b)  Electric vehicle charging stations; 
(c)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code; 
(d)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 32.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the CC1 Commercial Corridor Blind Pass Road Districts are as follows: 
(a)  Automotive rental agencies; 
(b)  Automobile services-Repair; 
(c)  Automotive service stations, with or without a carwash and/or a convenience store; 
(d)  Commercial developments with a gross square footage of greater than 25,000; 
(e)  Communication facilities; 
(f)  Parking lots, commercial and/or off-premises; 
(g)  Class I mobile food trucks, subject to the criteria found in Division 6, herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2017-12, § 1, 11-28-17; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 32.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or conditionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the CC1 Commercial Corridor Blind Pass Road District. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 32.6. - General requirements. 
    Only those lots that have direct access to Blind Pass Road shall be allowed commercial use, except that lots that do not have frontage on Blind Pass Road that are assembled and combined with lots that do have Blind Pass Road frontage may contain a commercial use. Such lots that are aggregated with lots that abut Blind Pass Road shall have an additional 10 foot landscaped buffer from residential uses pursuant to section 32.9 and Division 22. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 32.7. - Density and intensity. 
(a)  Single family or duplex residential lots that do not abut Blind Pass Road shall be limited to a density of 7.5 units per acre. 
(b)  The residential density of mixed-use developments shall not exceed 12 units per acre. Residential uses may only be established on lots that are a minimum of one-half acre in area, with commercial or office on the first floor at street level and residential use permitted on the second and third floors only. Non-residential uses are limited to a FAR of 0.90. 
(c)  Non-residential uses shall not exceed a FAR of 0.70. 
(d)  Both maximum commercial FAR and maximum residential density shall be available based upon the entire site area, and the presence of one shall not limit the density or intensity of the other. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 32.8. - Building height. 
(a)  Single-family residential maximum height shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  Twenty-eight (28) feet for an exclusively non-residential use; 
(c)  Forty (40) feet for mixed-use development projects located on a minimum 1/2 acre buildable site with a retail or office component on the first floor at street level and the residential use located above the first floor. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 32.9. - Setbacks. 
Use Front 
Yard Secondary Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Single family that do not directly access Blind Pass Road 20 feet 10 feet 10% of lot width 20 feet Non-residential only 10 feet 10 feet 10% of lot width 20 feet; additional 10 feet if abutting single family residential and properties are aggregated with those abutting Blind Pass road. Mixed use-Ground floor non-residential, residential above, 1/2 acre minimum site area 10 feet 10 feet 10% of lot width- minimum of 10 feet if abutting single family residential 20 feet; additional 10 feet if abutting single family residential and properties are aggregated with those abutting Blind Pass road.  
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 32.10. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for all uses: 0.70 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 32.11. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 22, 2011, designated the above section and subsequent sections as §§ 32.10-32.13. To facilitate indexing, and to avoid duplicate section numbers, said sections have been redesignated as §§ 32-11-32-14. 
Sec. 32.12. - Landscaping. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 22 of the Land Development Code, Landscaping and Tree Protection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Note- See note at § 32.11. 
Sec. 32.13. - Design requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 39. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Note- See note at § 32.11. 
Sec. 32.14. - Signs. 
    Shall be in accordance with Division 26. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Note- See note at § 32.11. 
DIVISION 33 - CC2 COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR GULF BLVD DISTRICT 

Sec. 33.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The CC2 Commercial Corridor Gulf Blvd is intended to provide for general commercial, office, retail, and residential uses that properly buffer the adjacent residential districts that border the corridor. Residential uses will only be allowed as a component of mixed-use projects and design requirements will serve to create a more urban form for redeveloped properties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 33.2. - Permitted uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the CC2 Commercial Corridor Gulf Blvd are as follows: 
(a)  Clinics; 
(b)  Eating and drinking establishments with or without outdoor seating; 
(c)  Financial institutions with or without drive-through service; 
(d)  Laundries, self-service; 
(e)  Office uses; 
(f)  Printing and copying services; 
(g)  Retail uses; 
(h)  Personal service businesses such as barbershops, beauty shops, tailoring, garment alteration and repair, shoe repair, dry cleaning pick-up and drop-off and other personal service uses similar in character and impact; 
(i)  Veterinarians, dog grooming establishments; 
(j)  Multi-family residential uses as a component of mixed-use development only. Multi-family residential uses shall not be allowed on the ground level of any structure; 
(k)  Artist studios and galleries with retail and/or wholesale distribution space for artist's original handmade works, excluding mass produced or manufactured products; 
(l)  Grocery stores, pharmacies, markets; 
(m)  Commercial recreation, public parks and/or recreational facilities; 
(n)  Sales, rentals, and/or service of bicycles, mopeds, motorcycles, Segways, and scooters; 
(o)  Other commercial uses similar in character, nature and impact to permitted uses listed above. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 33.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited under section 32.5; 
(b)  Electric vehicle charging stations; 
(c)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code; 
(d)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 33.4. - Conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the CC2 Commercial Corridor Gulf Boulevard District are as follows: 
(a)  Automotive rental agencies; 
(b)  Automobile services-Repair; 
(c)  Automotive service stations, with or without a carwash and/or a convenience store; 
(d)  Commercial developments with a gross square footage of greater than 25,000; 
(e)  Communication facilities; 
(f)  Parking lots, commercial and/or off-premises; 
(g)  Class I mobile food trucks, subject to the criteria found in Division 6, herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2017-12, § 1, 11-28-17; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 33.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the CC2 Commercial Corridor Gulf Blvd District. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 33.6. - General requirements. 
(a)  Only those lots that have direct access to Gulf Blvd shall be allowed commercial use, except that lots that do not have frontage on Gulf Boulevard that are assembled and combined with lots that do have Gulf Boulevard frontage may contain a commercial use. Such lots that are aggregated with lots that abut Gulf Boulevard shall have an additional 10 foot landscaped buffer from residential uses pursuant to section 33.8 and Division 22. 
(b)  All other development standards are contained in Division 39, Redevelopment Area General Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 33.7. - Density and intensity. 
(a)  Single residential lots that do not abut Gulf Blvd shall be limited to a density of 7.5 units per acre. Minimum lot width is 50 feet. Lots of record that do not meet the minimum density standards may construct one single family residential unit. 
(b)  The multi-family residential density of mixed-use developments shall not exceed 12 units per acre. Residential uses may only be established on lots that are a minimum of one-half acre in area, with commercial or office on the first floor at street level and residential use permitted on the second and third floors only shall not exceed a FAR of 0.90. 
(c)  Single use or multi-tenant non-residential uses shall not exceed a FAR of 0.70. 
(d)  Both maximum commercial FAR and maximum residential density shall be available based upon the entire site area, and the presence of one shall not limit the density or intensity of the other. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 33.8. - Building height. 
(a)  Single-family residential maximum height shall be thirty (30) feet; 
(b)  Twenty-eight (28) feet for an exclusively nonresidential use only; 
(c)  Forty (40) feet for mixed-use development projects located on a minimum 1/2 acre buildable site with a rental or office component on the first floor at street level and the residential use located above the first floor. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 33.9. - Setbacks or build-to lines. 
Detached Single Family Setbacks Front yard setback Twenty (20) feet Secondary front yard setback Ten (10) feet Side yard setback Ten (10) percent of lot width per side Rear yard setback Twenty (20) feet All other uses Front yard 20 feet Maximum Secondary front yard setback 10 feet Side yard setback 0 feet Rear yard setback 20 feet if year is abutting residential; 0 feet otherwise. Such lots that are aggregated with lots that abut Gulf Boulevard shall have an additional 10 foot landscaped buffer from residential uses.  
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 33.10. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for all uses: 0.70 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 33.11. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 33.12. - Landscaping. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 22 of the Land Development Code, Landscaping and Tree Protection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 33.13. - Design requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 39. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 33.14. - Signs. 
    Shall be in accordance with Division 26. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
DIVISION 34 - DOWNTOWN CORE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-21, § 6, adopted Sept. 22, 2015, added provisions designated as 34.4. Sections 7-16 of said ordinance renumbered §§ 34.4-34.13 as §§ 34.5-34.14, as set out herein. 

Sec. 34.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The Downtown Core Residential District (DCR) is intended to support single and multi-family residential development with traditional neighborhood design characteristics. Physical development patterns are intended to emphasize the relationship of this district to the City's urban core district. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 34.2. - Permitted uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the Downtown Residential District are as follows. 
(a)  Residential dwellings-Attached and detached single family, two-family and multifamily. 
(b)  Residential docks. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 34.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited under section 33.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Residential and Class B commercial docks, including tie poles, in conformance with the provisions of section 6.23 and other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county or state. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord.No. 2013-08, § 1(Exh. A), 2-26-13) 
Sec. 34.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the DCR Downtown Core Residential District are as follows: 
    Eating and drinking establishments, full-service restaurant, limited-service restaurant, bar/lounge, subject to Section 6.24 of this Code as may be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2015-21, § 6, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 34.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the Downtown Core Residential District. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 7, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 34.6. - General requirements. 
    All other development standards are contained in Division 39, Community Redevelopment District Standards. Landscaping and parking requirements are located in Divisions 22 and 23. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 8, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 34.7. - Density. 
(a)  The maximum residential density shall be ten units per acre. 
(b)  Minimum lot area for residential shall be 4,356 square feet per unit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 9, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 34.8. - Building height. 
(a)  Shall not exceed 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 10, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 34.9. - Setbacks. 
Front yard 10 feet minimum for principal structure; 15 feet for garages Secondary front yard 10 feet Side yard 10 percent of lot width on each side Rear yard 20 feet  
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 11, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 34.10. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for all uses: 0.70 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 12, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 34.11. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 13, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 34.12. - Landscaping. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 22 of the Land Development Code, Landscaping and Tree Protection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 14, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 34.13. - Design requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 39. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 15, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 34.14. - Signs. 
    Shall be in accordance with Division 26. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 16, 9-22-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 22, 2011, designated the above section as § 32.12. To facilitate indexing, and to avoid duplicate section numbers, said section has been redesignated as § 32-13. 
DIVISION 35 - (LR) LARGE RESORT DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 22, 2011, repealed the former Div. 35, §§ 35.1-35.14, and enacted a new Div. 35 as set out herein. The former Div. 35 pertained to (LR) Large Resort District and derived from Ord. No. 2008-11, § 1, adopted 6-3-08. 

Sec. 35.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The Large Resort District is intended to primarily support and encourage full-service integrated resort redevelopment projects to promote economic balance and compatibility of land uses. Large Resort District regulations provide higher density and intensity of temporary lodging use than provided in any other district in the city to support and encourage redevelopment of resort hotels and in consideration of the larger size and depth of the parcels that are adjacent to the Gulf beaches. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 35.2. - Definitions. 
    The following terms are defined and shall apply to development and redevelopment within the Large Resort District only: 
(a)  Large-scale development shall mean development or redevelopment of a buildable site that: 
(1)  Is three acres in size or greater; and 
(2)  Large scale development may also include secondary commercial uses pursuant to section 35.3. 
(b)  Small-scale development shall mean all other developments that fall below the thresholds of Large-scale development. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 7, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 35.3. - Permitted principal and secondary uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the LR District are as follows: 
(a)  Primary uses . 
(1)  Temporary lodging uses, including hotels, motels, resort condominium hotels 50 feet or less in building height or a density of 30 temporary lodging units per acre or lower; 
(2)  Multi-family residential. 
(b)  Primary uses requiring conditional use approval. Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable primary uses requiring conditional use approval in the LR District are as follows: 
(1)  Temporary lodging uses, including hotels, motels, resort condominium hotels greater than 50 feet in building height or a density above 30 temporary lodging units per acre. 
(2)  Eating and drinking establishments, full-service restaurant only, subject to section 6.24 of this Code as may be applicable. 
(3)  Commercial parking lot/structure. 
(c)  Secondary uses . Secondary commercial uses may be developed as an additional nonresidential use bonus floor area that is not located within the principal building, provided that the secondary commercial development is constructed with a minimum of 200 temporary lodging units. Secondary commercial uses located within one-hundred and fifty (150) feet of the westerly right-of-way line of Gulf Boulevard may be under separate ownership from the primary use when approved by the city as part of an overall site plan incorporating the primary and secondary uses as an integrated project. Secondary commercial uses include: 
(1)  Retail; 
(2)  Eating and drinking establishments, full-service restaurant, limited-service restaurant, bar/lounge, subject to section 6.24 of this Code as may be applicable; 
(3)  Indoor commercial entertainment facilities; 
(4)  Vehicles for hire. 
(d)  Secondary uses requiring conditional use approval . Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable secondary uses requiring conditional use approval in the LR District are as follows. 
(1)  Commercial kitchen; 
(2)  Commercial parking structure; 
(3)  Eating and drinking establishment - take-out restaurant only; 
(4)  Off-premise parking lot and/or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 7, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 8, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 35.4. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited under section 35.5. 
(b)  A temporary lodging use may include accessory uses such as management office space, housekeeping facilities, security and maintenance areas, recreational facilities, restaurants, bars, and other eating and drinking establishments, guest office centers, concierge services, personal service uses, retail uses, meeting rooms and conference areas, fitness centers, spa facilities, parking structures, and other uses commonly associated with temporary lodging uses, subject to the intensity limits established in section 35.7(d)(2). 
(c)  Home occupations for residential uses only, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. Home occupational licensing shall be prohibited for any temporary lodging unit and any affordable workforce living accommodation. 
(d)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 35.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
(a)  All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or conditionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the LR District. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 35.6. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances to any maximum development standard established in the comprehensive plan, including but not limited to density, intensity, impervious surface ratios, and height, shall not be granted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 35.7. - Density and intensity. 
(a)  Density limitations on temporary lodging uses mixed with residential uses . Residential and temporary lodging units are permitted to be developed as separate buildings within the same development site or combined within one building, provided that a minimum of 200 temporary lodging units shall be constructed on the development site subject to the height limitations provided in section 35.8. Density shall be calculated based upon the pro rata acreage allocated to each land use. Temporary lodging units existing, or approved to be developed or redeveloped in the LR District shall be prohibited from converting to residential dwelling units that exceed the density limitation of 15 residential dwelling units per acre based on the pro-rata acreage. 
(b)  Density limitations on temporary lodging lockout units . For the purposes of this division, lockout temporary lodging units shall count against specified density limitations. A lockout unit shall be defined as a room or rooms with sanitary facilities, with or without cooking facilities, which is attached and has access to a temporary lodging unit by means of a door or doors that are lockable from within the lockout unit, and that has a separate lockable access to the public areas or corridors. A lockout unit is capable of being functionally separated from the temporary lodging unit to which it is attached and rented as a separate room. 
(c)  Density . 
(1)  Existing and/or small scale development, as defined in section 35.2 above, shall not exceed the following density: 
a.  50 temporary lodging accommodation units per acre; or 
b.  15 residential units per acre. 
(2)  Large-scale development as defined in section 35.2 above shall not exceed the following density: 
a.  75 temporary lodging units per acre; or 
b.  15 residential units per acre; or 
c.  A combination of residential and temporary lodging units which shall be prorated on an acreage basis allocated to each use, provided that a minimum of 200 temporary lodging units will be constructed on the development site. 
(d)  Intensity . 
(1)  Existing and small scale development . Floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.8. 
(2)  Large-scale development floor area ratio shall not exceed 2.6. 
(3)  Secondary commercial as part of a large scale development: Secondary commercial uses permitted in section 35.3(b) shall not exceed an additional floor area ratio of 0.15 of the buildings site. 
(4)  On-site parking structures are exempt from the floor area ratio limits. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 9, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 35.8. - Building height. 
(a)  Restrictions and limitations. The maximum height for each use within the LR District shall not exceed: 
(1)  Residential use only or any temporary lodging use mixed with residential in the same building. Building height shall not exceed 50 feet above base flood elevation. 
(2)  Any temporary lodging or commercial use building located within 200 feet of a property occupied by an existing residential use located outside the Community Redevelopment District. Building height shall not exceed 50 feet above base flood elevation or the height of the adjacent residential building located outside the Large Resort District, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Temporary lodging use only . Building height shall not exceed 116 feet above base flood elevation not including any decorative features or rooftop amenities extending twelve feet or less in height above the roofline. 
(4)  Secondary bonus commercial uses . Buildings containing the secondary commercial uses described in section 35.3(b) shall not exceed a maximum height of 28 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 10, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 35.9. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Any conforming use or structure built prior to the adoption of these regulations is exempt from the setback requirements of [section] 35.9. Additions to existing structures and all new construction shall comply with the required setbacks below: 
(1)  Front Yard . The minimum front yard setback for buildings 50 feet in height or lower shall be 25 feet. The minimum front yard setback for that portion of a building rising above 50 feet in height shall be equal to the height of the building. The city commission, through the conditional use process, may reduce the required front yard setback to provide for increased compatibility with adjoining properties. 
(2)  Side yards . The minimum side yard setback shall equal ten (10) percent of the lot width of the subject property, or thirty (30) feet on one side, whichever is less, not to exceed sixty (60) feet combined for both setbacks. Provided, however, when the subject property is adjacent to an existing residential use located outside the Large Resort District, the minimum side yard setback shall equal twenty (20) percent of the lot width of the subject property or 60 feet, whichever is less, provided that in no event shall the setback be less than 30 feet, for that side yard abutting the existing residential use. The city commission may increase the minimum side yard setback for that portion of a proposed building rising above 50 feet in height when determined to be in the public interest upon evaluating a conditional use permit request. 
(3)  Rear yards . For non-waterfront parcels, the minimum rear yard setback shall be 20 feet. For waterfront parcels, the minimum rear yard setback shall be the Florida Coastal Construction Control Line, provided, however, when the subject property is adjacent to an existing residential use located outside the Large Resort District, the minimum rear yard setback as follows: 
a.  50 feet landward of the Florida Coastal Construction Control Line or in alignment with the existing rear yard setback of the adjacent residential use, whichever is less, for buildings 50 feet in height or lower. 
b.  50 feet landward of the Florida Coastal Construction Control Line plus an additional one-half foot of rear yard setback for every one-foot in building height for that portion of the building above 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 1(Exh. A), 9-12-12; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 11, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 35.10. - Temporary lodging amenity requirements and restrictions. 
    Within the LR Large Resort District, temporary lodging uses shall, at a minimum, comply with the following: 
(a)  Temporary lodging operational and occupancy restrictions, limitations and prohibitions. All temporary lodging uses shall be subject to the operational and occupancy restrictions, limitations and prohibitions provided in Division 39 of the LDC. 
(b)  Temporary lodging services and amenity requirements. 
(1)  The following guest amenities are the minimum required for all new development of temporary lodging uses regardless of size or density: 
a.  Housekeeping services; 
b.  Swimming pool or spa; 
c.  Fitness facility; and 
d.  Business center. 
(2)  The following guest amenities are the minimum required for all large-scale development of temporary lodging use and one or more of these amenities are strongly encouraged for all other temporary lodging uses: 
a.  Concierge services; 
b.  Restaurants and other food services that include full service of a minimum of two meals daily open to the public as well as hotel guests; 
c.  Retail space serving hotel guests and the public; and 
d.  Meeting rooms or conference facilities available to serve the public and hotel guests. 
(3)  Existing temporary lodging uses are exempt from the requirements of [section] 35.10(b). 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 35.11. - Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR). 
(a)  In general. The maximum impervious surface ratio for any new development or redevelopment project regardless of size shall be as follows: 
(1)  Temporary lodging uses with or without secondary commercial uses shall not exceed 0.85; or 
(2)  Residential use shall not exceed 0.70; or 
(3)  Combined temporary lodging and residential uses. In the event a portion of a development site is redeveloped in part as temporary lodging use and in part as residential use subject to the limitations and restrictions set forth in this division, the impervious surface ratio shall be provided for each use as required above on a pro rated basis per acre dedicated to each use. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 35.12. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 35.13. - Landscaping. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 22 of the Land Development Code, Landscaping and Tree Protection. In cases where new construction of a temporary lodging or commercial use exceeds 50 feet in building height or adjoins an existing residential property located outside the Large Resort District, the applicant shall provide a minimum 30 foot wide landscape buffer along the entire length of a required side yard with the specific landscape plan to be reviewed and approved as part of the conditional use permitting process. The landscape buffer may contain any required public access to the beach, but no accessory uses. New construction of a temporary lodging or commercial use adjoining an existing residential property located outside the Large Resort District shall include the same buffer for rear yard along the adjoining residential property line, if applicable. The city commission may reduce the width of the required buffer by up to 50 percent based upon its design and compatibility review of the project and any superior alternatives presented unless it adjoins an existing residential use located outside the Large Resort District, in which case there shall be no reduction to the required buffer width. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 12, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 35.14. - Design requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 39. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 35.15. - Signs. 
    Shall be in accordance with Division 26. 
(Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
DIVISION 36 - UPHAM BEACH VILLAGE DISTRICT 

Sec. 36.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The Upham Beach Village District is intended to provide primarily for medium intensity residential uses with principle orientation and connection to the waterfront. This district does not anticipate large scale redevelopment of existing facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 36.2. - Permitted uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the Upham Beach Village District are as follows. 
(a)  Residential dwellings-Attached and detached single family, two-family and multifamily. 
(b)  Temporary lodging use; Only existing temporary lodging uses may be redeveloped and new temporary lodging uses shall be strictly prohibited. All bed and breakfast inns shall comply with the provisions of sections 2.1 and 6.2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 36.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited under section 34.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 36.4. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the Upham Beach Village District. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 36.5. - General requirements. 
(a)  All structural parking elements must be enclosed by a consistent building facade along all property lines (with the exception of entrance and exit points). 
(b)  Other development standards are contained in Division 39, Community Redevelopment District General Standards. Landscaping and parking requirements are located in Divisions 22 and 23. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 36.6. - Density and intensity. 
(a)  One and Two Family Residential uses shall not exceed 7.5 units per acre. Minimum lot area shall be 5,808 square feet. Existing lots of record that do not meet the minimum lot size prescribed by density shall be permitted one (1) single family dwelling unit. 
(b)  Multi Family Residential: 
(1)  18 dwelling units per acre for multi-family residential use on a minimum 1/3 acre buildable site; or 
(2)  21 dwelling units per acre for multi-family residential use on a minimum 1/2 acre buildable site; or 
(3)  24 dwelling units per acre for multi-family residential use on a minimum 3/4 acre buildable site. 
(c)  Temporary Lodging Unit Density Pool ("TLU Density Pool"): Density for temporary lodging uses in the Upham Beach Village District shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Temporary lodging units shall be allocated to uses which are presently licensed with the City of St. Pete Beach and operating as a transient accommodation. 
(2)  Temporary lodging units shall be allocated on a first come first serve basis utilizing the Temporary Lodging Unit Density Pool. 
(3)  The TLU Density Pool shall not exceed 175 total units for the entire Upham Beach Village District. 
(4)  The TLU Density Pool shall be allocated by ordinance of the city commission upon request of an individual property owner. 
(5)  Any TLU Density Pool allocation by ordinance per project shall not exceed the number of existing temporary lodging units located on the development site. 
(6)  The remaining number of available TLU Density Pool units shall be specified in each city commission ordinance allocating such units and each such ordinance shall provide that no units beyond those remaining in the TLU Density Pool shall be allocated to any subsequent temporary lodging use project in the Upham Beach Village District. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 13, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 36.7. - Building height. 
(a)  Thirty-five (35) feet for single family homes, duplexes and multi-family uses 18 dwelling units per acre or less. 
(b)  Forty-five (45) feet for multi-family residential use exceeding 18 dwelling units per acre and for all temporary lodging uses. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 36.8. - Setbacks. 
Front yard 10 feet minimum; 20 feet maximum Secondary front yard 10 feet Side yard 10 percent of lot width on each side; minimum required setback of seven (7) feet. Rear yard 20 feet  
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 36.9. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for residential uses: 0.70 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for temporary lodging uses: 0.85 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 36.10. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 36.11. - Landscaping. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 22 of the Land Development Code, Landscaping and Tree Protection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 36.12. - Design requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 39. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 36.13. - Signs. 
    Shall be in accordance with Division 26. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
DIVISION 37 - TC-2 TOWN CENTER COREY CIRCLE AND COQUINA WEST DISTRICTS 

Sec. 37.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The TC-2 Town Center Corey Circle District and TC-2 Coquina West District are established as mixed use districts anchoring either end of the Corey Avenue corridor. The TC-2 districts exist to accommodate medium intensity commercial and mixed-use developments oriented to the waterfront with retail and/or eating and drinking establishments on the ground level. The intent of these districts is to facilitate property assemblage and comprehensive redevelopment under unified project plans. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 37.2. - Permitted uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses in the TC-2 Town Center Corey Circle and Coquina West Districts are as follows. 
(a)  Retail uses except automotive sales lots, pawn shops, liquor stores, and tobacco shops; 
(b)  Grocery stores, markets, pharmacies without drive-through service; 
(c)  Personal service businesses such as barbershops, beauty shops, salons, day spas, gyms and fitness centers, tailoring, garment alteration and repair, shoe repair, dry cleaning pick-up and drop-off and other personal service uses similar in character and impact. Body art, bail-bond, check-cashing and other similar services are prohibited; 
(d)  Eating and drinking establishments - full-service restaurant, limited-service restaurant, bar/lounge, subject to Section 6.24 of this Code as may be applicable; 
(e)  Office uses; 
(f)  Commercial recreation, public parks and/or recreational facilities; 
(g)  Government buildings and other public facilities, including parks and recreation facilities; 
(h)  Artist studios and art galleries; 
(i)  Multi-family residential only as a component of mixed use. Residential uses are not permitted on the ground floor; 
(j)  Vehicle for hire - Limited to rental of non-motorized (bicycles) and individual motorized vehicles such as Segways, mopeds/scooters; 
(k)  Other commercial uses similar in character, nature and impact to permitted uses listed above. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2013-25, § 3, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 17, 9-22-15) 
Sec. 37.3. - Secondary uses. 
(a)  Marina-Wet slip only. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 37.4 - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited under section 31.5. 
(b)  Electric vehicle charging stations; 
(c)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(d)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 37.5. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the TC-2 Town Center Corey Circle and Coquina West Districts are as follows: 
(a)  Temporary lodging facilities hotel, motel and resort condominium, awarded on a first come, first serve basis, to come from the density pool established in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Commercial developments with a gross square footage of greater than 25,000. 
(c)  Commercial kitchen. 
(d)  Commercial docks-Classes A, B, C and D. 
(e)  Eating and drinking establishment-Take-out only restaurant. 
(f)  Vessel for hire (water taxis). 
(g)  Class I mobile food trucks, subject to the criteria found in Division 6, herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2013-25, § 3, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 2015-21, § 18, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 2017-12, § 1, 11-28-17; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 37.6. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the TC-2 Town Center Corey Circle and Coquina West Districts. 
(a)  Detached and attached single and two family dwellings. 
(b)  Any type of vehicle sales or service. 
(c)  Restaurants with drive-through service. 
(d)  Industrial and other incompatible uses (including, but not limited to, day labor, pawn shops, check cashing, plasma centers, body piercing and tattoo parlors). 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 37.7. - Density and intensity. 
(a)  Residential densities of 24 units per acre as a component of mixed-use projects. Commercial, office retail, or non-habitable portions of temporary lodging uses shall only be located on the first floor accessible at street level. 
(b)  Maximum floor area ratio for exclusively commercial/office/retail projects shall be limited to 0.55. 
(c)  Temporary lodging use. Density and intensity shall be approved by conditional use only and shall not exceed fifty (50) temporary lodging units per acre located on a minimum 1.8 acre buildable site and shall also not exceed a cumulative total of 150 units per project subject to the requirements, restrictions and limitations for the TLU Density Pool for the Town Center Corey Circle and Coquina West Districts. Temporary lodging uses shall not exceed an aggregate floor area of 750 square feet per temporary lodging unit allocated by ordinance, excluding indoor amenities, common areas and structured parking. Indoor amenities and common areas shall not exceed an additional 0.2 floor area ratio combined. For example: 50 units × 750 square feet = 38,500 square feet plus 0.2 × total parcel square feet for common areas and indoor amenities = total building square footage, excluding structured parking. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 37.8. - Building height. 
    For areas designated Town Center Corey Circle or Town Center Coquina West on the Future Land Use map series, heights are limited to: 
(a)  Exclusively non-residential uses shall be limited to a maximum height of twenty-eight (28) feet. 
(b)  Up to seventy-six (76) feet for buildings containing non-residential uses on the first habitable floor accessible at street level mixed with a primary residential or temporary lodging use above. 
[c]  Up to eighty-six (86) feet for buildings containing non-residential uses on the first habitable floor accessible at street level and either a minimum of fifty (50) temporary lodging units or a primary residential use above the first floor or all three uses in one or more buildings as part of a unified development project, provided that the main principal building provides retail/commercial/restaurant uses at street level. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 37.9. - Setbacks. 
Front yard Mainstreet-Corey Avenue & Corey Circle - 10 feet maximum for building elements up to 28 feet in height; 30 feet for all building elements above 28 feet. 
All other streets: 10 feet Minimum for building elements up to 28 feet in height; 30 feet for all elements above 28 feet. 
Parts of the building that are stepped back above 28 feet on all streets may be used as patio or balcony space. Secondary front yard 5 Feet minimum for building elements up to 28 feet in height; 30 feet for all elements above 28 feet. 
Parts of the building that are stepped back above 28 feet on all streets may be used as patio or balcony space. Side yard 10 percent of lot width minimum per side minimum for building elements up to 28 feet in height; 30 feet for all building elements above 28 feet. 
Parts of the building that are stepped back above 28 feet on all streets may be used as patio or balcony space. Rear yard 20 feet for the first feet in height; 30 feet for all building elements above 28 feet; No setback shall be required for any structural pedestrian facilities adjacent to any body of water. Outdoor seating areas for permitted uses may be placed within the required rear yard setback. 
Parts of the building that are stepped back above 28 feet on all streets may be used as patio or balcony space.  
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 37.10. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for all uses: 0.70 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 37.11. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 37.12. - Landscaping. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 22 of the Land Development Code, Landscaping and Tree Protection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 37.13. - Design requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 39. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 37.14. - Signs. 
    Shall be in accordance with Division 26. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
DIVISION 38 - AC ACTIVITY CENTER DISTRICT 

Sec. 38.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The AC Activity Center District is intended to support a high intensity of commercial development and secondary residential uses. Design features such as inter-parcel access and pedestrian facilities should be utilized to promote the functional integration of redevelopment sites. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 38.2. - Permitted uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses and structures in the AC Activity Center District are as follows. 
(a)  Grocery stores, markets, pharmacies with or without drive through service; 
(b)  Automotive rental agencies; 
(c)  Automotive service stations; 
(d)  Car wash facilities; 
(e)  Clinics; 
(f)  Clubs, community service; 
(g)  Clubs, private; 
(h)  Doctor's offices and medical clinics; 
(i)  Eating and drinking establishments without outdoor seating; 
(j)  Financial institutions with or without drive-through service; 
(k)  Kennels without outdoor runs; 
(l)  Laundries, self-service; 
(m)  Office uses; 
(n)  Printing and copying services; 
(o)  Retail uses; 
(p)  Government buildings and other public facilities, including parks and recreation facilities; 
(q)  Personal service businesses such as barbershops, beauty shops and salons, day spas, gyms and fitness centers, tailoring, garment alteration and repair, shoe repair, dry cleaning drop-off and pick-up and other personal service uses similar in character and impact; 
(r)  Private, specialized instruction, such as computer training, real estate courses, self-improvement classes, career training or fitness instruction; 
(s)  Social service agencies; 
(t)  Veterinarians and pet grooming facilities; 
(u)  Multi-family residential only as a component of retail mixed-use development; 
(v)  Artist studios and art galleries; 
(w)  Vehicle for hire; 
(x)  Marine electronics, sales, and service; and 
(y)  Other commercial uses similar in character, nature and impact to permitted uses listed above. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 38.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited under section 38.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Electric vehicle charging stations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 38.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the AC Activity Center District are as follows: 
(a)  Assisted living facilities; 
(b)  Charter and tour boat operations; 
(c)  Commercial developments with a gross square footage of greater than 25,000; 
(d)  Communication facilities; 
(e)  Docks, commercial-Classes A, B, C, and D; 
(f)  Eating and drinking establishments with outdoor seating; 
(g)  Kennels with outdoor runs; 
(h)  Off-premises parking lot and/or structure; 
(i)  Commercial parking structure; 
(j)  Theatres; 
(k)  Vessel for hire businesses; and 
(l)  Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, temporary lodging units may be allocated from a density pool via a conditional use as follows: 
40 temporary lodging uses per acre, not to exceed a total of either 50 units per project or the density pool allocated in the Comprehensive Plan (325 available units for potential use in the Town Center Core Corey Circle, Coquina West, Activity Center, and Bayou Residential Districts), with a maximum 1.0 floor area ratio on a minimum one (1) acre buildable site. To qualify for mixed use densities and intensities, a minimum of 10 temporary lodging units, mixed with a minimum of 0.35 floor area ratio for commercial or office uses, is required. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 8, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 38.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the AC Activity Center District. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 38.6. - General requirements. 
    Commercial mixed with residential or temporary lodging uses may be mixed horizontally under the following conditions: 
(a)  Neither the commercial nor the residential/temporary lodging use may exceed 40 feet in height; 
(b)  The development site is a minimum of one acre in size; 
(c)  The commercial and residential uses shall have internal pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation. 
Other development standards are contained in Division 39, Community Redevelopment District Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 38.7. - Density and intensity. 
(a)  Exclusively non-residential development shall not exceed a maximum FAR of 0.75. 
(b)  Residential density of up to 15 dwelling units per acre combined or 40 temporary lodging uses per acre, not to exceed a total of 50 units per project nor the density pool allocated, with a maximum 1.0 floor area ratio on a minimum one (1) acre buildable site. To qualify for mixed use densities and intensities, a minimum of four (4) residential units, or 10 temporary lodging units, mixed with a minimum of 0.35 floor area ratio for commercial or office uses shall be required; or 
(c)  Mixed-use projects may have up to 18 units per acre combined with 1.0 FAR if the project site is a minimum of four (4) acres. Projects must have a residential density of at least four (4) units per acre to be defined as mixed-use for the purposes of this standard. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 38.8. - Building height and minimum lot sizes. 
(a)  Twenty-eight (28) feet for exclusively commercial or office development; 
(b)  Forty (40) feet for a structures containing non-residential uses on the first floor with secondary residential or temporary lodging uses above on a minimum one (1) acre parcel; 
(c)  Eighty-six (86) feet, for a structure containing non-residential uses on the first floor with secondary residential uses above on a minimum parcel size of four (4) acres or more. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 38.9. - Setbacks. 
Front yard For building elements of up to twenty-eight (28) feet: 20 feet maximum on all streets. 
  
For building elements over 28 feet: Must step back an additional half-foot for every foot in height above 28 feet from the front facade of the building. The open areas produced as a result of the stepped back portion of the building may be used as deck, patio, balcony, or other open space. Secondary front 10 feet Side yard 10 percent of lot width per side; 10 foot minimum setback required. Rear yard 20 feet for the first 28 feet in height; 30 feet for all elements above 28 feet; No setback shall be required for any structural pedestrian facilities adjacent to any body of water. Outdoor seating areas for permitted businesses may be placed within the required rear yard setback if the zoning lot is not adjacent to a residential use.  
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 38.10. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for exclusively non-residential uses: 0.85 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for mixed residential/temporary lodging use: 0.70 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 38.11. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. Parking shall not be located in front of the building, but may be placed to the side or rear. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 38.12. - Landscaping. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 22 of the Land Development Code, Landscaping and Tree Protection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 38.13. - Design requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 39. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 38.14. - Signs. 
    Shall be in accordance with Division 26. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
DIVISION 39 - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT GENERAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 39.1. - General standards. 
    These general standards shall apply to all districts within the Downtown and Gulf Boulevard Redevelopment Districts, unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Sec. 39.2. - Classification of district streets. 
    The following table designates existing streets within the Downtown Redevelopment District only as "Main Street" or "A" street. Streets not identified shall be designated "B" streets. 
Street Name Designation Corey Avenue Main Street Blind Pass RD from 82nd Ave. south A 75th Avenue A Gulf Blvd, from 75th Ave. south to 64th Avenue A Sunset Way, from 75th Ave. south to 64th Avenue A  
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Sec. 39.3. - Site design for the Downtown Redevelopment District. 
(a)  Buildings shall form a consistent, distinct edge, spatially delineating the public street through maximum building setbacks that vary by no more than ten feet from those of the adjacent building. 
(b)  Building frontages shall occupy no less than 75 percent of a "Main Street" street and 50 percent of an "A" street facing entrance. If site constraints exist, a knee wall may be constructed with the following provisions: 
(1)  Only 25 percent of the required frontage may be credited as part of a knee wall. 
(2)  A knee wall must be constructed in accordance with the design criteria specified herein. 
(3)  The knee wall should be the length of the primary building frontage. 
(c)  Buildings that are open to the public shall have an entrance for pedestrians from the street to the building interior. This entrance shall be designed to be attractive and functionally be a distinctive and prominent element of the architectural design, and shall be open to the public during business hours. Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface or finish to give emphasis to the entrances. The primary building entrances shall be visible and directly accessible from a public street. Building massing such as tower elements shall be used to call-out the location of building entries. 
(d)  Buildings shall provide a foundation or base, typically from ground to bottom of the lower windowsills, with changes in volume or material. A clear visual division shall be maintained between the ground level floor and upper floors with either a cornice line or awning from 12 feet to 16 feet above base flood elevation or grade, whichever applies to the proposed development. No more than 20 feet of horizontal distance of wall shall be provided without architectural relief for building walls and frontage walls facing the street. All buildings excluding single-family detached homes shall utilize at least three of the following design features to provide visual relief along all elevations of the building: 
(1)  Divisions or breaks in materials (materials should be drawn from a common palette). 
(2)  Window bays. 
(3)  Separate entrances and entry treatments, porticoes. 
(4)  Variation in rooflines. 
(5)  Awnings. 
(6)  Dormers. 
(7)  Gables. 
(8)  Recessed entries. 
(9)  Covered porch entries. 
(10)  Cupolas. 
(e)  Commercial and mixed-use buildings shall express a "storefront character". This guideline is met by providing all of the following architectural features along the building frontage as applicable: 
(1)  Corner building entrances on corner lots. 
(2)  Regularly spaced and similar-shaped windows with window hoods or trim (all building stories) 
(3)  Large display windows on the ground floor. All street-facing, park-facing and plaza-facing structures shall have windows covering a minimum of 50 percent and a maximum 80 percent of the ground floor of each storefront's linear frontage. Blank walls shall not occupy over 50 percent of a street-facing frontage and shall not exceed 20 linear feet without being interrupted by a window or entry. Mirrored glass, obscured glass and glass block cannot be used in meeting this requirement. Display windows may be used to meet this requirement if the first floor has not been design as a flood proof first floor. 
(f)  The use of black or fluorescent colors is prohibited as the predominant exterior building color(s). Black may be used for trim, windows, doors, and awnings. 
(g)  The first 20 feet of depth of the first floor of any multifamily structure's primary building frontage facing a street shall be constructed as commercial space. 
(h)  Garages are required for attached and detached homes subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Front garages must be set back a minimum of five feet from the primary structure. 
(2)  Rear garages must be setback a minimum of four feet from an alley or rear access drive. 
(3)  Side garages may have an access from the street, and are required, at a minimum, to be setback in line with the primary structures side setback. 
(4)  Ground floor parking, including garages that are located inside the internal block are permitted on the first floor of a structure provided that the street facing side view of the garage must blend in with the primary building frontage by incorporating the same design elements. 
[i]  Reserved. 
(j)  Front driveway's are required to have a shared driveway and shall be located along the centerline on the common side lot line. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
Sec. 39.4. - Use of prototypes. 
    Development prototypes are intended to provide general guidance for the physical design of new projects within the Community Redevelopment District. These prototypes indicate general patterns for building placement, landscape configuration and the location of parking facilities and access points. The prototypes provide for consistency of site layout within a flexible framework which addresses the individual features of specific sites. 
    Permitted block types are described within a single-use prototype for illustrative purposes. Development applications for specific sites are required to assemble structures into blocks when the development is over two acres. Each site plan shall be required to identify how the proposed development including buildings and structures are assembled within a context that conforms to the design standards for the block or partial block within which the building occurs. 
(a)  Development prototype structure. The development prototype structures are a series of figures that highlight some of the regulations. The prototypes are shown in a block format and individual parcel development may not be able to build to the form of a block. However, all development, at a minimum, will be expected to build to the building design, site design and lot layout. If development of an entire block occurs, the prototype shall be used as a development tool. 
The mixed-use development prototypes are designed to accommodate a range of retail, office and mixed-use building types including "anchor" retail, "liner" retail, and "main street" retail buildings. The Multi-Family Development Block is designed to accommodate a range of multi-family building types including apartment buildings, condominiums and town homes. 
(b)  Specific development prototype standards. 
"Main Street" Retail. The Main Street Retail building type permits multi-story, mixed-use buildings with retail and office uses on the ground floor. 
"Liner" Retail. The Liner Retail building type permits single-story retail uses along "A" Street frontages. 
"Anchor" Retail. The Anchor Retail building type permits grocery stores and larger format retail within the retail development block. The maximum size of an "anchor" retail use is 30,000 square feet. At least one building entrance shall face a public street and shall be articulated with additional height and massing. 
Shelter. Buildings shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticos or awnings that protect pedestrians from the rain and sun. 
Setback encroachment. Special architectural features, such as balconies, bay windows, arcades, awnings, etc. may project into front setbacks and public right-of-ways on streets provided they are eight feet above the sidewalk and leave a minimum five-foot wide unobstructed sidewalk. Support structures for these features shall be located such that they do not affect the clear sight triangle for travel lanes or the on-street parking. Prior to new encroachment into the public right-of-way, a permit shall be obtained from the city manager or designee. 
Garages. Street-facing ground floor parking, including garages, is not permitted on the first floor of a multifamily structure on an "A" street. Parking shall occur underneath the multifamily structure, within parking garages, or within surface lots that do not front on a "Main street" Street. 
Retail Prototype 

Office Mixed-Use Prototype 

Mixed Use Commercial Prototype 

Mixed Use Development Block with Structured Parking 

Gas Station Prototype 

Multifamily Prototype 

(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Sec. 39.5. - General operational and aesthetic requirements. 
(a)  Commercial and temporary lodging uses shall be designed and operated so that neighboring residents are not exposed to offensive noise, especially from late-night activity. No amplified music shall be audible to neighboring residents. Common walls between residential and non-residential uses shall be constructed to minimize the transmission of noise and vibration. 
(b)  All outdoor lighting associated with commercial and temporary lodging uses shall be designed so as not to adversely impact surrounding residential uses, while also providing a sufficient level of illumination for access and security purposes. Such lighting shall not blink, flash, oscillate, or be of unusually high brightness. Also, parking areas shall be illuminated so as to provide appropriate visibility and security during hours of darkness. 
(c)  Loading or service areas, including refuse and recycling, must be out of public view and must not front onto Gulf Boulevard. 
(d)  No commercial use shall be designated or operated so as to expose residents to offensive odors, dust, electrical interference, and/or vibration. 
(e)  Residential, commercial, and temporary lodging uses in a mixed-use development shall provide combined and private bulk sanitation service for the entire development. 
(f)  Electric and communications transformers shall be screened from public view through below grade installation, a hedge, or similar measure. 
(g)  All other mechanical equipment must be behind or on top of the building and screened from public view through use of a parapet wall or through landscaping. 
(h)  Any roof area above the highest allowed story may be utilized for active or passive recreational uses or other similar uses which require no permanent structures. Such roof areas must be enclosed by a parapet wall no less than four feet nor greater than five feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Sec. 39.6. - Temporary lodging use operational and occupancy restrictions, limitations and prohibitions. 
    To ensure that temporary lodging use development authorized and approved within the Community Redevelopment District are built, function, operate, and are occupied exclusively as temporary lodging and adhere to mandatory closure and evacuation procedures, the following restrictions shall apply to temporary lodging use: 
(a)  No temporary lodging unit shall be occupied as a permanent residential dwelling unit. 
(b)  All temporary lodging units must be offered, advertised and occupied on a temporary basis for 30 consecutive days or less for temporary lodging guests and no more than 30 days cumulatively on an annual basis for a resort condominium unit owner to ensure that any temporary lodging use does not function as a permanent residential use. The thirty days is measured beginning on the first day of any occupancy until 365 days from that date. The city may require affidavits of compliance with this requirement from each temporary lodging use and/or unit owner. Seller of temporary lodging unit shall be responsible for advising the purchaser of this requirement. Any seller of a resort condominium project or temporary lodging unit shall record a covenant in the public records of Pinellas County, Florida, agreeing to said restriction prior to conveyance. 
(c)  Temporary lodging units shall not qualify or be used for homesteading purposes or home occupational licensing. 
(d)  All temporary lodging units must be included in the inventory of units that are available within a temporary lodging use. 
(e)  Conversion of a temporary lodging unit to permanent residential unit shall be prohibited unless the conversion is in compliance with the density and intensity standards and regulations applicable to the property and all other required city approvals are obtained prior to the conversion and provided said conversion does not violate any other legally enforceable agreement or restriction, law or local ordinance prohibiting such conversion. 
(f)  A temporary lodging use may include accessory uses, such as recreational facilities, restaurants, bars, personal service uses, retail uses, meeting space, fitness centers, spa facilities, parking structures, affordable housing or other workforce living accommodations, and other uses commonly associated with temporary lodging uses. 
(g)  Proper licensing, including occupational licensing, by the state, county and local government and agencies, shall be required of all temporary lodging uses through all applicable agencies that license hotels and motels prior to any certificate of occupancy being issued. All licenses must be kept current. 
(h)  Temporary lodging uses shall be subject to all applicable tourist development tax collections. 
(i)  All temporary lodging uses shall include a reservation system and a lobby/front desk area that is necessary to operate the temporary lodging facility and service its guests. 
(j)  Temporary lodging uses must have sufficient signage viewable by the public designating the use as a temporary lodging use that also complies with local codes. 
(k)  The applicable local government may require affidavits of compliance with this section that includes reasonable supporting documentation that does not violate privacy laws for each temporary lodging use, guests and/or unit owners. 
(l)  All temporary lodging uses shall comply with all county and local hurricane closure and evacuation procedures that will ensure orderly evacuation of guests and visitors prior to evacuation orders being issued for residents. The restrictions and procedures contained within the hurricane closure and evacuation plan shall apply to all on-site workforce living accommodations, as applicable. 
(m)  The restrictions set forth above shall be made a condition of site plan approval. 
(n)  The restrictions set forth in subsections (a), (b), and (d) relating to prohibitions on conversion or use of a temporary lodging unit as a permanent residential dwelling shall be contained in a covenant or other legally enforceable recordable instrument that shall be approved as to content, form and legality by the city and shall be recorded in the public records of Pinellas County at the time of building permit approval. 
(o)  All large scale development and redevelopment projects approved under scenario 2 as defined under Permitted Uses & Standards for the Large Resort character district category may be required to provide an easement to the city for unimproved public access landward of the mean high water line to provide a continuous, uninterrupted pedestrian beach system along the Gulf of Mexico prior to a building permit being issued. 
(p)  All new temporary lodging uses that exceed 50 feet in height or a density greater than 30 units per acre shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to Division 4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 14, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 39.7. - Street-level facades. 
    The human scale and aesthetic appeal of street-level facades, and their relationship to the sidewalk, are essential to a pedestrian-friendly environment. Accordingly, at least 50 percent of the street level facades of buildings used for nonresidential purposes which abut a public street or pedestrian access way, will be transparent. For the purpose of this standard: 
(a)  Street level facade means that portion of a building facade from ground level to the allowable first story height; 
(b)  Transparent means windows or doors that allow pedestrians to see into: 
(1)  The building; or 
(2)  Landscaped or hardscaped courtyard or plazas, where street level facades are set back at least 15 feet from the edge of the sidewalk and the area between the sidewalk and the facade is a landscaped or hardscaped courtyard or plaza. 
(c)  Parking structures should utilize architectural details and design elements such as false recessed windows, arches, planter boxes, metal grillwork, etc. instead of transparent alternatives. When a parking garage abuts a public road or other public place, it will be designed such that the function of the building is not readily apparent except at points of ingress and egress. 
(d)  Window coverings and other opaque materials may cover no more than ten percent of the area of any street-level window in a nonresidential building that fronts on a public right-of-way. 
(e)  Building entrances should be aesthetically inviting, easily identified, preferably with a recessed entrance and also distinctive and visually interesting paving pattern. 
(f)  Awnings and other structures that offer pedestrians cover from the elements are recommended. Awnings help define entryways and provide storefront identity to both pedestrians and drivers. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
Sec. 39.8. - Design, scale and mass of buildings. 
(a)  No plane of a building may continue uninterrupted for greater than 100 linear feet. For the purpose of this standard, "interrupted" means an offset of greater than five feet. 
(b)  At least 60 percent of any elevation will be covered with windows or architectural decoration. For the purpose of this standard, an elevation is that portion of a building that is visible from a particular point outside the parcel proposed for development. 
(c)  The height and mass of buildings will be correlated to: (1) the dimensional aspects of the parcel proposed for development and (2) adjacent public spaces such as streets and parks. 
(d)  Buildings may be designed for a vertical or horizontal mix of permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 39.9. - Energy and environmental design-New construction and major renovation. 
(a)  All development and redevelopment projects in the Community Redevelopment District shall be required to obtain certification for at least two of the eight standards listed below, as appropriate and applicable to the type of construction: 
(1)  Certification by the Florida Green Building Coalition provided the site consists of more than one building and will meet the qualifications of a development. For more information go to www.floridagreenbuilding.org. 
(2)  Certification by the U.S. Green Building Council, LEED-NC (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design - New Construction), Green Building Rating System for New Construction and Major Renovation. For more information go to www.leedbuilding.org. 
(3)  Certification by the Florida Green Building Coalition - High Rise Residential Standard for all new residential construction exceeding three stories in height. 
(4)  Certification by the Florida Green Building Coalition - Residential Standard Certification for all new residential construction three stories or less in height. 
(5)  Certification by the U.S. Green Building Council, LEED-hotels and Green Building Rating System for all new temporary lodging use construction. 
(6)  Certification by the U.S. Green Building Council, LEED-EB (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design - Existing Buildings), or Green Building Rating System for Existing Buildings for existing buildings that are located on a buildable site that is partially being redeveloped. For more information go to www.usgbc.org. 
(7)  Certification by the U.S. Green Building Council, LEED-CS (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design - Commercial Interiors), Green Building Rating System for Commercial Interiors for commercial interior space. For more information go to www.usgbc.org. 
(8)  Designated by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection as a Florida Green Lodge for all temporary lodging construction that is existing, new or undergoes a major renovation. For more information, go to http://www.dep.state.fl.us/greenlodging/. 
(b)  Any new or partial redevelopment project that is subject to payment of community improvement impact fees pursuant to division 41 of this Code shall be eligible for and receive a credit against those impact fees owed in accordance with the rating and scoring system for credits established as part of the community improvement impact fee ordinance. Such impact fees, the types of green standards and green improvements eligible for credits and the amount or percent of such credits shall be established in accordance with the principles and parameters established in Goal 1 and Section (j)3 of the Community Redevelopment District General Redevelopment Guidelines, Standards and Initiatives contained in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 15, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 39.10. - Streetscape design required elements. 
(a)  A ten-foot sidewalk shall be constructed that will allow for safe, unobstructed and efficient pedestrian flow and the potential for sidewalk cafes and outdoor eating areas, as appropriate, in front of all development projects within the Community Redevelopment District along Gulf Boulevard or Blind Pass Road and within the Town Center Core areas. This requirement may be reduced to six feet when warranted through TRC site plan review. This is imperative to ensure pedestrians feel comfortable on the sidewalk as well as important to meet the current American with Disabilities Act standards. Distinctive and visually interesting paving patterns are encouraged, particularly to define an entrance, a gathering place, a pedestrian crosswalk link, or a sidewalk cafe area. Patterns, cooler, materials and constructions standards shall be coordinated with the city manager and his staff to ensure a cohesive and unified streetscape. 
(b)  On all streets not designated a Main street or a street type "A" in section 39.2, a minimum eight-foot wide private landscape zone shall be installed along the property between the sidewalk and the building face; minimum building setbacks may be increased in accordance with the width of the landscape zone. The landscape zone proposal shall be reviewed for compliance during the design review/site plan approval process by the TRC and may be reduced to five feet during that process when warranted, in order to coordinate and integrate new development into an overall streetscape plan. 
(1)  Trees shall be placed in the landscape zone using the following specifications: 
(i)  Trees shall be placed not more than 30 feet apart within the landscape zone. Drought tolerant and native shade trees to reduce urban heat and offer protection to the pedestrian from the sun are encouraged. 
(ii)  Where there are physical restrictions, spacing of street trees shall be adjusted, provided the adjustment is the minimum needed to avoid the obstruction. 
(iii)  Tree spacing can be adjusted so as not to block, obscure, or interfere with the operation of traffic signals, utilities, or any existing sign, awning, or other public infrastructure that was placed prior to the planting of the landscape zone, provided the adjustment is the minimum required for such avoidance. 
(iv)  Street trees shall not be planted in a manner that will diminish adequate sight distance. 
(v)  No street tree shall be planted within ten feet of a light standard or utility pole. 
(vi)  Tree species should be selected with root growth habits that will not cause damage to sidewalks or anything contained within the public right-of-way, or such tree species should be sited away from such hard-surfaced areas. 
(2)  Landscaping plans shall show all obstructions that may affect plant placement and installation limitations including all underground utilities. 
(3)  All exposed dirt areas shall be covered with bark, mulch, or other weed control measures included as part of the final landscape plan. The use of non-cypress mulch is strongly encouraged in support of "green" practices for a sustainable community. 
(4)  The property owner shall ensure the upkeep, health, and aesthetics of the landscape zone through the use of proper reclaimed irrigation of plant species in the landscape zone, regular maintenance of the landscape zone and replacement of items located within the landscape zone. Waterwise Florida friendly landscapes are encouraged and use of drought tolerant plant material and turf. 
(5)  Within the landscape zone on the main commercial corridor the developer shall provide at least two of the following pedestrian amenities for each 200 feet of street frontage that shall be accessible to the sidewalk: 
(i)  Benches; 
(ii)  Trash receptacles; 
(iii)  A design element that offers protection from the weather; 
(iv)  Secured bicycle storage; 
(v)  Public art; 
(vi)  Or other similar design feature integrated into the overall design of the building or portion of the landscape zone in order to enhance the pedestrian environment. 
(6)  Pedestrian-scale decorative lighting fixtures are required every 30 feet on the main commercial corridor within the landscape/pedestrian zone. Where there are physical restrictions, spacing of lighting standards shall be adjusted, provided the adjustment is the minimum needed to avoid the obstruction. An adequate easement shall be dedicated to the city, adjacent to the public right-of-way to allow adequate maintenance by the city of the lighting fixtures. Energy efficient or solar lighting is required. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 39.11. - Walkways and pedestrian connections. 
(a)  Pedestrian walkways shall be landscaped with additional shade or ornamental trees equal to an average of one shade tree per 30 linear feet of walkway, unless the walkway is adjacent or included within an existing compliant buffer or frontage planting. Adjustments to tree spacing may be approved by the city manager in accordance with the provisions of sections 39.10(1) and 39.10(2) above. 
(b)  A minimum of one shade tree shall be planted for each 200 square feet of separate additional landscaped area. 
(c)  Shade trees shall be drought tolerant and the species and location shall be approved by the city manager to ensure proper implementation of the overall streetscape plan. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Sec. 39.12. - Site utilities and waste management. 
(a)  All solid waste areas shall be designed with a six-foot decorative masonry wall. The wall shall be of the same material as the primary structure or concrete masonry, decorative brick or standard concrete masonry clad with painted stucco or other masonry veneer. The wall shall include a continuous cap feature and closing gate. 
(b)  In addition to the masonry enclosure, storage and dumpster/solid waste areas shall be treated with a 24-inch high planted hedge that shall reach 36 inches to 42 inches height and 90 percent opacity within one year. 
(c)  Other above-ground utility elements such as pull boxes, transformers, and backflow preventers shall be located and designed to permit convenient maintenance access, painted dark green and screened with a 24-inch planted hedge that shall reach 36 inches to 42 inches height and 90 percent opacity within one year. 
(d)  Long-term storage containers are prohibited unless located on a parcel with a fully screened masonry or brick enclosure designed and constructed for that purpose. 
(e)  There shall be no open storage of materials or equipment. 
(f)  On-site utilities shall be located underground. 
(g)  Participation in a waste recycling program will be required. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Sec. 39.13. - Irrigation and maintenance. 
(a)  All landscaped areas within the City of St. Pete Beach shall be designed, installed and maintained at a high level of quality, following best management practices for landscaping. Broken lines or damaged spray heads shall be repaired to minimize wasted water. 
(b)  All landscaped areas shall be irrigated with a timed, automatic underground system utilizing pop-up heads and/or tree bubblers and providing coverage of not more than one and one-half inches of water per week. (Use of xeric plant materials may require only three-quarter inch water per week). 
(c)  The automatic irrigation system shall include a rain gauge or other water saving features to conserve water and minimize waste. 
(d)  All landscape areas shall use reclaimed water and shall provide 100 percent irrigated coverage. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Sec. 39.14. - Garden walls, fences, and hedges. 
    All garden walls, fences or hedges located or constructed within the required yard area shall conform to the following regulations, except where special requirements are set forth for specific screening purposes elsewhere in this chapter. 
(a)  Residential districts. 
(1)  Front yard in a residential district. All garden walls, fences or hedges located within the required front yard shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(2)  Side and rear yards in a residential district. All garden walls, fences or hedges located within the required side or rear yards shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(3)  Side yard of corner lot in a residential district. All garden walls, fences, or hedges located in the side-yard abutting the secondary street of a corner lot must not exceed four feet in height. 
(4)  Rear yard abutting water in a residential district. All garden walls, fences, or hedges located in the required rear yard abutting a body of water shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(b)  Commercial districts. All garden walls, fences, or hedges located in a commercial or industrial district shall not exceed eight feet in height and must be constructed to allow an unobstructed view of the front yard of the property from adjacent property or a public street. 
(c)  Buffering and screening between non-compatible uses. Where a RU-1 or RU-2 Residential District or existing single-family or duplex home abuts a non-residential district, the non-residential development shall provide an opaque to semi-opaque screen consisting of landscaping, wall, fence or a combination of any of those elements adequate to buffer the non-residential development from the adjacent residential property in accordance with the height and location requirements set forth above in sections 39.14(a) and 39.14(b) except that no such screen shall be required in the front yard of the non-residential development. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Sec. 39.15. - Compatibility with low density residential. 
    External compatibility. Non-residential development and multi-family development must provide additional buffers and screening from RU-1 and RU-2 residentially zoned properties or parcels of land developed with existing single-family or duplex homes as follows: 
(a)  Lighting restrictions. Any development shall control the effects of lights from automobiles or other sources to prevent lighting spillover so that lights do not illuminate adjacent residential property or shine into any residential window. 
(b)  Setback. When a commercial retail, restaurant, drinking establishments or multi-family use is abutting any existing single-family or duplex use or a RU-1 or RU-2 residentially-zoned property, there shall be an additional setback required for the boundary line(s) abutting the residential property, as follows: 
(1)  Any structure 25 feet in height or less shall be set back at a minimum 20 feet from the abutting residential property. 
(2)  Any structure greater than 25 feet in height shall be set back at a minimum 35 feet from the abutting residential property. 
(3)  Trash receptacles and loading facilities may not be permitted in the rear of the property. Service areas shall be located on the side yard. 
(4)  Building design. The side of the building that is facing or backing up to any residential development shall not be a blank facade and shall have a quality architectural finish that contains the same articulated architectural features as the front of the building except that windows shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Sec. 39.16. - Story standards. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the bottom surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Interstitial space means that area between the bottom surface of a floor above and the functional ceiling of the floor below, which usually contains the sprinkler system, recessed room lighting, duct work and other common items installed above drop ceilings. 
(b)  Height standards. Total height of any structure shall be determined by land use category, the number of stories and height for each story allowed by the Table below, or the maximum height allowed for each use in each specific District as established in the Special Designation Community Redevelopment District of the Future Land Use Element of The Comprehensive Plan, whichever is greater. Variances to increase height are prohibited. 
District Floor Desired

Finished 

HeightInterstitial

SpaceTotal

Story 

HeightTC-1 1st floor 12 feet 4 feet 16 feet 2nd & 3rd floors 10 feet 2 feet 12 feet Garage floor 9 feet 1 foot 10 feet TC-2 1st floor 12 feet 4 feet 16 feet All other floors 10 feet 2 feet 12 feet Garage floor 9 feet 1 foot 10 feet DCR Garage floor 9 feet 1 foot 10 feet All other floors 9 feet 2 feet 11 feet UBV Garage floor 9 feet 1 foot 10 feet All other floors 9 feet 2 feet 11 feet CC-1 1st floor 12 feet 4 feet 16 feet All other floors 10 feet 2 feet 12 feet CC-2 1st floor 12 feet 4 feet 16 feet All other floors 10 feet 2 feet 12 feet LR Structured parking - All 9 feet 1 foot 10 feet 1st floor & 2nd 14 feet 4 feet 18 feet All other floors 9 feet 2 feet 11 feet B-HC Structured parking - All 9 feet 1 foot 10 feet All other floors 9 feet 2 feet 11 feet AC Structured parking - All 9 feet 1 foot 10 feet 1st floor 12 feet 4 feet 16 feet All other floors 10 feet 2 feet 12 feet BR Structured parking - All 9 feet 1 foot 10 feet All other floors 9 feet 2 feet 11 feet  
(c)  In instances where structured parking is developed adjacent to, or at the same level with, enclosed first story space, the allowable height of the parking structure shall be the allowable height of the first story. In addition, in instances where parking is developed adjacent to multiple enclosed stories of the building, as many levels of parking as possible may be developed so long as such parking levels do not exceed the total height allowed for the adjacent stories. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08) 
Sec. 39.17. - Community involvement. 
(a)  Community meeting . Applicant shall have a minimum of one community meeting at least 30 days prior to submitting its application for administrative approval of a development or redevelopment site plan proposed to be built within the Community Redevelopment District. Single-family home, duplex construction or any development on buildable site that is less than one-half acre in size are exempt from this meeting requirement. 
(b)  Notice requirements . The following are the notice requirements for all development projects within the Community Redevelopment District except single-family home, duplex construction or any development on a buildable site that is less than one-half acre in size. Proof of publication shall be provided to the city clerk prior to the community meeting. 
(1)  Notice of the community meeting shall be published in a local newspaper at least seven days and no more than 21 days prior to the community meeting for all development within the community redevelopment district. 
(2)  Additionally, the applicant, at its sole expense, shall be required to mail notices of the community meeting via first class U.S. mail to each property owner at the last known mailing address registered with the county property appraiser's office and each association registered with the city clerk as follows: 
(i)  Within a one mile radius of any property boundary of the subject property for any development on a buildable site of three acres in size or greater; or 
(ii)  Within a one-half mile radius for any development on buildable site greater than one acre in size but less than three acres; or 
(iii)  Within 1,000 feet for any development on a buildable site one-half acre in size or greater but less than one acre. 
(3)  Notice shall be mailed no later than 15 days and no earlier than 30 days prior to the meeting date. Notice shall state the date, time, location and purpose of the meeting and shall include the physical address and parcel identification numbers that will be the subject of the application. The notice shall include an eight and one-half × 11 copy of the proposed site plan. 
(4)  Within three business days of mailing said notice, applicant shall file with the city clerk a copy of the notice including the reduced size site plan and two full size copies of the site plan. The city clerk shall file one full-size copy in the official public record files and maintain one copy for public inspection. The applicant shall provide the city clerk an affidavit of mailing signed by the applicant or authorized agent for the applicant attaching a copy of the mailing list, certifying the date notice was mailed, the contents of the notice and the mailing list as being current and in compliance with the requirements in this section. 
(5)  Any defects or deficiencies in these notice requirements shall be identified by the city clerk and the city clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of any defects or deficiencies identified within five business days of the clerk's receipt of the notice affidavit. The applicant shall have three business days to cure said defects or deficiencies and notify the city clerk with evidence of such cure. In the event applicant fails to timely cure any such defects or deficiencies, the applicant shall be required to provide notice in accordance with the requirements in this section as if the first notice was never mailed. 
(6)  The property which is the subject of the application shall also be posted with a notice of the community meeting at least 15 days prior to the date of the meeting and said notice shall remain posted up to and including the community meeting date and time. The applicant shall provide proof of posting to the city clerk by affidavit attaching a photo of the posted sign and an affidavit of compliance certifying the date of posting. 
(7)  Upon receipt of said notice, the city clerk shall be responsible for posting said notice of the community meeting on Channel 15 up to and including the date and time of the meeting. 
(i)  Purpose . The purpose of the community meeting shall be to present the development project site plan to interested city residents and business owners, answer questions and solicit comments. All attendees shall be given at least three minutes to comment or ask questions on the subject matter under consideration. The public shall be allowed to take notes and video record the community meeting. At least one city staff person from the community development services department shall attend the community meeting. 
(ii)  Citizen comments . A sign-in sheet and comment cards shall be provided to all attendees and one copy shall be provided to the city clerk and one copy shall be provided to the director of community development within three business days after the community meeting. The city shall consider the written comments submitted by attendees during an administrative site plan review process, and may implement such public comment as appropriate that are consistent with and not contrary to law and local land development regulations, and are in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 16, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 39.18. - General Residential Unit "RU" Density Pool Reserve. 
    The residential density pool is established for the entire Community Redevelopment District by reducing the previously allowed maximum residential density of 18 dwelling units per acre in the Large Resort character district by three dwelling units per acre to a maximum of 15 dwelling units per acre over the entire 65.16 acres. The total residential density reduction in the Large Resort district equals 195 residential dwelling units. These 195 residential dwelling units shall automatically become available as a residential density reserve for any property located within the boundaries of the Community Redevelopment District that permits residential use without further need to amend the Future Land Use Plan and Map through the conditional use process in conjunction with a unified site plan. Residential units will be available on a first come first serve basis. 
(Ord. No. 2015-22, § 16, 12-15-15) 
DIVISION 40 - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT-EIGHTH AVENUE (CRD-EA)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 22, 2013, repealed the former Div. 40, §§ 40.1-40.11, and enacted a new Div. 40 as set out herein. The former Div. 40 pertained to Community Redevelopment District-Eighth Avenue (CRD-EA) and derived from Ord. No. 2010-18, § 1(Exh. A), adopted 11-8-11. 

Sec. 40.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The CRD-EA district is intended to encourage and promote the continuance of the existing mixed use development pattern and architectural aesthetic of the area, as well as encourage the infill of vacant or under-developed lots. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
Sec. 40.2. - Permitted principal uses and structures. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted uses in the CRD-EA district are as follows: 
(a)  Residential uses as a component of a vertically mixed-use development; 
(b)  Temporary Lodging;; 
(c)  Eating and drinking establishments, specialty food such as gourmet take out, catering, coffee shops, etc. and sit-down restaurants; 
(d)  Offices; 
(e)  Retail sales; 
(f)  Private, specialized instruction, such as computer training, real estate courses, self- improvement classes, career training or fitness instruction; 
(g)  Artist studios, art galleries, and museums; 
(h)  Personal service businesses such as barbershops, beauty shops, tailoring, garment alteration and repair, shoe repair, dry cleaning drop-off and pick-up and other personal service uses similar in character and impact; 
(i)  Vehicle for hire-limited to rental of bicycles and individual motorized vehicles such as segways, mopeds/scooters; 
(j)  On-site parking facilities; 
(k)  Other uses similar in character, nature and impact to permitted uses listed above. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
Sec. 40.3. - Permitted secondary uses and structures. 
(a)  Transit facilities; 
(b)  Public recreation and other governmental or civic uses. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
Sec. 40.4. - Permitted conditional uses and structures: 
    The purpose of this section is to allow for single family and two-family residential uses and structures for only saving and/or moving locally designated historic structures. In no case shall a new construction single family home be allowed in the 8th Avenue CRD. 
(a)  Single-family residential, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The structure is eligible for local historic designation pursuant to Section 28.22 of the Land Development Code; 
(2)  The applicant applies for designation of the structure as historic and the Historic Preservation Board approves the request; 
(3)  The applicant applies for and is granted a certificate of appropriateness for any alterations to the exterior of the structure and moving the structure if a structure is proposed to be moved to the 8th Ave District, consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for Rehabilitation or Preservation of Historic Structures and Division 28 of the Land Development Code; 
(4)  The applicant applies for and is granted the conditional use pursuant to Section 4.4 of the Land Development Code; 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
Sec. 40.5. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures. Where setbacks of accessory uses in sections 6.12 and 6.13 conflict with this section, the standards in this section shall apply; 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Temporary uses under the provisions of section 6.11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
Sec. 40.6. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    Existing non-historic single family residences currently located in the 8th Avenue district may continue as legal non-conforming uses or can be adaptively reused as uses permitted in Sections 40.2 and 40.3. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
Sec. 40.7. - Density and intensity. 
    Density and intensity of use for commercial and residential components shall be inclusive, i.e. the same land area on a zoning lot may be used to support both use types without proration. For the purpose of determining mixed uses, transient accommodations shall be considered residential uses and may be combined with ground floor commercial within a mixed-use project. The intensity of the commercial use shall be determined by floor area ratio and the density of the transient accommodation shall be determined by units per acre. 
    Residential use - Shall not exceed 24 dwelling units per acre. 
    Transient accommodation use - Shall not exceed 50 units per acre. 
    Non-residential use - Shall not exceed a floor area ratio (FAR) of 1.0 for single use commercial structures or 1.50 for mixed-use development. Projects that consist of a non-residential uses mixed with a transient accommodation or residential use shall provide a minimum FAR of .40 for the non-residential use. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
Sec. 40.8. - Building height. 
    Height shall not exceed 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
Sec. 40.9. - Setbacks. 
    For structures that front 8th, 9th or Gulf Way: 
Front yard : A minimum of 75 percent of the building frontage shall be built in line with the buildings adjacent to it, or set back no greater than two (2) feet, whichever distance from the front property line is less. In cases where vacant lots are adjacent to the lot which is proposed for development, no more than 75 percent of the building frontage shall be set back more than two (2) feet from the front property line. In the event there are existing buildings on both sides of the proposed building, and the adjacent buildings are not set back the same distance from the front property line, then the proposed structure may be built to the average frontage of the two adjacent buildings. 
Marquees, canopies, colonnades, arcades, or fixed awnings may project over the public right-of-way, provided such projection does not extend over the back of curb line. Foundational structures, that support such projections, may be placed in the public right-of-way provided that such items and overhangs are subject to a development and public right-of-way use agreement with the city. The second story of the primary structure may extend over the public right-of-way, provided such projection does not extend over the back of curb line. That portion of the second story which projects over the public right-of-way may not be enclosed but may be roofed and screened as a porch or open balcony. A third story shall extend no more than the second floor structural face and may provide an open balcony. A third story shall not be enclosed by solid walls or windows and may not contain a roof, but may contain a pergola structure which does not provide more that 50% opacity. Structures may not project over alleys. 
Structural face, as it used in this section, is defined as those portions of the principal structure and accoutrements which protrude toward the lot line and are most closely parallel to the front lot line. Pergola as defined herein is garden feature forming a shaded walkway, passageway, or sitting area of vertical posts or pillars that usually support cross-beams and a sturdy open lattice. 
Secondary front yard : No secondary front yard setback for primary structure; Marquees, canopies, colonnades, arcades, or fixed awnings may project over the public right-of-way provided such projection does not extend over the back of curb line. Foundational structures, that support such projections, may be placed in the public right-of-way provided that such items and overhangs are subject to a development and public right-of-way use agreement with the city. Structures may not project over alleys. 
Side yard : None 
Rear yard : 10 feet minimum. Parking may be placed in the rear setback. 
For structures that front Pass-a-Grille Way: 
Front yard : 10 feet 
Secondary front yard : 5 feet 
Sideyard : 5 feet 
Rear yard : 10 feet. Parking can be placed in the rear yard setback. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13; Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 8-25-15; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 40.11. - Minimum off-street parking requirements and access requirements. 
(1)  Number of parking spaces required: Subject to Division 23 of the Land Development Code. 
(2)  Access to and location of parking areas: 
a.  Parcels abutting an alley shall not place parking in the front yard of the zoning lot, nor will be provided driveway access from the main thoroughfare. Parking may be placed in the rear or side yard. Access shall be provided via the alley. 
b.  Parcels without alley access shall be granted a curb cut from the main thoroughfare and may provide parking in the front yard. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
Sec. 40.12. - Landscaping and buffering. 
    In order to accommodate the form and scale of historic development patterns on 8th Avenue, the CRD-EA District shall be exempt from the buffering and landscaping requirements in Division 22 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-13) 
DIVISION 41 - IMPACT FEES FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2005, adopted provisions designated as a new Div. 41 to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 41.1. - Authorization. 
    This division is enacted pursuant to the general police power, the authority granted to cities by Section 2(b), Article VIII, of the Florida Constitution, Chapter 166, and F.S. §§ 163.3161 through 163.3244. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.2. - Purpose and intent. 
    This division is enacted for the purpose of requiring that new development pay for its fair share of public facilities through the imposition of impact fees that will be used to finance, defray, or reimburse all or a portion of the costs incurred by the City for public facilities and services that serve such development. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.3. - Definitions. 
    When used in this division, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Benefit area means the geographic area within which impact fees are collected and expended for a particular type of capital improvement serving development projects within such area. 
    Calculate means to determine the amount of impact fee to be imposed on a particular development project and includes an individualized determination showing a reasonable, and roughly proportional, relationship between: (1) the fee's use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed; (2) the need for the public facility or service and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed; and (3) the amount of the fee and the cost of the portion of the public facility or service attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed. 
    Capital improvement means land or facilities for the generation or distribution of electricity; for the collection and disposal of storm water; for flood-control purposes; for purposes of transportation and transit, including without limitation, streets, street lighting and traffic-control devices and supporting improvements, roads, bridges, and related facilities; for parks and recreational improvements; for public safety, including police and fire department facilities; for public art; for public buildings of all kinds; and for any other capital project identified in the City's capital improvements plan. Capital improvement also includes design, engineering, inspection, testing, planning, legal land acquisition, and all other costs associated with construction of a public facility. 
    Capital improvements plan means the five-year plan for capital improvements adopted annually by the city commission, describing the approximate location, size, time of availability and estimated cost of capital improvement projects and identifying sources of funding for capital improvement projects. 
    Capital improvements project list means the list describing the approximate location, size, time of availability and estimated cost of each capital improvement to be funded from a particular impact fee account. 
    Collection means the time at which the impact fee is actually paid to the city. 
    Commitment means earmarking impact fees to fund or partially fund capital improvements serving new development projects. 
    Dwelling unit means any building or portion thereof designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a complete, independent living facility for the exclusive use of one family, including permanent full provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. A dwelling unit shall have no more than one kitchen and shall provide complete internal access to all rooms in the unit. 
    Impact fee means a monetary exaction, adopted by the city pursuant to this division at a specified rate and imposed pursuant to this division, as a condition of or in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or some of the city's cost or repaying costs previously expended from other city funds for capital improvements, and as further defined herein. 
    Impose means to determine that a particular development project is subject to the collection of impact fees as a condition of development approval. 
    New development or development project means any project undertaken for the purpose of development, including without limitation, a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction, reconstruction, or change of use, but not a project involving the issuance of a permit to operate or to remodel, rehabilitate, or improve an existing structure, which does not change the density or intensity of use, nor the rebuilding of a structure destroyed or damaged by a catastrophic event. 
    Nonresidential development project means all development other than residential development projects. 
    Residential development project means any development undertaken to create a new dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.4. - Applicability. 
    Unless expressly excepted or exempted, this division applies to all fees which may be imposed by the city to finance capital facilities and maintain levels of service, the need for which is created by new development, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Affordable housing fees; 
(2)  Park and recreational fees; 
(3)  Drainage fees; 
(4)  Police/public safety fees; 
(5)  Transportation improvement fees; 
(6)  Public works fees; 
(7)  Public art and cultural events fees; 
(8)  Fire department fees; 
(9)  Library fees; and 
(10)  Public education fees. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.5. - Exemptions. 
    This division does not apply to: 
(1)  Taxes and special assessments; 
(2)  Fees for processing development applications; 
(3)  Fees for enforcement of or inspections pursuant to regulatory ordinances; 
(4)  Fees for utility connection or utility impact fees which are authorized by City Code provisions outside of this division; 
(5)  Fees collected under development agreements, other than impact fees; 
(6)  Fees imposed pursuant to a reimbursement agreement between the city and a property owner for that portion of the cost of a public facility paid for by the property owner which exceeds the need for the public facility attributable to, reasonably related to, and roughly proportional to the development; 
(7)  Fees to mitigate impacts on the environment; 
(8)  Fees imposed, levied, or collected by other governmental agencies including subdivisions of the state and federal government; and 
(9)  Storm water utility fees which are authorized by City Code provisions outside of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.6. - Imposition, calculation and collection of impact fees. 
(a)  The city may only impose impact fees as a condition of approval of new development projects as provided in this division. Fees shall be calculated upon the net increase in density or intensity represented by the new development. 
(b)  The base fee amount of each impact fee for residential and for non-residential development, for each type of public facility or service funded by impact fees, shall be calculated at least every three years and adopted by ordinance. When the city manager determines that it is appropriate to the particular public facility or service, the fee amount may be calculated, imposed and expended by benefit area. 
(c)  After an individualized determination that each impact fee for a development project has been calculated as provided in this division, impact fees shall be imposed prior to issuance of any building permit. 
(d)  Impact fees shall be collected by the city manager at the time of, and as a condition for, issuance of a building permit, except that connection fees shall be collected at the time of application for connection to the utility system. 
(e)  An administrative fee, in the amount of three percent of the impact fee imposed on a development project, shall be collected from that development project with, and in addition to, the impact fee for the purpose of defraying the city's cost of administering the impact fee program. 
(f)  In the event impact fees are paid prior to, or concurrent with, the issuance of a building permit and subsequently the building permit is amended, the applicant shall pay the impact fee in effect at the time the amended building permit is issued with credit being given for the previous fees paid. 
(g)  In the case of the change of use, redevelopment, or expansion or modification of an existing use of a site which requires the issuance of a building permit, the impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in density or intensity of the proposed use as compared to the most immediately preceding of use of the property for which the permit is requested. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.7. - Notice and hearing required for establishing or increasing impact fees. 
(a)  Prior to establishing or increasing any particular impact fee, the city commission shall hold a public hearing. 
(b)  Notice of the time and place of the public hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered, shall be published as required for the adoption of a general ordinance pursuant to F.S. § 166.041. 
(c)  At least ten days prior to the public hearing, the city shall make available to the public data showing the amount or the estimated amount of the impact fee and a summary of the basis for the calculation of the impact fee amount. 
(d)  City commission action to establish or increase any impact fee shall be taken only by ordinance containing findings which demonstrate the basis for calculating the fee. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.8. - Independent impact analysis. 
(a)  A developer may choose to use an independent impact analysis to compute the impact fee due as a result of a development. 
(b)  The developer shall be responsible for the preparation of the draft independent impact analysis and the city manager may accept, reject, or modify the draft analysis. 
(c)  The city manager shall have the authority to approve the person or firm who prepares the draft independent impact analysis on the basis of the person or firm's professional training and experience in preparing development impact analyses. The independent impact analysis shall follow standard methodologies and formats. Prior to submission of the draft independent impact analysis, the developer shall meet with the city manager to review the requirements for preparing draft independent impact analyses. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.9. - Impact fee accounts. 
    The city shall provide for a separate accounting of each type of capital improvement for which an impact fee is imposed. Where benefit areas have been designated by the city manager there shall be a separate accounting for each benefit area. The impact fees collected shall be separately accounted for according to type of improvement and benefit area, if relevant. The funds for each impact fee shall be specifically tracked, monitored and accounted for separate from other funds of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.10. - Use of impact fee proceeds. 
    Impact fees may be expended only for the type of capital improvements for which they were imposed, calculated, and collected, in accordance with the time limits and procedures established in this division. If impact fees were calculated and collected by benefit area, then the fees may be expended only in the benefit area in which they were collected. Impact fees may be used to pay the principal, interest, and other costs of bonds, notes, and other obligations issued or undertaken by or on behalf of the city to finance such improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.11. - Refunds. 
(a)  Upon application of the property owner, the city shall refund that portion of any impact fee which has been on deposit over six years and which is unexpended and uncommitted, except as described in subsection (b) of this section. The refund shall be made to the then-current owner or owners of lots or units of the development project or projects. 
(b)  If fees in any impact fee account are unexpended or uncommitted during the sixth year, the fees are exempt from subsection (a) of this section if the city commission makes the following findings: 
(1)  A need for the capital improvement still exists; 
(2)  The fees will be used for an identified purpose within two years; and 
(3)  The purpose for which the fees will be used is substantially similar to the purpose for which the fees were collected. 
(c)  The city may refund by direct payment, by offsetting the refund against other impact fees due for development projects by the owner on the same or other property, or otherwise by agreement with the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.12. - Statute of limitations. 
    Any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, or annul the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any impact fee must be filed and service of process effected within 90 days following the date of imposition of the fee or the final determination of the city commission, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.13. - Amendment procedures. 
    Prior to the city commission's adoption of the budget and revisions to the capital improvements project list, the city manager shall report at least once every three years to the city commission with: 
(1)  Recommendations for amendments to this division, if any; 
(2)  Proposals for changes to the capital improvements project list, identifying capital improvements to be funded in whole or in part by impact fees, if any; 
(3)  Proposals for changes in the boundaries of benefit areas, if any; and 
(4)  Proposals for changes to impact fee rates and schedules, if any. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 41.14. - Analysis and establishment of fees. 
    Consistent with the foregoing requirements of this division, the city commission shall adopt appropriate amendments to Appendix A of the City of St Pete Beach Code of Ordinances, Fee Schedule, to impose any authorized impact fee. The analysis utilized to establish the fee shall be maintained on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2005-47, § 1, 12-13-05) 
DIVISION 42 - BR BAYOU RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 42.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The BR Bayou Residential District is intended to support multi-family residential or temporary lodging projects with limited non-residential uses mixed with the residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-12) 
Sec. 42.2. - Permitted primary and secondary uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, permitted primary and secondary uses and structures in the Bayou Residential District are as follows: 
Primary Uses: 
(a)  Residential uses - Attached single family, two family, and multi-family. 
Secondary Uses: 
(a)  Commercial uses as a mixed-use component with multi-family residential. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-12) 
Sec. 42.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code; 
(c)  Temporary structures under the provisions of section 6.11 of this Code; 
(d)  Electric vehicle charging stations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-12) 
Sec. 42.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, allowable conditional uses in the Bayou Residential District are as follows. 
(a)  Residential docks 
(b)  Docks, commercial: Class A 
(c)  Docks, commercial: Class B 
(d)  Temporary Lodging with or without a commercial component, awarded on a first come, first serve basis, to come from the density pool established in the Comprehensive Plan (325 available units for potential use in the Town Center Core Corey Circle, Coquina West, Activity Center, and Bayou Residential Districts). 
(e)  Off-premises parking lot. 
(f)  Commercial parking lot. 
(g)  Commercial rental of non-motorized water sports equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 9, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 42.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the Bayou Residential District. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-12) 
Sec. 42.6. - Density and intensity. 
(a)  Exclusive residential uses shall not exceed 15 units per acre. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Residential density of up to 18 units per acre mixed with a commercial use component with a maximum Floor Area Ratio of 0.3. 
(d)  40 temporary lodging units per acre not to exceed the density pool allocated. The temporary lodging use can be mixed with a commercial use. The maximum floor area ratio for the commercial portion of a mixed use project is 0.3 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-12) 
Sec. 42.7. - Height and setbacks. 
    For the Bayou Residential District, height and setbacks are regulated as follows: 
Use Height and Front Yard Setbacks Exclusive Residential 35 feet with a minimum setback of 20 feet from Gulf Blvd. Residential uses mixed with commercial uses 54 feet with a minimum setback of 30 feet from Gulf Blvd. Tourist Lodging with or without a mixed use commercial component 54 feet with a minimum setback of 40 feet from Gulf Blvd.  
Other setback requirements: 
Secondary Front: 20 Feet Side yard: 10 percent of lot width per side; 10 foot minimum setback required. Rear yard 20 feet. No setback shall be required for any structural pedestrian facilities adjacent to any body of water. Outdoor seating areas for permitted commercial uses may be placed within the required rear yard setback.  
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-12) 
Sec. 42.8. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for exclusively residential uses: 0.70 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for all other uses: 0.85 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-12) 
Sec. 42.9. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-12) 
Sec. 42.10. - Landscaping. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 22 of the Land Development Code, Landscaping and Tree Protection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-12) 
Sec. 42.11. - Design standards. 
    Design standards shall be in accordance with Division 39 [of the Land Development Code]. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-12) 
Sec. 42.12. - Signs. 
    Shall be in accordance with Division 26 [of the Land Development Code]. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-12) 
DIVISION 43 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 43.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent of the planned development district to provide for developments that incorporate complimentary uses and innovative design features that promote aesthetic quality and superior functionality of optimal density development. It is not the intent of the district to simply avoid the requirements and criteria which are found in the standard districts of the Land Development Code. Planned development districts shall be districts specifically approved by the city commission for the establishment of integrated groupings of residential, commercial or office uses developed under a single, unified plan. It is the intent of these regulations to provide for development of such districts at appropriate locations, in accordance with the goals, objectives, policies, and other criteria of the Comprehensive Plan, and in accord with the requirements of this division 
    Planned development districts are intended to be established for specialized projects where the proposed project warrants greater flexibility than a standard zoning district provides. Planned developments may be established to permit developments where the innovative use of buffering and design techniques mitigate the external impacts of development and create a unique physical environment. The utilization of a planned development district allows for a compatible mixture of uses with appropriate relationships of exterior and interior space and the preservation of desirable natural features. 
    Planned development district regulations are intended to accomplish the purposes of zoning and other applicable regulations to an equivalent or higher degree than the use of standard zoning districts, and are intended to promote economical and efficient land use, improved amenities, and harmonious and creative design. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 2007-42, § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 43.2. - Planned development defined. 
    For purposes of this division, a planned development is: 
(a)  Comprehensively planned site area; 
(b)  Built in a single development operation or a definitively programmed series of development operations; 
(c)  Including principal and accessory structures compatible with the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan; 
(d)  Built according to comprehensive plans, which include streets, utilities, lots and building locations, building architecture and other uses and improvements of the land; and 
(e)  Including a program to provide for operation and maintenance of such areas, facilities, and improvements as may be provided for common use by the occupants of the planned development district which shall not be provided, operated or maintained at general public expense. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 43.3. - Relation of planned development districts to general zoning, subdivision or other regulations. 
    Plans approved for the establishment of a planned development district shall serve as the zoning standards for such district and shall wholly supersede and replace the previous zoning designation of the property. Approved planned developments must comply with all requirements of this Code for subdivision, platting, site plan review and permitting. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 43.4. - Review criteria. 
(a)  Planned development districts may hereafter be established by amendment to the official zoning map. Properties approved under this division shall be designated PD on the zoning map. 
(b)  The following general review criteria shall be utilized in evaluating requests and establishing conditions for planned development districts: 
(1)  Relation to public utilities, facilities and services. Planned development districts shall be so located in relation to sanitary sewers, emergency services, public safety services, potable water infrastructure, storm and surface drainage systems and other utilities systems and installations such that services can be reasonably established and maintained. 
(2)  Relation to transportation facilities. Planned development districts shall be so located and designed to provide access to and from such districts without creating excessive traffic along minor streets in residential neighborhoods, or elsewhere outside of the district. 
(3)  Compatibility. Planned development districts shall be located and designed so as to minimize negative external impacts resulting from factors such as traffic, noise, or lighting. Mitigation of these impacts shall be accomplished through such techniques as buffering, architectural design, site design, height limitations, and density or intensity limitations. Planned development districts shall be responsive to the character of the area. When located in an area where land uses and/or intensities or densities vary, planned development districts shall be designed in such a manner as to provide for the most gradual change in intensity and/or density feasible. 
(4)  Access. Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to encourage smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Plans shall provide for functional and logical transportation linkages to adjacent commercial properties. Vehicular access to streets from off-street parking areas shall be so designed and located as to provide for convenient and safe movement of vehicles. Pedestrian access shall, to the extent possible, be separated from vehicular access points in order to reduce congestion and safety hazards. All private streets in planned developments shall be designed and constructed in accordance with city standards for public road construction. 
(5)  Service areas. Facilities and access routes for deliveries, servicing and maintenance shall be located and arranged to prevent interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Loading zones shall be located to minimize conflict with through traffic. 
(6)  Pedestrian systems. All planned development districts shall provide internal and/or external sidewalks where reasonably required for adequate pedestrian circulation. The site plan shall provide for the efficient grouping of structures, uses, and open spaces in a manner which facilitates pedestrian movement between origins and destinations within, and adjacent to, the district. 
(7)  Natural and historic features, and conservation and preservation areas. Planned development districts shall be designed to preserve natural and historic features, such as existing trees, natural topography, and archaeological and historic sites, to the extent reasonably possible. 
(8)  Aesthetic and architectural design criteria. Architecture and design features shall be consistent with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan and generally compatible with positive characteristics of surrounding or nearby areas. The city commission may impose such requirements for design features, aesthetics and architecture as are reasonably related to the purposes of the district and the general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 43.5. - Requirements for application. 
    The following requirements for application to amend the official zoning map to establish a planned development district shall apply: 
(a)  Submission of a standard rezoning application must be made to the planning department. 
(b)  Application shall be accompanied by a detailed development plan and additional documentation which, at a minimum, addresses the following (as applicable): 
(1)  Utility infrastructure, including sanitary sewer, reclaimed water, potable water, electric and natural gas services, and data transmission and telecommunications services; 
(2)  Transportation infrastructure, including ingress and egress from public rights-of-way, traffic control devices and signalization, internal vehicle circulation of the site, design and function of parking areas, loading and unloading areas, pedestrian transit infrastructure and amenities, and public sidewalks and roadways; 
(3)  Hydrological features and storm water management infrastructure; 
(4)  Aesthetic and architectural features of the development, including site layout, physical dimensions of structures such as height and massing, design and appearance of building facades, exterior building materials, shadow impact studies, advertising and directional signage and the provision and maintenance of Gulf and Bay views and vistas; 
(5)  Site landscaping, open space provision and impervious surface limitations; 
(6)  Operational and functional requirements of facilities, including hours of operation, provision of required services or amenities, lighting requirements, noise abatement requirements, residency limitations and facilities maintenance; 
(7)  Fire suppression and facility security; and 
(8)  Emergency management and hurricane evacuation provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 2007-42, § 2, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 43.6. - Permitted uses. 
    Proposed uses shall be consistent with those established in the Comprehensive Plan for the subject future land use designation. Planned development district uses shall be established after consideration of Comprehensive Plan criteria and policies, neighborhood compatibility, transitions, and site design. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 43.7. - Density and intensity. 
    Density and/or intensity shall not exceed maximums established in the Comprehensive Plan for the subject future land use designation. Planned development district densities/intensities shall be established after consideration of the Comprehensive Plan criteria and limits, neighborhood compatibility, transitions, and site design. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 43.8. - General requirements. 
(a)  Planned developments shall be allowed only in those areas which are defined as Commercial General [CG] and Resort Facilities Medium [RFM] on the Future Land Use Map of the city's adopted Comprehensive Plan, and which lie to the north of 37th Avenue. For areas designated as RFM, only those which lie on the east side of Gulf Boulevard shall be eligible for the planned development designation. Where a proposed project is comprised of more than one future land use designation, the maximum potential density/intensity of the project shall be determined by pro rating the available density/intensity of each future land use designation involved. 
(b)  A minimum site area of one acre is required. 
(c)  Proposed projects shall include at least two separate uses identified as either primary or secondary by the Comprehensive Plan policies for the applicable Future Land Use Classification. Each project shall allocate a minimum of 70 percent of the total project area to a use identified as commercial by the Comprehensive Plan policies for the applicable Future Land Use Classification. Project development shall be managed so that at not time shall the portion of the project identified as the commercial use(s) constitute less than 70 percent of the project completed and certified for occupancy. For the purposes of this calculation, all uses shall be determined as a ratio of the density or intensity to a unit of land. 
(d)  Individual uses may be permitted in freestanding structures that are architecturally and functionally integrated within unified project plans. 
(e)  Unless specified as a condition of city commission approval, all Land Development Code regulations for off-street parking, landscaping and tree preservation and applicable supplementary standards must be met. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 2007-42, § 3, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 43.9. - Building height. 
(a)  For areas designated CG, building heights shall be as follows: 
(1)  Structures on lots less than four acres shall be limited to 28 feet in height from existing grade. 
(2)  Structures for Transient Accommodation uses on contiguous lots of four acres or more may be approved for building heights of up to 75 feet from existing grade. 
(3)  Structures for all other uses on contiguous lots of four acres or more may be approved for building heights of up to 55 feet from existing grade. 
(b)  For areas designated RFM, building heights shall be as follows: 
(1)  Structures for all uses may be approved for building heights of up to 55 feet from existing grade. 
(c)  [ Reserved. ] 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 2007-42, § 4, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 43.10. - Setbacks. 
    Unless specified as a condition of city commission approval, the following setback requirements shall apply for all planned developments: 
    For areas designated CG, building setbacks shall be as follows: 
Front yard: 20 feet minimum Side yard: 10 feet minimum. Rear yard 20 feet; 50 feet for all elements above two stories where adjacent to water; No setback shall be required for any structural pedestrian facilities adjacent to any body of water to a maximum of 24 inches above grade. Outdoor seating areas for permitted businesses may be placed within the required rear yard setback.  
    For areas designated RFM, building setbacks shall be as follows: 
Front yard: 20 feet minimum; 40 feet maximum Side yard: 10 percent of lot width on each side Rear yard 20 feet; 
No setback shall be required for any structural pedestrian facilities adjacent to any body of water in mixed-use projects. Outdoor seating areas for permitted uses may be placed within the required rear yard setback.  
    For all structures in any district which abut Gulf Boulevard, the required setback shall be as follows: 
Front yard: For building elements of up to two stories: 20 feet minimum 

For building elements three to seven stories: Minimum setback shall be 75 percent of height  
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 43.11. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) for all uses: 0.70 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 43.12. - Additional development standards. 
(a)  General design requirements. 
(1)  Form. Buildings shall form a consistent, distinct edge, spatially delineating the public street through maximum building setbacks that vary by no more than ten feet from those of the adjacent building. 
(2)  Open storage. There shall be no open storage of materials or equipment. 
(3)  Utilities. All utilities shall be located underground. 
(b)  General operational and aesthetic requirements. 
(1)  Commercial and transient accommodation uses shall be designed and operated so that neighboring residents are not exposed to offensive noise, especially from late-night activity. No amplified music shall be audible to neighboring residents. Common walls between residential and non-residential uses shall be constructed to minimize the transmission of noise and vibration. 
(2)  All outdoor lighting associated with commercial and transient accommodation uses shall be designed so as not to adversely impact surrounding residential uses, while also providing a sufficient level of illumination for access and security purposes. Such lighting shall not blink, flash, oscillate, or be of unusually high brightness. Also, parking areas shall be illuminated so as to provide appropriate visibility and security during hours of darkness. 
(3)  Loading or service areas including refuse and recycling must be out of public view and must not front onto Gulf Boulevard. 
(4)  No commercial use shall be designated or operated so as to expose residents to offensive odors, dust, electrical interference, and/or vibration. 
(5)  Residential, commercial, and transient accommodation uses in a mixed-use development shall provide combined and private bulk sanitation service for the entire development. 
(6)  Electric and communications transformers shall be screened from public view through below grade installation, a hedge, or similar measure. 
(7)  All other mechanical equipment must be behind or on top of the building and screened from public view through use of a parapet wall or through landscaping. 
(8)  Any roof area above the highest allowed story may be utilized for active or passive recreational uses or other similar uses which require no permanent structures. Such roof areas must be enclosed by a parapet wall no less than four feet nor greater than five feet in height. 
(c)  Design, scale and mass of buildings. 
(1)  Buildings with a footprint of greater than 5,000 square feet or a single dimension of greater than 100 feet will be constructed so that no more than two of the three building dimensions in the vertical or horizontal planes are equal in length. For this purpose, equal in length means that the two lengths vary by less than 40 percent of the shorter of the two lengths. The horizontal plane measurements relate to the footprint of the building. 
(2)  No plane of a building may continue uninterrupted for greater than 100 linear feet. For the purpose of this standard, interrupted means an offset of greater than five feet. 
(3)  At least 60 percent of any elevation will be covered with windows or architectural decoration. For the purpose of this standard, an elevation is that portion of a building that is visible from a particular point outside the parcel proposed for development. 
(4)  The height and mass of buildings will be correlated to: (1) the dimensional aspects of the parcel proposed for development and (2) adjacent public spaces such as streets and parks. 
(5)  Buildings may be designed for a vertical or horizontal mix of permitted uses. 
(d)  Streetscape design required elements. Along Gulf Boulevard only, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  A ten-foot sidewalk shall be constructed that will allow for safe and efficient pedestrian flow in front of all development projects. The city manager may reduce this requirement to six feet when warranted. This is imperative to ensure pedestrians feel comfortable on the sidewalk as well as important to meet the current Americans with Disabilities Act standards. 
(2)  A minimum eight-foot wide private landscape zone shall be installed along the property between the sidewalk and the building face; minimum building setbacks may be increased in accordance with the width of the landscape zone. The landscape zone proposal shall be reviewed for compliance during the design review/site plan approval process 
a.  Trees shall be placed in the landscape zone using the following specifications: 
1.  Trees shall be placed not more than 30 feet apart within the landscape zone; 
2.  Where there are physical restrictions spacing of street trees shall be adjusted, provided the adjustment is the minimum needed to avoid the obstruction; 
3.  Tree spacing can be adjusted so as not to block, obscure, or interfere with the operation of traffic signals, utilities, or any existing sign, awning, or other public infrastructure that was placed prior to the planting of the landscape zone, provided the adjustment is the minimum required for such avoidance; 
4.  Street trees shall not be planted in a manner that will diminish adequate sight distance. 
i.  No street tree shall be planted within ten feet of a light standard or utility pole; 
ii.  Tree species should be selected with root growth habits that will not cause damage to sidewalks or anything contained within the public right-of-way, or such tree species should be sited away from such hard-surfaced areas. 
b.  Landscaping plans shall show all obstructions that may affect plant placement and installation limitations including all underground utilities. 
c.  All exposed dirt areas shall be covered with bark, mulch, or other weed control measures included as part of the final landscape plan. 
d.  The property owner shall ensure the upkeep, health, and aesthetics of the landscape zone through the use of proper irrigation of plant species in the landscape zone, regular maintenance of the landscape zone and replacement of items located within the landscape zone. 
e.  Within the landscape zone on the main commercial corridor the developer shall provide at least two of the following pedestrian amenities for each 200 feet of street frontage that shall be accessible to the sidewalk: 
1.  Benches; 
2.  Trash receptacles; 
3.  Public art; 
4.  Other similar design feature integrated into the overall design of the building or portion of the landscape zone in order to enhance the pedestrian environment. 
f.  Pedestrian lighting fixtures are required every 30 feet on the main commercial corridor within the landscape/pedestrian zone. Where there are physical restrictions spacing of lighting standards shall be adjusted, provided the adjustment is the minimum needed to avoid the obstruction. The lighting shall be a style approved by the city manager. In addition to supplying the pedestrian lighting a two-foot by two-foot dedicated easement adjacent to the public right-of-way shall be provide to allow adequate maintenance by the city of pedestrian lighting fixtures. 
(e)  Compatibility. 
(1)  External compatibility. Nonresidential development and multifamily development must provide additional buffers and screening such that the arrangement of land uses on site do not unreasonably impair the long-term use of properties located a minimum of 125 feet from existing residential development. 
(2)  Lighting. The proposed development shall also control the effects of lights from automobiles or other sources. Where the site plan indicates potential adverse effects of parking or of other light sources on the lot on which the non-residential use is to be located, such effects shall be prevented so that lights do not illuminate adjacent residential property below a height of five feet at the residential property line, or from shining into any residential window if there is to be non-residential parking on the premises after dark. 
(3)  Setback. When a non-residential or multi-family use is abutting any single-family residential property, there shall be an additional setback required for any yard of that use which is contiguous to the residential property, as follows: 
a.  When any side of a single story structure equal to or less than 25 feet in height abuts single-family residential property, that portion of the structure(s) shall be set back at a minimum 20 feet. 
b.  Trash receptacles and loading facilities may not be permitted in the rear of the property. Service areas shall be located on the side yard. 
c.  When any side of a structure greater than one story or 25 feet in height abuts single-family residential property, that portion of the structure shall be set back at a minimum of 39 feet from the property boundary. 
d.  Buildings over two stories in height shall have one additional six-inch step back from the second floor for each one foot additional height of the building. 
(4)  Building design. The side of the building that is facing or backing up to any residential development must be treated with the same architectural design standards as the front of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 1-24-06) 
DIVISION 44 - MARINE TURTLE PROTECTION 

Sec. 44.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this rule is to protect hatchling marine turtles from the adverse effects of artificial lighting, provide overall improvement in nesting habitat degraded by light pollution, and increase successful nesting activity and production of hatchlings. 
(Ord. No. 2007-21, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Sec. 44.2. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Artificial light or artificial lighting means the light emanating from any human-made device. 
    Bollards means lighting consisting of short posts that incorporate a lighting element. 
    Bug light or bug type bulb means any yellow colored light bulb that is marketed as being specifically treated in such a way so as to reduce the attraction of bugs to the light. 
    Coastal construction activities means any work or activity that is likely to have a material physical effect on existing coastal conditions or natural shore and inlet processes. 
    Cumulatively illuminated means illuminated by numerous artificial light sources that as a group illuminate any portion of the beach. 
    Directional fixture means an assembly that holds the lamp along with any globe, shade, or other covering surrounding the lamp that may be adjusted to concentrate or throw light in a specific direction. 
    Directly illuminated means illuminated as a result of glowing element(s), lamp(s), globe(s), or reflector(s) of an artificial light source which is visible to an observer on the beach. 
    Existing beachfront lighting means an artificial light source associated with a building, structure, roadway, parking lot, dune crossover, pier, beach walkway or beach access for which a permit was issued prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
    Floodlight means a reflector-type light fixture that may be attached directly to a building, other structure, or freestanding, and is unshielded. 
    Frontal dune means the first natural or man-made mound or bluff of sand which is located landward of the beach and which has sufficient vegetation, height, continuity, and configuration to offer protective value to the beach environment. 
    Ground-level barrier means any vegetation, natural feature or artificial structure rising from the ground which prevents beachfront lighting from shining directly onto the beach-dune system, including, but not limited to, hedges, native dune vegetation, privacy fences, walls, etc. 
    Hatchling means any species of marine turtle, within or outside of a nest that has recently hatched from an egg. 
    Illuminated means exposed to light from an artificial light source in a way that produces brightness detectable to an observer standing anywhere on the beach. A beach is illuminated if an observer standing anywhere on the beach can see light that has emanated from an artificial light source. 
    Indirectly illuminated means illuminated as a result of the glowing element(s), lamp(s), globe(s), or reflector(s) of an artificial light source which is not visible to an observer standing anywhere on the beach. 
    Low-pressure sodium luminaire (LPS) means an electric discharge lamp, containing sodium, neon, and argon, that when illuminated appears amber-yellow. 
    Low-profile luminaire means a light fixture set on a base which raises the source of light no higher than 48 inches above the ground, and is designed in such a way that light is directed downward from a hooded light source. 
    Low-wattage bug light means a bug light with no greater than 25-watt incandescence and no greater than nine-watt fluorescence. 
    Marine turtle means any marine-dwelling reptile of the families Cheloniidae or Dermochelyidae found in Florida waters or using the beach as nesting habitat, including the species: Caretta caretta (loggerhead), Chelonia mydas (green), Dermochelys coriacea (leatherback), Eretmochelys imbricata (hawksbill), and Lepidochelys kempi (Kemp's ridley). For purposes of this rule, marine turtle is synonymous with sea turtle. 
    Motorized vehicle means, but is not limited to, any self-propelled, wheeled, tracked, or belted conveyance. 
    Nest means an area where marine turtle eggs have been naturally deposited or subsequently relocated. 
    Nesting season means the period from May 1 through October 31 of each year. 
    New coastal construction means new construction and remodeling of existing structures when such remodeling includes alteration of exterior lighting. 
    Nighttime means the locally effective time period between sunset and sunrise. 
    Person means individuals, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations, and all other groups or combinations. 
    Point source of light means the actual light source such as the bulb, fluorescent tube, lamp, etc., from which light emanates. 
    Pole lighting means a light fixture set on a base or pole which raises the source of the light higher than 48 inches off the ground. 
    Primary dune means the most seaward dune with sufficient alongshore continuity which has sufficient height and configuration or vegetation to offer protective value to the beach environment. 
    Publicly owned lighting means lighting installed by a public or private entity which is owned by, or rented or leased to, a governmental agency, or lighting installed on public property. 
    Red or amber light-emitting diodes (LED) means miniature lamps that emit pure red or amber light that does not vary in color over the life of the lamp. These lamps may be used in multiples to form strips of small lamps within a light fixture. 
    Shield means a nonreflective covering, canopy or other such device fitted over and extended below a light source preventing light from illuminating the beach. Spotlight means a light fixture having a narrow beam. 
    Temporary structure means any human-made structure or object with a location or arrangement that is temporary or transient in nature. 
    Tinted glass means any glass treated to achieve an industry-approved, inside-to-outside light transmittance value of 45 percent or less. Such transmittance is limited to the visible spectrum (400 to 700 nanometers) and is measured as the percentage of light that is transmitted through the glass. 
    Transient lighting means artificial light sources that are not affixed to a building or other structure. Transient lighting includes, but is not limited to, flashlights, fishing lanterns, flash photography, recreational fireworks, and vehicle headlights. 
    True neon means a tubular lamp containing neon gas that emits pure red light. Not to be confused with tubular fluorescent lamps, which may appear as various colors. 
    Uplight means a lighting source which is strategically located to light up features such as building facades, signs, and trees. 
(Ord. No. 2007-21, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Sec. 44.3. - Prohibition of activities disruptive to marine turtles. 
    The following activities are prohibited on the beach at nighttime during the nesting season for the protection of nesting females, nests, and hatchling marine turtles: 
(a)  The operation of all motorized vehicles, except emergency and law enforcement vehicles or operated by those persons who have authorization or a permit to engage in marine turtle conservation or research issued by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, or the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, and Florida Department of Environmental Protection approved for mechanical beach cleaning or beach renourishment activities. 
(b)  The building of campfires or bonfires. 
(c)  Any transient lighting which purposely and flagrantly illuminates nesting sea turtles or hatchlings. This prohibition does not apply to those persons who have authorization or a permit to engage in marine turtle conservation or research. 
(d)  If any turtle nests or nesting activities have been reported within a portion of a beach, any temporary structures, including but not limited to beach chairs, umbrellas and cabanas which have the potential for entrapment of marine turtles and which may interfere with the use of the natural beach environment for nesting habitat shall be: 
(1)  Removed from the beach nightly; or 
(2)  Stored in areas designated by the City of St. Pete Beach staff which are situated to avoid interference with marine turtles; or 
(3)  Placed in a manner so as to not obstruct the transit of turtle hatchlings to the water. 
(Ord. No. 2007-21, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Sec. 44.4. - Standards for new beachfront lighting. 
    In order to provide the highest level of protection for nesting marine turtles and their hatchlings, the following standards for artificial light sources on all new coastal construction shall be applied: 
(a)  Exterior artificial light fixtures shall be designed and positioned so that: 
(1)  The point source of light or any reflective surface of the light fixture is not directly visible from the beach; 
(2)  Areas seaward of the frontal dune, or the beach in areas where the frontal dune no longer exists, are not directly, indirectly, or cumulatively illuminated. 
(b)  Exterior artificial light fixtures directly or indirectly illuminating the beach are considered appropriately designed if: 
(1)  Exterior lights are completely shielded downlight only fixtures or recessed fixtures having low wattage Bug Type Bulbs, low-pressure sodium vapor (LPS) bulbs, Red or Amber Light-Emitting Diodes (LED), or True Neon light sources. Other fixtures that have appropriate light-blocking shields, louvers, or cut-off features may also be used if they are in compliance with subsection (a)(1), (2), and (3) above; and 
(2)  All fixtures are mounted as low in elevation as possible through use of low-mounted wall fixtures, low bollards, and ground-level fixtures 
(c)  Floodlights, uplights or spotlights that are directly visible from the beach, or which indirectly or cumulatively illuminate the beach, shall not be used. 
(d)  Exterior lights used expressly for safety or security purposes shall be limited to the minimum number and configuration required to achieve their functional role(s). The use of motion detector switches that keep lights off except when approached and that switch hooded or shielded lights on for the minimum duration possible are preferred. 
(e)  Only low intensity recessed or louvered lighting, or other appropriate low intensity lighting, shall be used on dune crossovers where permissible. All light fixtures on dune crosswalks must utilize low wattage Bug Type Bulbs, low-pressure sodium vapor (LPS) bulbs, Red or Amber Light-Emitting Diodes (LED) or True Neon light sources. Dune crosswalk lighting seaward of the primary dune, or on the beach in areas where the primary dune no longer exists, shall not be used. 
(f)  Only low intensity lighting shall be used in parking areas within line-of-sight of the beach. Such lighting shall be: 
(1)  Set on a low-profile luminaire; and 
(2)  Positioned or shielded so that the light is cast downward and the source of light or any reflective surface of the light fixture is not visible from the beach and does not directly or indirectly illuminate the beach. 
(g)  All newly constructed parking areas and roadways, including any paved or unpaved areas upon which motorized vehicles will park or operate, shall be designed and located to prevent lights (including vehicular headlights) from directly or indirectly illuminating the beach. 
(h)  Vehicular lighting, parking area lighting, and roadway lighting shall be modified or shielded from the beach through the use of ground-level barriers or external shields. Ground-level barriers must not interfere with marine turtle nesting or hatchling emergence, or cause short- or long-term damage to the beach/dune system. 
(i)  Tinted glass shall be installed on all windows and glass doors of single or multi-story structures within line-of-sight of the beach. 
(j)  Use of appropriately shielded low-pressure sodium vapor lamps and fixtures shall be preferred for high-intensity lighting applications such as lighting parking areas and roadways, providing security, and similar applications. 
(k)  All of the above standards shall be met prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(l)  Temporary lighting of construction sites during the marine turtle nesting season shall be restricted to the minimal amount necessary and shall incorporate all of the standards of this section. Said lighting shall not be mounted more than eight feet above the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2007-21, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Sec. 44.5. - Standards for existing beachfront lighting. 
    By July 1, 2008; all light sources or reflective surfaces illuminated by such sources that are visible from the beach shall be brought into compliance with the following standards: 
(a)  Existing artificial light fixtures shall be repositioned, modified, or removed so that: 
(1)  The point source of light or any reflective surface of the light fixture is not directly visible from the beach; 
(2)  Areas seaward of the frontal dune, or the beach in areas where the frontal dune no longer exists, are not directly, indirectly, or cumulatively illuminated. 
(b)  The following measures shall be taken to reduce or eliminate the negative effects of existing exterior artificial lighting: 
(1)  Reposition fixtures so that the point source of light or any reflective surface of the light fixture is no longer visible from the beach; 
(2)  Replace fixtures having an exposed light source with fixtures containing recessed light sources or external shields; 
(3)  Replace traditional light bulbs (e.g. incandescent, fluorescent, and high intensity lighting) with yellow Bug Type Bulbs, low-pressure sodium vapor (LPS) bulbs, Red or Amber Light-Emitting Diodes (LED) or True Neon light sources; 
(4)  Replace non-directional fixtures with directional fixtures that point down and away from the beach; 
(5)  Replace fixtures having transparent or translucent coverings with fixtures having opaque shields covering an arc of at least 180 degrees and extending an appropriate distance below the bottom edge of the fixture on the seaward side so that the light source or any reflective surface of the light fixture is not visible from the beach; 
(6)  Replace pole lamps with low-profile, low-level luminaries so that the light source or any reflective surface of the light fixture is not visible from the beach; 
(7)  Replace incandescent, fluorescent, and high intensity lighting with the lowest wattage low-pressure sodium vapor lighting, yellow Bug Type Bulbs, Red or Amber Light-Emitting Diodes (LED) or True Neon light sources possible for the specific application; 
(8)  Plant or improve vegetation buffers between the light source and the beach to screen light from the beach; 
(9)  Construct a ground level barrier to shield light sources from the beach. Ground-level barriers must not interfere with marine turtle nesting or hatchling emergence, or cause short- or long-term damage to the beach/dune system; 
(10)  Permanently remove, disable or lock in off position any fixture which cannot be brought into compliance with the provisions of these standards. 
(c)  One or more of the following measures shall be taken to reduce or eliminate the negative effects of interior light emanating from doors and windows within line-of-sight of the beach: 
(1)  Apply window tint or film that meets the standards for tinted glass; 
(2)  Rearrange lamps and other moveable fixtures away from windows; 
(3)  Use window treatments (e.g., blinds, curtains) to shield interior lights from the beach; or 
(4)  Turn off unnecessary lights. 
(Ord. No. 2007-21, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Sec. 44.6. - Standards for publicly owned lighting. 
    All publicly owned lighting with light sources that are visible from the beach or that illuminate reflective surfaces that are visible from the beach, including but not limited to streetlights, parking lot lights, and beach access lighting, shall be: 
(a)  Fitted with a shield or positioned so that the light source or any reflective surfaces illuminated by such sources are not visible from the beach and do not directly or indirectly illuminate the beach; or 
(b)  Extinguished between sunset and sunrise from May 1 to October 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-21, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Sec. 44.7. - Construction during nesting season. 
(a)  During the nesting/hatching season, it shall be unlawful to construct any structure, excavate or place any fill, mechanically clean any beach, or grade any dirt within 100 feet of the nesting zone of a beach where marine turtles nest or may nest, without: 
(1)  Obtaining written approval from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) (F.A.C. 62B-33, F.S. ch. 161, and F.S. § 370.12); and 
(2)  Coordinating each activity by means of a written agreement with FWC-permitted sea turtle nest monitoring personnel holding a current and valid permit from the FWC for the specific area. 
(b)  Construction activities shall not interfere with marine turtle nesting, nests or hatching activities, shall preserve or replace any native vegetation on the site, and shall maintain the natural existing beach profile and minimize interference with the natural beach dynamics and function. 
(Ord. No. 2007-21, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Sec. 44.8. - Enforcement. 
    Periodic nighttime lighting inspections shall be performed from the beach to determine the extent of compliance with section 44.5. Inspections shall include both public and private properties within jurisdictional boundaries. Inspections shall be conducted by the city or other qualified person appointed or contracted by the city. At least one compliance inspection of the beach shall be conducted at night prior to the commencement of the marine turtle nesting season and additional compliance inspections shall be conducted during the marine turtle nesting season until existing beachfront lighting has been brought into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-21, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Sec. 44.9. - Monitoring and reporting guidance. 
    The following information should be compiled on an annual basis and submitted to the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission Marine Turtle Protection Program: 
(a)  Number of lighting applications reviewed; 
(b)  Number of potential violations reported; 
(c)  Number of potential violations investigated; 
(d)  Disposition of all potential violations including results of enforcement actions and amounts of penalties assessed; 
(e)  Results of compliance checks conducted prior to and during the marine turtle nesting season; and 
(f)  Status of local lighting ordinances and any amendments to those ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-21, § 1, 8-14-07) 
DIVISION 45 - PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTERING INTO DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 45.1. - Statutory definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the definitions set forth in F.S. § 163.3221 shall apply and control all development agreements entered into by the city, 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 45.2. - Legislative intent and findings of fact. 
    The city commission (the "commission") finds and declares that each of the following statements are true and correct, and hereby adopts these statements as the legislative findings of the commission, which shall be considered as further justification and authority for the adoption of this division. 
(1)  The provisions of F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243 set forth the Local Government Development Agreement Act (the "act"). 
(2)  The provisions of F.S. § 163.3223 provide that local governments may, by ordinance, establish procedures and requirements, as provided by the act, to consider and enter into development agreements with any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property within its jurisdiction. 
(3)  The act recognizes that the lack of certainty in the approval of development can result in waste of economic and land resources, discourage sound capital improvement planning and financing, escalate the cost of housing and development, and discourage commitment to comprehensive planning. 
(4)  The act recognizes that assurance to a developer that upon receipt of his development permit he may proceed in accordance with existing laws and policies, subject to the conditions of a development agreement, strengthens the public planning process, encourages sound capital improvement planning and financing, assists in assuring there are adequate capital facilities for the development, encourages private participation in comprehensive planning, and reduces the economic costs of development. 
(5)  In conformity with, in furtherance of, and in order to implement the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act (F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.) and the State Comprehensive Planning Act of 1972 (F.S. § 186.001 et seq.) it was the intent of the state legislature in adopting the act to encourage a stronger commitment to comprehensive and capital facilities planning, ensure the provision of adequate public facilities for development, encourage the efficient use of resources, and reduce the economic cost of development. 
(6)  The act authorizes local governments to enter into development agreement with developers, subject to the procedures and requirements of the act. 
(7)  The act provides that the act shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to the powers conferred upon local governments by other laws and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(8)  The provisions of F.S. § 125.01(1)(t), (11)(w), provide authority for the city to adopt ordinances which are in the common interest of the people of the city and not specifically prohibited by law. 
(9)  It is the intent of this division to encourage a strong commitment to comprehensive and capital facilities planning, ensure the provision of adequate public facilities for development concurrent with the impacts of development, encourage the efficient use of resources, and reduce the economic cost of development. 
(10)  It is the intent of this division to encourage comprehensive planning by developers by affording greater predictability and reducing risks in order to lessen the costs of providing major infrastructure and public benefits. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 45.3. - Authority. 
(a)  This division sets forth the procedural requirements that the city shall consider and implement in order to enter into development agreements. Specific authority for adoption of this division is found in F.S. § 163.3223. In general, the provisions of this division comply with and are authorized by the provisions set forth in the local government development agreement act. 
(b)  In approving a development agreement, the commission shall have the authority to grant, without limitation, variances, special exceptions, conditional uses or other forms of approvals otherwise delegated to other authorities in the ordinary course of approvals outside of the development agreement process. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 45.4. - Development agreement requirements. 
(a)  All development agreements shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
(1)  A legal description of the land subject to the agreement; 
(2)  The duration of the agreement, which shall meet the terms set forth in section 45.5; 
(3)  The development uses permitted on the land, including population densities, and building intensities and height; 
(4)  The land use designation under the future land use plan element of the comprehensive plan for all property included within the terms of the proposed agreement; 
(5)  The current zoning classification of the property; 
(6)  A description of public facilities that will service the development, including who shall provide such facilities; 
(7)  The date any new facilities, if needed, will be constructed; 
(8)  A schedule to assure public facilities are available concurrent with impacts of the development; 
(9)  A description of any reservations or dedications of land for public purposes; 
(10)  A description of all local development permits approved or needed to be approved for the development of the land; 
(11)  A finding that the development permitted or proposed is consistent with the comprehensive plan and land development regulation, as required by F.S. § 163.3231; 
(12)  A description of any conditions, terms, restrictions, or other requirements determined to be necessary by the city for the public health, safety, or welfare of its citizens; 
(13)  A statement indicating that the failure of the agreement to address a particular permit, condition, term, or restriction shall not relieve the developer of the necessity of complying with the law governing such permitting requirements, condition, term, or restriction; and 
(14)  A statement identifying the legal and equitable interest of all persons having any interest in the property described in subsection (a)(1), above. The statement of ownership interests of any joint ventures, partnerships or corporations shall reveal all principals or directors and officers, as appropriate. Such statements shall be certified by a title company or an attorney-at-law licensed to practice in the state. 
(b)  A development agreement may provide that the entire development or any phase thereof be commenced or concluded within a specific period of time. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 45.5. - Duration of development agreements. 
    The term of a development agreement shall not exceed ten years or such time as the act may provide. A development agreement may only be extended by mutual consent of the commission and the developer, subject to required public hearings in accordance with section 45.6. No extension shall exceed ten years or such time as the act may provide. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 45.6. - General requirements for notices and hearings. 
(a)  Before entering into, amending, modifying, canceling, or revoking a development agreement, the city shall conduct at least two public hearings, one of which shall be held by the land planning agency prior to a final public hearing before the commission. 
(b)  The day, time and place at which the next scheduled public hearing under this division will be held shall be announced at the prior public hearing. 
(c)  Notice of intent to consider a development agreement at a scheduled public hearing under this division shall be provided: 
(1)  By advertising the required notice in a newspaper of genera! circulation and readership in the city approximately seven days before each public hearing on the application; 
(2)  By mailing the required notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all property owners of record as of no greater than two weeks prior to mailing, as listed in the Pinellas County Property Appraiser's office records as abutting or lying within 200 feet of the subject property; these notices shall be mailed at least 14 calendar days prior to the first scheduled public hearing; and 
(3)  In writing, to adjacent or affected local governments or their agencies. 
(d)  Required notice of intent to consider a development agreement shall specify: 
(1)  The time, place, and location of the scheduled hearing(s); 
(2)  The location of the land subject to the development agreement; 
(3)  The development uses proposed on the property, including the proposed population densities and proposed building intensities and height; and 
(4)  Instructions for obtaining further information, including the place(s) where a copy of the proposed agreement can be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 45.7. - Development agreement procedures. 
(a)  Submission of development agreement packages; fees. 
(1)  Applications requesting consideration by the city of a developer's proposed or amended development agreement shall be submitted on such forms as may be provided by the city. In addition to the information required by section 45.4, the city may require an applicant to submit such information as is reasonably necessary to process and fully consider the application. 
(2)  Application packages shall be accompanied by such fees and charges as may be imposed by the commission, or its designee, for proper filing and processing. 
(3)  Payment of application fees, submission of applications, engineering plans, surveys, or any other expenditures shall not vest any rights to complete development or to obtain any requested zoning or land use classification amendments. 
(b)  Negotiation of development agreements. 
(1)  The city manager and staff personnel shall review the developer's application package and negotiate such further terms and conditions as the city manager shall deem to be appropriate and necessary to protect the public's interest, safety, health or welfare. 
(2)  Once a tentative agreement has been reached as to the terms and conditions of a development agreement, or further negotiations are not anticipated or will not reach a consensus on the development agreement's terms or conditions, the city manager and staff personnel shall draft a report, including any recommendations, for consideration of the commission along with the tentative development agreement. 
(3)  The existence of a tentative agreement, staff report or recommendation shall not be sufficient governmental acts upon which reliance may be placed, such that further expenditures by a developer would vest any right to continue development; nor shall such actions constitute partial performance entitling the owner to a continuation or extension of the development agreement. 
(c)  Adoption, amendment, extension, modification, revocation and cancellation procedures. 
(1)  Following such notice and public hearings as may be otherwise required, the city commission, by majority vote, may act to adopt, amend, extend, modify, revoke, or cancel any proposed or existing development agreement. 
(2)  Where mutual consent is required by law, the commission may act to authorize such consent prior to all other parties so doing only upon the condition that the act is not complete or official until a binding agreement is contemporaneously signed by the mayor and the representatives of ail other parties. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 45.8. - Recordation. 
(a)  Within 14 days after the city enters into, extends, amends, modifies, revokes, or cancels a development agreement, the city clerk shall have the agreement or the action on the agreement recorded with the clerk of the circuit court and in the official records of the City of St. Pete Beach. 
(b)  A copy of the recorded development agreement and any recorded action on the agreement shall be submitted to the Florida Department of Community Affairs within 14 days after the agreement is recorded. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 45.9. - Periodic review. 
(a)  The city shall review the land and development subject to the development agreement at least once every 12 months. 
(b)  If, as part of its review, the city finds that the developer has, in good faith, complied with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the agreement shall continue in force as is, pending the next review. 
(c)  If as part of its review the city makes a finding on the basis of substantial competent evidence that there has been a failure to comply with the terms of the development agreement, the commission, following required notice and hearing provisions of section 45.6, may: 
(1)  Modify the agreement as necessary to obtain and ensure compliance with the terms of the agreement; or 
(2)  Revoke the agreement in order to protect the public's interest, health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 45.10. - Amendment, modification, extension, revocation and cancellation of agreements. 
(a)  In addition to being extended pursuant to [section] 45.5, development agreements may be amended or canceled by mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or by then-successors in interest upon proper notice and hearing as set forth in section 45.6. 
(b)  If state or federal laws are enacted after the execution of a development agreement which are applicable to and preclude the parties' compliance with the terms or conditions of a development agreement, then such agreement shall be modified or revoked as is necessary to comply with the relevant state or federal laws upon proper notice and hearing set forth in section 45.6. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 45.11. - Legal status of development agreements. 
(a)  The burdens of a development agreement shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the agreement shall inure to. all successors in interest to the parties to the agreement. 
(b)  The city's laws and policies governing the development of land in effect at the time of execution of a development agreement, including but not limited to, this division of the City of St. Pete Beach Land Development Code, and all other ordinances comprising land development regulations under F.S. § 163.3202, as amended, shall govern the development of all land specified in the development agreement for its stated duration. 
(c)  The city may only apply subsequently adopted laws and policies to then existing development agreements if, after a duly noticed public hearing, the commission: 
(1)  Determines that such laws and policies are specifically anticipated and provided for in a development agreement; 
(2)  Determines that such laws and policies are not in conflict with the prior laws and policies governing existing development agreements; and do not prevent development of the land uses, intensities, or densities set forth in existing development agreements; 
(3)  Determines that such laws and policies are essential to the public health, safety or welfare, and expressly state that they shall apply to existing development agreements; 
(4)  Determines and demonstrates that substantial changes have occurred in pertinent conditions existing at the time of approval of certain development agreement; or 
(5)  Determines that certain development agreements were based upon substantially inaccurate information supplied by the owner/developer. 
(d)  The provisions set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section do not abrogate any development rights that may vest pursuant to common law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 9-10-08) 
Sec. 45.12. - Enforcement. 
    The following may file an action for injunctive relief in the Circuit Court of Pinellas County to enforce the terms of a development agreement, or to challenge compliance of the agreement with the provisions of F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243: 
(1)  Any aggrieved or adversely affected person as defined in F.S. § 163.3215(2); 
(2)  Any party to the agreement; or 
(3)  The state land planning agency. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 9-10-08) 
DIVISION 46 - B/HC BOUTIQUE HOTEL/CONDO DISTRICT 

Sec. 46.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The B/HC Boutique Hotel/Condo District is established to accommodate multi-family residential and medium intensity transient accommodation uses. This district is not intended to support commercial or other non-residential uses, except those that are accessory and subordinate to transient accommodation uses. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 46.2. - Permitted uses. 
    Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this code, permitted uses and structures in the B/HC Boutique Hotel/Condo District are as follows. 
(a)  Residential uses-multifamily only. 
(b)  Transient accommodations-hotel, motel and resort condominium. 
(c)  Non-residential uses that are accessory and subordinate to transient accommodation uses, such as recreational facilities, restaurants and bars, personal service uses, retail uses, meeting spaces/conference rooms, fitness centers, and spa facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 46.3. - Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures, as regulated in sections 6.12 and 6.13, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures and are not of a nature prohibited under section 46.5. 
(b)  Home occupations, subject to the conditions set forth in section 6.5 of this Code. 
(c)  Electric vehicle charging stations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 46.4. - Allowable conditional uses. 
(a)  Eating and drinking establishments - full-service restaurant, limited service restaurant, take-out only restaurant, bar/lounge, subject to section 6.24 of this Code as may be applicable; 
(b)  Off-premise parking lot; 
(c)  Subject to the provisions or restrictions contained in this section and elsewhere in this Code, additional temporary lodging units may be allocated from a density pool via a conditional use as follows: 
In addition to any transient accommodation units which may be allowed on a per acre basis, there are hereby 125 total transient accommodation units for the entire Boutique Hotel/Condo district, which shall be allocated to individual projects by ordinance of the city commission upon request of an individual property owner. Such allocation shall not exceed an additional twenty (20) units per acre, nor a total of 60 units per redevelopment project, irrespective of total project acreage. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 10, 5-26-15) 
Sec. 46.5. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally permitted herein are hereby prohibited in the B/HC Boutique Hotel/Condo District. 
    Any use which has been determined under the provisions of Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances to be potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive to residents of the district or to those who pass by on public roadways or likely for other reasons to be incompatible with the character of the district, is hereby prohibited in the B/HC Boutique Hotel/Condo District. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 46.6. - Density and intensity. 
    Density and intensity shall be calculated on the basis of those portions of the site which are landward of the Florida Coastal Construction Control Line and shall be permitted as follows: 
(a)  Residential uses shall not exceed 18 units per acre. 
(b)  Transient accommodation uses shall not exceed 50 units per acre, except as provided for in section 46.4. 
(c)  The aggregate floor area of transient accommodation units in projects in this district shall not exceed the total allowable unit density multiplied by 750 square feet per unit, excluding indoor amenities, common areas, and structured parking. Indoor amenities and common areas shall not exceed an additional 0.2 floor area ratio combined. Common areas shall not include hallways, stairwells, elevator shafts, manager's office, restrooms, storage or mechanical areas, but shall include a lobby, reception/concierge areas, conference rooms, and common office (i.e. computer/business centers with computers, fax machines, copiers, etc) for guest use. 
Example: Unit density = 50/acre; Aggregate floor area = 50 units × 750 square feet = 38,500 square feet of unit floor area plus 0.2 × total parcel area square feet for common areas and indoor amenities = total building square footage, excluding structured parking. 
Actual unit count, configuration and average size shall be at the discretion of the developer, in accordance with the above specified limitation. 
(d)  For the purposes of this division, lockout units shall count against specified density limitations. A lockout unit shall be defined as a room or rooms with sanitary facilities, with or without cooking facilities, which is attached and has access to a transient accommodation unit by means of a door or doors that are lockable from within the lockout unit, and that has a separate lockable access to the public areas or corridors. A lockout unit is capable of being functionally separated for the transient accommodation unit to which it is attached and rented as a separate room. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 46.7. - Building height and front yard setbacks. 
    The maximum height shall be regulated by front setback as follows: 
(a)  Seventy-six (76) feet for any building that exclusively contains only temporary lodging uses with a minimum setback of one hundred (100) feet from Gulf Boulevard; or 
(b)  Sixty-five (65) feet for any building that exclusively contains only temporary lodging uses with a minimum setback of seventy-five (75) feet from Gulf Boulevard; or 
(c)  Fifty (50) feet above base flood elevation, for any buildings containing multi-family residential dwelling units, or any temporary lodging facility that does not comply with the minimum setbacks required for additional height established in sections 46.7.(a) and 46.7.(b) above, subject to a minimum setback of fifty (50) feet from Gulf Boulevard; or 
(d)  Fifty (50) feet for temporary lodging with or without accessory uses as described in section 46.3-and residential uses are required to have a minimum front setback of twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 46.8. - Secondary, rear, and sideyard setbacks. 
Secondary front yard 10 feet Side yard Minimum combined side yards of 30 percent of lot width, with a minimum of 10 percent on each side. No single side yard setback shall be less than 10 feet. Rear yard 10 feet landward of the Florida Coastal Construction Control Line.  
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 46.9. - Maximum impervious surface ratio. 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio for any exclusive transient accommodation uses: 
    Maximum impervious surface ratio for any residential use or combined residential and transient accommodation use: 0.70 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 46.10. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 23 of the Land Development Code, Off Street Parking and Loading. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 46.11. - Landscaping. 
    Shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 22 of the Land Development Code, Landscaping and Tree Protection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 46.12. - Design standards. 
    Design standards shall be in accordance with Division 39. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
Sec. 46.13. - Signs. 
    Shall be in accordance with Division 26. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-11) 
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS 
This table gives the location within this Land Development Code of those ordinances which are included herein. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 03-7  5-1-03 3 1.1-1.9 2.1 3.1-3.17 4.1-4.12 5.1-5.11 6.1-6.23 7.1-7.5 8.1-8.12 9.1-9.12 10.1-10.12 11.1-11.12 12.1-12.12 13.1-13.12 14.1-14.12 15.1-15.12 16.1-16.11 17.1-17.11 18.1-18.19 19.1-19.9 20.1-20.14 21.1-21.12 22.1-22.14 23.1-23.12 24.1-24.11 25.1-25.11 03-10  6- 3-03 1 26.1-26.34 03-15  9- 2-03 1 6.13(c)(8)a. 6.14, 6.24 14.4(i), 22.6(b) 23.2(b) 2004-3  3- 9-04 1       Rpld 6.18 2 7.1 3       Added 27.1-27.4 2004-18  8-24-04 1 2.1 2 8.2(a) 3 9.2(a) 4 10.2(a) 5 11.2(a) 6 12.2(a) 7 20.1 8 20.2 2004-25 11- 9-04 2 28.1-28.24 2004-31 12-14-04 2       Added 29.1-29.11 2004-33 12-14-04 1 6.12 2004-34 12-14-04 1 2.1 2 13.4(b) 3 14.4(d) 4 17.3(a) 2005-01  1-25-05 1       Rpld 6.7 2005-07  2-22-05 1 3.1-3.10, 3.12, 3.14-3.16 2 4.1-4.5, 4.7-4.11 3 5.1-5.5 2005-09  2-22-05 1 28.8 2005-38 11- 8-05 2 22.1-22.14 2005-39 11- 8-05 2 23.1-23.13 2005-43 12-13-05 1 3.1-3.10, 3.12, 3.14-3.16 2005-44 12-13-05 1 4.1-4.5, 4.7-4.14 2005-47 12-13-05 1       Added 41.1-41.14 2006-01  1-24-06 1 28.1-28.24 2006-02  2-28-06 1 17.1-17.12 2006-03  1-24-06 1 43.1-43.12 2006-04  1-24-06 1 29.1-29.10 2006-37 12-12-06 1 23.5 2006-39 11-28-06 1 3.4(c) 2 3.12(a)(3) 2007-01  1-23-07 1 29.2 2       Added 29.12 2007-08 10- 9-07 1 3.10(b)(3) 2007-21  8-14-07 1       Added 44.1-44.9 2007-41 11-27-07 1 2.1 2 6.23(d)(3), (4) 3       Added 6.23(f), (g) 2007-42  2-12-08 1 43.1 2 43.5(b) 3 43.8(c) 4 43.9 2007-51  1- 8-08 1       Added 31.1-31.11 2008-05  3-18-08 1 6.6 2008-11  6- 3-08 1       Added 35.1-35.14 2008-12  6- 3-08 1       Added 39.1-39.17 2008-13  6- 3-08 1       Added 30.1-30.11 2008-32  8-26-08 1 8.9 9.9 10.9 11.9 12.9 13.9 14.9 15.9 16.9 17.9 20.11 21.9 23.5 31.9 2008-33  8-26-08 1 2.1 8.6 9.6 10.6       Added 12.13 13.6       Added 13.13 14.4 14.6       Added 14.13 15.6       Added 15.13 21.6 21.12 2008-31  9-10-08 1       Added 45.1-45.12 2008-38 10-28-08 1 31.1 2009-02  5-26-09 1 2.1 2009-03  5-10-09 1 14.4(c), 15.4(j), 16.4(e) 2009-05  4-28-09 1 29.2       Added 29.13 2010-01  2- 9-10 1 3.4(a), (b) 2010-02  2-23-10 1(Att. A) 26.2 26.4-26.15       Rpld 26.16       Rnbd 26.17-26.33       as 26.16-26.32       Added 26.33, 26.34       Rnbd 26.34       as 26.35 2010-03  4-27-10 1(Att. A) 20.1 20.5-20.9 2(Att. B) 28.8 28.18 2010-10  5-25-10 1 3.10(b)(1) 2 3.10(b)(3)A. 2010-18 11- 8-11 1(Exh. A)       Added 40.1-40.11 23.5(e)       Rnbd 26.36       as 26.37       Added 26.36 2010-21 11-22-11 1(Exh. A)       Added 32.1-32.14       Added 33.1-33.14       Added 34.1-34.13       Added 36.1-36.13       Added 37.1-37.14       Added 38.1-38.14       Added 42.1-42.12       Added 46.1-46.13 2010-31  2-22-11 1 2.1 2 31.1-31.3       Added 31.4(b) 31.6       Added 31.12, 31.13 3 6.6 2010-32  1-11-11 1 26.2 26.4(c), (d) 26.11(c) 26.13 26.26(a), (n)       Added 26.25(q)       Rnbd 26.25(q)-(t)       as 26.25(r)-(u) 26.25(r) 26.28 26.29(c)(3) 26.30-26.34 2011-03  5-24-11 1       Added 26.35       Rnbd 26.35       as 26.36 2 31.8(a) 3 20.10(a) 2011-17  6-28-11 1 28.11 2011-18  7-12-11 1 6.23(f)(3) 2011-21 11-22-11 1(Exh. A)       Added 3.12(c), (d) 4.2(a)(b) 2011-32 11-22-11 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 30.1-30.11       Added 30.1-30-13       Rpld 35.1-35.14       Added 35.1-35.15 2011-42  1-24-12 1(Exh. A)       Dltd 26.1-26.37       Added 26.1-26.40 2012-14  9-12-12 1(Exh. A) 2.1       Rpld 25.4(a)       Rnbd 25.4(b), (c)       as 25.4(a), (b)       Rpld 25.5(a) 25.6 25.10 35.9(a)(4) 2012-16  9-12-12 1(Exh. A) 26.1, 26.2 26.4-26.14 2012-22 11-13-12 1(Exh. A) 42.1-42.12 2013-03  1-22-13 1(Exh. A) 39.3 2013-04  1-22-13 1(Exh. A) 39.7 2013-05  1-22-13 1(Exh. A) 6.9 6.15 2013-06  1-22-13 1(Exh. A)       Dltd 40.1-40.11       Added 40.1-40.12 2013-08  2-26-13 1(Exh. A) 11.3 12.3 12.4 34.3 2013-14  4-23-13 1(Exh. A) 26.1-26.41 2013-25 11-26-13 1 2.1 2 30.2 30.4 3 37.2 37.5 2014-0010 11- 5-14 1 2.1 2 6.11 2015-03  5-26-15 1 2.1 2 23.4 3 23.5 4 23.7 5       Rpld 23.8 6       Added 23.14 7 35.3 8 38.4 9 42.4 10 46.4 12 17.3 2015-16  8-25-15 1 40.9 2015-21  9-22-15 1 2.1 2 6.24 3 16.2 4 16.4 5 30.2 6       Added 34.4 7-16       Rnbd 34.4-34.13       as 34.5-34.14 17 37.2 18 37.5 2015-22 12-15-15 1 2.1 2 4.7 3 4.12 4 5.1 5 6.24 6 29.4 7 35.2 8 35.3 9-11 35.7-35.9 12 35.13 13 36.6(b)(1) 14 39.6 15 39.9(a) 16 39.17 17       Added 39.18 2016-13 10-11-16 4 17.3 2016-15 10-25-16 1(Exh. A) 6.12(g) 2 25.6(a)(1) 2016-08 10-11-16 1 2.1 2 6.12(g) 3 6.13(f) 2016-19  2-28-17 2(Exh. A)       Rpld 20.1-20.14       Added 20.1-20.24 2016-24  1-10-17 1 2.1 2 26.2 3 26.5 4 26.23 5 26.25(g) 6 26.33 7       Added 26.41       Rnbd 26.41       as 26.42 2017-01  2-28-17 2(Exh. A)       Rpld 29.1-29.13       Added 29.1-29.13 2017-07  6-13-17 2 2.1 3.4(b)(3) 4.7 6.13-6.15 14.6 28.8 38.5 42.4 46.6-46.8 2017-12 11-28-17 1 2.5       Added 6.25 30.4(i) 32.4(f) 33.4(f) 37.5(f) 2017-17 11-14-17 2 26.2 3 26.23 2017-30  2-27-18 2 2.1 6.12 6.22 6.24 13.4 14.4 15.4 16.4 22.4(f) 23.4(h) 30.4 32.4 33.2 33.4 35.3(b) 37.5 37.7 38.4 39.8 39.10(a), (b), (b)(6) 40.9 2018-02  6-12-18 2       Added 7.6  
